A NEW BEGINNING FOR GSIS

The GSIS should be restored to its former strength and original mission as the country’s premier social insurance institution. A GSIS member herself, the President sees the importance of promptness on the part of GSIS in giving each member the benefits and privileges due him. The President is pleased to note the beginning of the transformation of GSIS from extravagance to economy, from losses to gains. The President, however, sees a lack of cohesion in the institution’s social security set-up. She would like to see a consolidation of all insurance packages into one integrated scheme without diminishing the benefits already enjoyed by GSIS members.

On the occasion of your Golden Anniversary, your President and General Manager, Sonny Belmonte, wanted to bring all of you to Malacañang for a courtesy call. I said, it’s your anniversary, it’s your celebration – I’ll come to you.

You have given me a wonderful reception. I hope the way you received me today is reflective of the way you receive and service the 1.4 million members of the System. I am, after all, just one of them.

I have just received my policy contract as a public servant and member of the System. I shall treasure it, and, you can be sure, I shall collect on it should need arise. I shall treasure it for what it represents, for what it offers and provides, and for what it can do for the civil servant and his family, in their time of need. But this policy is only as good for the civil servant as you make it.

In my opinion, the most important thing for our members is receiving our benefits precisely when we need them. To my mind, retirement benefits which are granted months after a government employee has retired have substantially lost their usefulness, a funeral benefit paid out after a member has been buried has lost its meaning and betrayed its intention, a monthly pension delayed may actually come too little and too late for the increased need of the pensioner.

The bottomline is that everytime you issue a policy contract to a member, you are committing to pay his benefits and privileges not at the time of your choice but at the time of his need; not at the time when you are able to provide but at the time the member needs to be provided for.

I took these things into consideration when I was looking for a President and General Manager for this institution. I felt that the person for the post should not only share my thoughts on what GSIS is and should be, but should also have the capability to restore GSIS to its former strength and original mission as the State’s premier social insurance institution.

Looking over your president’s report, I note with satisfaction the direction in which he has set you, the transformation that has begun. A transformation from extravagance to economy, from losses to gains, from deficits to surpluses, from ignominy to high esteem in the eyes of our people.

I particularly appreciate your P31 million savings on administrative expenses. It is a good and auspicious beginning.

I note with equal satisfaction the other financial gains your management has reported. They are encouraging signs of growth and improvement, and indeed serve as assurances of a better future for your members.

Regarding our policy on privatization, I appreciate your desire to extract the best price for the assets you hold. You should indeed maximize returns on the disposal of your properties, as you have apparently been doing. As for that P2.5 billion building which you inherited from the past regime, how you dispose of this is a crucial test of your ingenuity, managerial ability and business acumen. I am sure you will exercise the same prudence and fidelity to the principle of privatization that has marked your dealings thus far.

With regard to housing, may I say that while Executive Order No. 90 transfers the operation of a home mortgage market to the National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation, your housing program can continue as a complement to the Corporation’s functions, giving special attention to the housing needs of Government employees.

I note your initial accomplishments in your general insurance business. But there is a great deal more that needs to be done, particularly in the matter of extending coverage to all Government property.

But what is really of paramount concern to me is your social insurance responsibility. This is, after all, the reason for your being. Through you, Government extends protection to its workers. Unfortunately, I see a lack of cohesion in your social security set-up.

For while you provide life insurance, you also have independent coverages for retirement, Medicare, employee compensation, disability and survivorship. The simultaneous existence of different and independent insurance coverages results in duplication of benefits and the charging of multiple insurance rates, not to mention a larger overhead. I am instructing your President and General Manager to consider the consolidation of all existing insurance packages into one integrated scheme; without, of course, diminishing the benefits already enjoyed by your members. The aim should be to remove disparities among the retirement schemes of the various sectors of the Government.

And finally, I am equally pleased to note the decentralization moves you have initiated to bring the GSIS closer to the grassroots with more complete frontline services. That’s the test of good government: Does it finally deliver? No amount of corporate success can compensate for any failure you incur in your first responsibility to provide prompt, efficient and honest service to your members.

In closing, I would like to say that your Golden Jubilee Celebration is very timely and appropriate to what is unfolding in our country today. A jubilee means an emancipation and a restoration. And that is what is happening both here in the GSIS and throughout our country. We have begun to free ourselves from the waste and fraud and neglect of the past, and we are on the way to restoring the public service to its true character and mission: honesty and efficiency in the service of the country. This is a new beginning for the country and for the GSIS, in particular; a beginning marked by the enormous and deeply heartening trust and confidence that our people have in all who serve in the name of the Republic.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].