Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 30th anniversary of the Social Security System

[Delivered on September 1, 1987]

SSS ON THE GO

During the celebration of the 30th anniversary of the Social Security System, the President cites the accomplishments of the SSS. She approves the SSS’s recommendation to increase the minimum monthly pension from P200 to P400, and to increase by 20 percent the monthly pension of all pensioners.

The recognition of outstanding performance is the best incentive to improved public service. I readily accepted Administrator Cuisia’s invitation to your celebration of the Social Security System’s 30th Anniversary because I know about the good work the management and employees of the SSS have been doing.

The SSS was established 30 years ago to respond to the workingman’s crying need for social security, for protection against economic distress brought on by death, disability, sickness or retirement. The philosophy was that men work better when they know there is some provision for the accidents of life and the inevitability of old age and weakness, when there is some sure provision for his family, however modest.

The SSS was created to fill this need for a sense of security.

Today, the SSS covers approximately 11 million members and their families. I note with great satisfaction your increasing annual benefit disbursements to the members and their dependents and beneficiaries. I am equally pleased with the various social programs you have implemented.

I am happy also that the SSS has continued to provide short-term loans to the members at very low interest rates, so they don’t have to turn to moneylenders. And while you have stopped your direct housing loan operations, you have given substantial support to the National Shelter Program which is our way of rationalizing our housing measures. I have been informed that you have responded to my appeal for countryside assistance by financing small and medium-scale enterprises in cooperation with the DBP and giving financial assistance for the establishment and upgrading of the hospitals and schools.

These and other projects too many to mention now have been made possible by the continually growing financial strength of the SSS, that rare combination of prudence and creativity that mark its new management. Records show that the total assets managed by the SSS have reached P33.8 billion.

You have achieved much. I congratulate you and I commend you all for a great job. But more remains to be done. You will learn in my Government that the more you perform the more will be demanded of you.

You must extend your coverage to include those not traditionally included in the System – farmers, fishermen, and other workers, and increase your benefits to match the reality of the present. I know of course, that you don’t have all the money in the world to do all you want for our people.

At any rate, I am happy to announce that I have approved the Social Security Commission’s recommendation to increase the minimum monthly pension from P200.00 to P400.00 effective September 1, 1987.

I have also directed another 20 percent upward adjustment of the monthly pension of all pensioners. This is the second across-the-board increase I have approved this year, bringing the aggregate to 40 percent. This attempts to adjust pensions to inflation.

Although we have increased benefits, they remain modest. We are still a poor country. But let us not compound the modesty of our benefits with inefficiency in delivering them. I commend the positive steps you have taken to improve the delivery of benefits to the members. I am told by Administrator Cuisia that you have completed your reorganization and now have an operational computer system that is the state of the art. With these improvements, SSS members will be anticipating even better service from the SSS.

I know that the improvements in the SSS would not have happened without the dedication of its employee force. Hence, I have approved the immediate adjustment of your salaries and fringe benefits to make them comparable with those of other Government financial institutions. Chairman Roa and Administrator Cuisia have just approved two additional employee benefit programs: the Hospitalization Benefits Program and the SSS Employee Housing Program.

Let me congratulate you on your anniversary and let me wish you even more successes. I remind you that the SSS is one of the few activities of the Government that serve as an accurate measure of the Government’s genuine concern for the people and willingness to help them. You make a difference in the lives of our people. Make it clearer by your better performance that we truly care.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].