The law is supreme.

Despite the dictatorship’s attempts to subvert democracy, the Filipinos’ love for freedom and respect for law remain alive and undiminished. The Filipinos have restored the rule of law. President Aquino calls on the lawyers and the country as a whole to make it work.

This accomplished association is accustomed to hearing words of wisdom from Presidents who are also lawyers. And who occasionally happen to be alumni of the U.P. College of Law.

I would not be breaking that tradition today if events had not interrupted the study of law that I had embarked on after college. I was attracted to the law for its discipline rather than as a profession. But not far into the course at Far Eastern University, I stumbled. I fell in love with another law student, a sharp one but haphazard at his studies. Ninoy wanted to be a lawyer, but wanted also to make his mark in history as quickly as he could. He went to Korea to cover that war as the youngest Filipino correspondent. Not satisfied with that, he served as emissary for the Government in the settlement of the Huk rebellion. In the first semester of his last year at law, we married: I to him and he to me, but I knew even then, that he had also married his destiny to serve his nation.

In Fort Bonifacio, while this country’s legal institutions were disintegrating and crashing down outside the prison’s walls, Ninoy resumed his law studies. This time, he went at it with life-and-death urgency. For what was at stake was both his life and that of the democracy he loved. When the military commission poised to deliver its death sentence on him, Ninoy was well-prepared and well assisted by his counsel, most of whom were U.P. Law alumni.

As fate would have it, the law degree that had eluded both of us, fell into my lap happily last year. I thank the U.P. and its College of Law for the honorary degree conferred this former student of law who, without regret, chose love above its long discipline some 33 years ago. I like to think that the honor was implicitly bestowed on Ninoy, who, but for his restlessness and energy, might have belonged to your roster of alumni. And so I now face you as President and as honorary colleague.

I cannot claim to be steeped in the discipline of law which has taken you years to master. But I think our recent experience has taught us that mastery of law does not necessarily result in respect for its aim of justice. The last President knew the law well – or thought he did. For he came to the contradictory conclusion that the law, whose aim is a responsible freedom, did not give him the freedom he felt he needed to achieve his aims. And so, with Martial Law, he set himself above the law and made his private judgments the laws that would govern this nation. The law is the first defense of our freedom and security. He made it an instrument of oppression, on the one hand, and of selective favor on the other; violating the spirit of equality that animates it.

He called this state of affairs, on the occasion of the 65th anniversary of the U.P. College of Law, “a revolution by law.” It was certainly that, for he had turned the law around on its head.

Martial Law, he said, “utilized the law to bring about what people demand, which is radical change.” The change was certainly radical: in the structure of government, in the ways of the economy, in the purposes of public service, and in the values of our society.

For a government of laws, he substituted that of one man and his friends. For a government of divided powers in which liberty would be secure, he provided the unified state in which thievery was facilitated. For a nation, proud by nature and heritage, he substituted one brought to shame by a government that was scorned by the world and impoverished by plunder.

I recall his words, not as an exercise in masochism, but to review how and why our country came to its present state. How indeed could a nation, welded supposedly by the blood of its republican heroes, by religion, by a common heritage, and by a system of laws upheld by one democratic regime after another, fall so easily into the hands of a few ruthless men?

Were the apologists of dictatorship right after all? The ease with which dictatorship was consolidated would seem to bear them out. Democracy would seem to have been imposed on our culture rather than spun painstakingly by a self-willed and self-determining people. Those arguments were heard even last year, after the Revolution. It was too soon for democracy, some people said; absolute power should be shared by the liberators and held until the people were ready.

I did not believe that. Even while I held all the powers of government in my hand, I began to parcel them out and provide for their independent exercise. I believed that I was called to the Presidency to reestablish democracy and secure our freedoms by the separation of the powers that had come into my hands.

To that end, I bent all my efforts, convinced that that was what our people wanted first and foremost: a true democracy. The results of the plebiscite proved me right, and proved wrong all the apologists of dictatorship. Our people are instinct with the love of freedom and will not have themselves governed any other way than by a democracy of laws. Laws that express the Popular Will and are reflective of the higher law of God.

Do such things as a Popular Will and the higher law of God exist? While some may have doubted, others, including myself, hold them as truths eternal. One swept aside an entrenched dictatorship and put its elected choice in power. One will reestablish and ratify those democratic principles – that respect for the rule of law – which the dictatorship had erased from our books, but which God had kept alive in our hearts.

Our people, with God’s help, have restored the rule of law. It is now our solemn duty to make it work.

Justice, it is said, is the first virtue of political institution. It is clearly the first demand of our people:

Justice for the poor who were born and are imprisoned in desperate poverty.

Justice for the man of enterprise and hard work whom God has promised a just share of the fruits of his labors.

Justice for a country that deserves a measure of prosperity commensurate with the nobility and courage of its people.

But it must always be justice through law. The law, as made by the people themselves through their elected representatives. The law, always informed by the values of compassion and justice that mark our race and our faiths.

It is the privilege of the profession assembled here today that its first and highest duty is to uphold the supremacy of the law that marks our society today. In the sincere and dedicated pursuit of the law, lies the answer to many of our people’s demands.

The sum of your duty and perhaps the mission of all government as well is found in the words of Isaiah:

“Seek justice, encourage the oppressed.

Defend the cause of the fatherless, plead the case of the widow.”

Give the Filipino what is his due: freedom, justice, a helping hand to break the shackles of age-old poverty and under-development, a voice in his destiny and the rest will follow. The Filipino does not ask for much. The Filipino showed himself willing to offer everything, including his life, to give us, you and me, this chance to serve our nation. Each of us, in his own way and appointed role, will prove him right in his trust and confidence.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].