Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 34th Convention of the Rural Bankers Association

[Delivered at the Manila Midtown Ramada Hotel, April 24, 1987]

THE ROLE OF RURAL BANKS

The government aims to create an environment where the private sector, including the rural banks, can effectively and efficiently supply on a sustained basis the credit requirements of the economy. The partnership between the Government and the rural banks, in particular, is a joint effort directed towards the singular goal of increasing the income of farmers.

I am very pleased to be your guest today for two principal reasons:

First, because it is rare that we have opportunities to interact with you in the face of our country’s grave problems, and the need to find lasting solutions to them.

Second, I am happy that your convention is focusing on the partnership between Government and the rural banks, a partnership aimed towards national recovery. In fact, it is the nature of our partnership that I would like to address today. It is high time that we determine the terms of that partnership and base it on the lessons we have learned in agricultural credit and rural development over the past 15 years.

What are these lessons, which we have learned the hard, expensive way?

First: we have learned that subsidized credit is not the most critical factor in increasing the income of our farmers, which is our primary goal. Out of the total production costs of our farmers, the cost of credit is only 6 percent. The more important cost factors are those for labor, fertilizer, pesticides and seeds. Thus, Government assistance to farmers should be focused on lowering the costs of these inputs rather than on credit. As you know, we have done this already. We dismantled the monopoly on fertilizer supply and we removed the 10-peso surcharge on fertilizer which was being used to pay off the obligations of that monopoly. We intend to do more. We are also working on a policy to give incentives and protection to seed producers.

The second lesson we have learned is that the private sector has always been the principal supplier of credit to our agriculture. At the height of the Masagana 99 and all other supervised credit programs in 1979, Government’s share of the total supply of bank credit was still only 24 percent. In 1985, that share dropped to 5 percent.

You may as well know it: Government cannot begin to meet the credit requirements of our agriculture. The agricultural sector’s total estimated credit requirement for 1987 is estimated conservatively at P60 billion. The Government has less than P5 billion in agricultural credit funds at its command. Clearly, the proper role of Government in the credit system is not the provision of credit itself, but in the creation of an environment where the private sector, including the rural banks, can effectively and efficiently supply, on a sustained basis, the credit requirements of our economy.

The third lesson we have learned is that the relationship that has existed between Government and the rural banking system has resulted in the overdependence of that system on Government support and subsidies. This over-dependence is painfully evident in the current state of the rural banking system. Most rural banks would not be in financial trouble these days if the system had not been so dependent on government-sourced deposits, rediscounts and subsidies. When this support dried up after the crisis of 1983, the system folded up quickly. From a high of 1,167 rural banks in 1981, we are now down to about 850.

These lessons were painfully and expensively learned. We will make the most of them. Thus, even as the Central Bank prepares to implement a rehabilitation program to set the rural banking system back on its feet, that program will be selective. Some rural banks do not need any help, and will get none. Others are beyond help, and will be treated accordingly. At the end of the road we shall have a leaner but stronger and more self-reliant system of rural banks.

Hand in hand with rural bank rehabilitation must go the reform of our agricultural credit system. Government can no longer afford to borrow high and lend low to the agricultural sector. The previous government did this for the past 20 years, with such programs as Masagana 99. Government lent money to the rural banks at one and three percent which it had borrowed abroad at 13 and a half percent. Government lending these days will be close to market rates and, at best, to a qualified few. You will have to mobilize deposits from the private sector. Market-oriented deposit rates will help you attract more deposits.

Given the lessons we have learned, and the imperatives of development we face, what should be the terms by which Government and you, the rural bankers, can be partners in economic development? To answer this question, we must first establish what our partnership is all about.

I believe that our partnership is a joint effort, made by Government with the private sector, to increase the income of all our farmers. Naturally, our main effort is focused on the low-income farmer. All our combined energies and attention should be directed at this singular goal: increase his income.

In thus focusing our efforts, let us not confuse help for the rural banks with help for our farmers. Our experience shows that helping rural banks does not necessarily translate into help for our farmers.

We must therefore ensure that whatever special subsidies and benefits will continue to be given to the rural banks are indeed passed on to the agricultural borrowers, particularly the small-holders.

Today, I should like to state the commitments of the Government in that partnership of which I have spoken.

First, I confirm Government’s commitment to make farming more profitable, to increase the income of farmers. When farmers are able to buy at lower costs the critical inputs of fertilizers, pesticides and seeds, then their incomes will rise. Also, when farmers can sell their produce at higher prices, then their incomes will rise further. With higher incomes, farmers can pay back their loans.

Second, I commit Government to a more rational policy with regard to the rural banking system. Essentially that policy will call for a less paternalistic supervision of its activities, thereby giving rural banks more flexibility to respond to emerging profitable opportunities and adjust to changing market conditions.

Since this is a partnership, we expect corresponding commitments from the rural banks.

We expect the rural banks to act more like banks, that is, institutions which transform savings into loans. In the past, rural banks served more as one-way channels of funds from Government to the public. As a result, they fell under increasingly close and tighter government regulations.

We have found, of course, that government cannot run your banks for you. You know your communities, you know your borrowers. In short, only you can be the bankers. Government can set the overall framework, but you alone can make your part of it work.

This is a facet of the general economic policy I pledged to implement: to get Government off the backs of private business and its hands out of your pockets. Business, however, will find the same policy imposed on it. We intend to get business out of Government and its hands out of the national coffers and national affairs, until the State is confined to its proper role of providing for the protection of basic rights, the security of the people, and the basic well-being of its least advantaged members. There will be no favors for anyone. The power and prestige of the State will not be used for any but the most exalted purposes of democratic political community and national honor.

The rural banks play a very important role in the countryside. This is reflected in the great influence they wield in their areas. As a closing note, I ask you to use that influence for the greater good of our country, particularly in the coming elections. Join me in urging our countrymen to vote responsibly. Every sector has its own special interest to promote and protect, but come election day we should all be, first, Filipinos.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].