PEOPLE’S WAR AGAINST TERRORISM

Enemies from the Left and the Right continue in their vain attempts to bring down the regained democracy. Because the people reject them, they have intensified their efforts. Again, Filipinos are called upon to give all-out support to the military in its effort against the left- and rightwing terrorists. It is the people’s peace and freedom that the terrorists seek to destroy. Clearly, it is now a people’s war against terrorism.

The other day, Balweg and his party were attacked. He escaped. His party was not so lucky. We are on our 32nd murdered policeman. A grenade was thrown at the Comelec offices over the weekend. A grenade attack took more lives in Cebu.

Our enemies, on the Left and the Right, have not relented. Despite the stinging rebuke they received from the people in the last elections, the Left and the Right continue their vain attempts to bring down our democracy. Perhaps it is because of that rebuke that they have intensified their efforts. As the toll increases, it becomes increasingly clear that the price of liberty is not just eternal vigilance, but a mounting sacrifice of lives.

There is no help for it. Our policemen are the front line of the public defense. The first in the face of danger, the first in the list of casualties. They are the natural targets of terrorists who want to show that they can reach with their bullets what they could not seize with their promises, the hearts and minds of the Filipinos.

Last Independence Day, I called on all our people to give all-out support to our military effort against the left- and rightwing terrorists. I repeat that call today. I call on our people to report all suspicious activities and persons to the police and military authorities in the area. It is the people’s peace and freedom that the terrorists seek to destroy. It is clearly now a people’s war, a people’s war against terrorism.

I expect the Defense Department, the Chief of Staff and the Police Chiefs to work out immediately an integrated approach that will use the power of the people to stop the terrorism against them.

In the meanwhile, I call on our naval forces to redouble your vigilance and your efforts to keep our borders secure, especially from arms landings. This is a tremendous task, given our coastline, and our small naval capabilities. But what is at stake here is freedom and what we have so painstakingly built up since the Revolution. We must do what we can with what we have. The terror must be contained and then destroyed. The last thing we need is a massive infusion of arms to our enemies.

I commend the naval forces for the great work it has done so far; not only in the military sphere but also in bringing relief to distressed areas of the country.

I commend the navy’s land forces, the Philippine Marines for its particularly distinguished performance in the last elections in the South. Colonel Cabanlig has received our highest commendation for conduct that has made us truly proud to be his Commander.

We have achieved much since the Revolution: not only the consolidation of democracy but also a respectable measure of economic progress and military security. The elections have exposed the real strength of our enemies. These attacks are signs of desperation, attempts to recoup in terms of fear what our enemies have lost in terms of credibility as popular political forces. We shall not let them.

To mark its 89th anniversary, the Philippine Navy renews and redoubles its commitment to defend the peace and freedom of our country.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].