Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 86th Foundation Anniversary of the Bureau of Customs

[Delivered on February 5, 1988]

A CATALYST FOR REFORMS

As a public service agency and revenue collection arm of the government, the Bureau of Customs must be a model of efficiency, honesty and integrity. The Bureau must promote the growth of commerce and industry. It must enforce rules and regulations which protect the higher interest of the people and the government.

President Aquino lauds the meaningful reforms that the Bureau of Customs has undertaken. She commits the government’s full support for the Bureau’s plans to modernize its operations. She stresses the importance of reorientation of the values of the Bureau officials and employees so that meaningful reforms may be effected not only in management systems but in the lives of those in public service.

Congratulations on your 86th Foundation Anniversary, I did not realize that the Bureau of Customs is that old. Perhaps, the need to rejuvenate the Bureau is long overdue. It must undergo some face-lifting, including the removal of excess bureaucratic fat and worn-out nerves.

I am truly glad that a determined effort is being made to streamline the operations of the Bureau of Customs. As a public service agency and revenue collection arm of the government, this Bureau must be a model of efficiency, honesty and integrity.

You have my assurance that Commissioner Mison and the officials and employees of Customs will receive my full support and backing in this undertaking.

I welcome the creation of a Customs-Industry Consultative Council. The first responsibility of the Bureau is to serve the country’s traders and to promote the growth and development of our industries. We cannot collect duties and taxes if the businessmen are not making profits. We cannot squeeze juice from a turnip.

I am sure our businessmen will be more than happy to pay their taxes to the government if they are making money.

The leaders of the business community should take an active interest in Custom affairs and conduct constant dialogue with its officials and employees. The Consultative Council can serve as a forum for this.

Our traders should formulate policies and recommend measures which will expedite their transactions with the Bureau. They have every right to demand prompt and efficient service from our Customs officials and employees. Afterall, they are the customers and they provide income to finance the operations of our government. The Bureau must promote rather than hamper the growth of commerce and industry. Regulations and rules are promulgated for the purpose of ensuring the olderly conduct of business and for reconciling the interest of all concerned. Protecting the higher interest of our people and the government is not a monopoly of those in public service. Most of the true patriots are in the private sector, not in government.

I am happy to note that the Bureau of Customs has exceeded its targeted revenues. I am confident that it will do better this year. I know that our businessmen will fully cooperate for as long as they have a genuine respect and confidence in the leadership of Customs.

I am prepared to support the modernization and professionalization of the customs’ service. It is a shame that the Philippines is far behind other countries in terms of facilities and equipment in the processing of shipping documents; in the handling, warehousing, and monitoring of cargoes; and in the expeditious reception of incoming foreign guests and returning residents.

The computerization of the entire operations of the Bureau is a must in this day and age.

I was informed that the present administration of the Bureau is planning to set up modern cold-storage facilities for perishable goods and items sensitive to temperature changes. I was told that a plan to acquire the most sophisticated laboratory equipments and instruments is contemplated.

I give full support to these plans.

I issued Executive Order No. 127 to promote efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of services in our revenue-collection agencies.

By this order, all positions in the Bureau of Customs are deemed vacant. The Commissioner of Customs has the authority to overhaul the entire organization in this agency. I understand Commissioner Mison has just completed the reorganization of the Customs service.

More important than the personnel changes and movement is the reorientation of values of our officials and employees. Meaningful reforms must be effected not only in management systems but in the lives of those who have embraced the public service.

1988 has been decreed as Public Service Year in this agency. I welcome this. Government officials and employees must never forget that their positions are not their private preserves.

I appeal to the leaders of the business community to match the initiatives of the new administration in the Customs service. Without the support and cooperation of the business community, no reforms in the Bureau will work or succeed.

I hope that the Customs-Industry Consultative Council will act as the catalyst in pushing through radical reforms and improvements in Customs service.

I need not stress the urgency of regaining the full trust and confidence of our people in the government.

You are all aware of the magnitude and complexity of our problems. We must address these critical areas of concern with resolute will.

Our people can no longer afford to wait. They have long suffered from government neglect. We must fulfill their expectations and help them realize their aspirations and their dreams.

If we can make the Bureau of Customs a model agency, there is no reason why we cannot improve the performance of other agencies of the government.

What we have initiated in this bureau is just the beginning.

Before I close, I want to bring us back to the Bureau’s essential mission: and that is to collect tariffs and catch smugglers. Computerization is fine, but unless this essential mission is accomplished, all that computerization achieves is a detailed record of failure.

Last Wednesday, I directed the Customs Commissioner to put the heat on textile smugglers. I directed him to raise the bounty for turning in textile smugglers. I want the bounty and the heat raised to a pitch where smuggling will be a definite and imminent hazard to the health.

I don’t want analysis at the end of this year. I want convictions. I want protection for the industries that are investing their all in the future of this nation. And I want absolute protection for the men and women, and their families, whose livelihoods are threatened by smuggling.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library