A GOOD NEWS ECONOMY

The restoration of democratic institutions has paved the way for economic recovery and growth. President Aquino discusses the government’s accomplishments in the business and finance sectors — strong GNP growth, single-digit inflation; higher income levels; increased employment and increased investments.

At the outset, let me congratulate the Financial Executive Institute of the Philippines (FINEX) for hosting this very important conference of the world’s chief financial officers and executives.

I also wish to greet the various member institutes of the International Association of Financial Executives (IAFEI).

This 19th World Congress is most timely and you earn global attention as you take center stage in addressing the subject “Emerging Issues in the Financial World”. The theme becomes even more relevant in the light of such major global problems as the huge Third World Debt, the volatile foreign exchange markets and the “Black Monday” effect on the world’s major stock exchanges.

Since those fateful days in February 1986 when we succeeded in toppling a 14-year dictatorship through a bloodless coup, the road to political and economic recovery has been far from easy. But we have taken giant steps to restore our democratic institutions. Under a New Constitution, we have established again a bicameral Congress, conducted relatively free and honest national and local elections, set up an independent judiciary and given back to the citizens their long-lost rights. To improve the quality of life of our people, our Congress has passed a Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Act, and a law giving free secondary education in public schools and regional autonomy to cultural minorities, among others.

These political infrastructures have paved the way for economic growth. The government has instituted pump priming activities and stimulated private sector participation as mandated in our Constitution.

To date, domestic investments have far outpaced foreign investments in the Philippines. We have, in short, put in place the magnet for investments and created the circumstances, that should encourage the entry of more capital into the national economy.

Hence, from a negative GNP growth in 1984 and 1985, our economy turned around in 1986; displayed a strong GNP growth of 5.7 per cent in 1987; and sustained a 6.8 per cent growth in GNP for the first eight months of 1988. Consumer spending remains strong due to higher income levels induced by increased employment and wages, which in turn are the result of increases in investments.

Prices have been stable owing to both a prudent economic policy and to drops in the prices of essential imports. For the past two years, the inflation rate has been single-digit; prime lending rates have hovered at around 15 to 16 per cent; while the peso-dollar exchange rate has been fairly stable.

And now that income levels are growing, so is per capita income. In terms of 1972 constant prices, the level of per capita savings in 1988 is almost 10 per cent higher compared with that of 1985.

On investments, the net profits after tax of the top 1000 corporations rose by 651 per cent in 1986. The net earnings of publicly-listed companies grew by 100 per cent in 1986 and by 30-40 per cent in 1987. They are expected to grow by at least 30 per cent this year. Successful business ventures with foreign participation enjoyed a return on investment almost 22 per cent higher here than in other ASEAN countries.

The market is booming so fast that producers periodically even run out of raw materials and components. Some makers of consumer products cannot even begin to export because local demand still has potential, so some manufacturing plants have to operate day and night on three full shifts! Production is, in fact, pushing the energy-generating sector to the limits of its capacity.

The labor situation has significantly improved. There has been a 43 per cent decrease in work stoppages compared to the figures last year and a speedier settlement of labor disputes. Meanwhile, the domestic market is expanding even as the export markets are opening up to Filipino producers trying to tap a bigger share of the US market that the newly-industrialized countries are expected to lose because of higher tariffs applicable to them.

In terms of government support systems, the government is continuing to develop the infrastructure necessary to encourage investments and industrialization, such as: the setting up of regional industrial centers, the establishment and improvement of viable export processing zones, and the modernization of our communications and transportation systems. In addition, our new Omnibus Investments Code offers tax and other incentives to foreign investors in priority areas even as we cut down on the regulations imposed by laws and administrative regulations.

In another sense, the investment climate has never been better. The general peace and order situation has significantly improved and can be expected to improve further.

The recent capture of some of the top leaders of both the Communist Party of the Philippines New People’s Army (CPP-NPA) and the ex-military and right-wing elements is proof of the effectiveness of our military surveillance and operations.

To further ensure that peace prevails, I have likewise directed our police forces to effectively clamp down on ordinary criminals and lawless elements, and to uncompromisingly enforce discipline in the streets towards the protection of our citizens and guests.

I have been asked about the debt-equity swap program which the Central Bank initiated about two years ago to encourage foreign investments and at the same time reduce somewhat our foreign debt.

While this program has elicited considerable interest, the Central Bank has had to proceed cautiously because of its concern that the program could have inflationary effects on the economy. Hence, the Monetary Board of the Central Bank is currently evaluating the program to determine appropriate modifications which will, hopefully, enable us to achieve the objective without endangering the financial stability of the economy.

Let me also address the issue of graft and corruption which has contributed to the heavy drain of the country’s economic resources in the past regime and whose adverse effects are being painfully felt by us now. I have said before and am saying again that we rose to power on the crest of hope for a new moral order in government. That hope shall not diminish and I shall see to it that it is realized.

I have already directed all agency heads, all department secretaries and all in government to take steps to minimize, if not to completely eradicate, graft and corruption in the bureaucracy. I have charged all government officials with the responsibility and the task of seeing to it that the commission of graft is made more risky and less rewarding for those to whom the inclination and the temptation come. Already we observe that the vigorous campaign to ensure integrity and enhance productivity and efficiency in sensitive frontline services is producing gratifying results.

We hope you will be our partners in our valiant effort to sustain the progress of our reborn democracy.

Be our guests and accept our hands in friendship and in partnership.

Thank you and please accept my good wishes for the success of this conference.

*International Association of Financial Executives Institutes (pronounced ee-ya-fey)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].