NEW LAW FOR WORKERS

With the signing of the Wage Rationalization Act, the President believes that the wage increase under this law will be sufficient to cushion the impact of price increases. She adds that management and Government should work together to maintain industrial peace essential for the improvement of productivity and investor confidence.

We have just signed into law Republic Act No. 6727 known as the Wage Rationalization Act. In signing this, the following points must be stressed:

First, we believe that even with the expected increase in power rates and prices of petroleum products and other selected goods and services, the P25 – P20 – P15 wage increases provided for under this law will be sufficient to cushion the impact of said price increases.

Second, labor, management and Government should now work together to soften the inflationary impact of the wage increase on our people, particularly on the unemployed. Productivity at the enterprise level should now be improved in order that the added labor cost brought about by this wage increase need not be passed on to the consumers. I have instructed the Department of Labor and Employment to give priority to the establishment of productivity improvement schemes, to be undertaken with the active participation of employers and organized labor. At the same time, I consider it essential to the improvement of productivity and investor confidence that industrial peace at the workplace be maintained.

Third, labor and management should strive to improve and strengthen further the collective bargaining process so that in the future, wage-fixing and the determination of other terms and conditions of employment shall be in their hands.

And finally, with the creation of the Regional Tripartite Wages and Productivity Boards, the authority to fix wages is now devolved to such bodies, and henceforth, there shall be no need for Congress to intervene in wage fixing. We concur with the policy stated in this law that such Boards are in the best position to determine the appropriate wage rates, taking into account regional socio-economic differences and industry peculiarities.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].