Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Conference of ASEAN Business Leaders

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, November 7, 1988]

REACHING FOR NEW HEIGHTS

The President paints a more conducive business climate for the ASEAN business leaders who came to look more closely at trade and investment opportunities in the Philippines. She enjoins them to make the balance of her stewardship as meaningful and as significant as the past 2-1/2 years in the life of the Filipino nation.

At the outset, let me congratulate the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FFCCI) for its initiative in sponsoring this Conference of ASEAN Business Leaders.

I believe it is the sum of many efforts such as this, coming from different sectors but all pushing in one direction that eventually brings a nation to its fulfillment

Let me also extend a warm welcome to our guests from ASEAN who have heeded the call of their counterparts here to look more closely at trade and investment opportunities in the Philippines.

I know that you will not be disappointed with what our country has to offer. For today, perhaps more than at any other time in the past 20 years; the Philippines is on the rise. The momentum of recovery is building up. It may well overtake other countries that did not have to go through the pain and trials my country has.

Let me present you with unassailable facts.

Less than three years ago, the Philippines was known for its one-man rule. The man who had been elected President in 1965 was still in power 20 years after. He acted like he was preparing to stay on for some time more.

The Filipino people broke that line. They showed to the world in 4 historic days in February 1986 how democracy defends itself. Since then, we have lost no time in restoring our democratic institutions.

The people have ratified a New Constitution. They have elected their representatives to both Houses of Congress as well as their governors, mayors, and other local officials. We have given back to them their civil and political rights. Our independent judiciary has regained its pride and confidence. Peace and order have returned to many communities.

Less than three years ago, the Philippines was also known as the sick man of Asia. Its economy which had led the way for other Asian economies in the early ’60s was in a dangerous tailspin. Real GNP was continuously contracting. International reserves were hemorrhaging even as a selected few enriching themselves at the expense of legitimate businessmen and entrepreneurs.

Today, we can proudly say that we have pulled off one of the most phenomenal rescue operations in economic history.

We arrested the nosedive of the GNP in 1986 and propelled it to a growth of 5.7 per cent last year, second only to Thailand in the ASEAN region. We have not stopped as we even exceeded this with a 6.8 per cent growth as of the first semester of 1988.

From a consumption-led growth in 1987, we have made the difficult transition to an investment-led growth. Capital formation radically increased its growth rate from 4.8 per cent in the first semester of 1987 to 22.5 per cent in the first semester of 1988, while personal consumption maintained its more moderate increase of 5 to 6 per cent.

This only means that expenditures are now flowing into the construction of plants and factories and into purchases of durable equipment, all of which directly expand our country’s productive capabilities.

Having done away with the stranglehold of crony capitalism and government-run business, we have seen the private sector unleash its long pent-up energies. Industry has been showing the way for the rest of the sectors of the economy, with growth rates of 8 to 9 percent over the last two years.

Even with a burgeoning economy, we have managed to keep inflation below double digits. Prime rates remain at 16-17 per cent; while the peso-dollar exchange rate has been relatively stable.

The labor situation has already normalized. Businessmen are reporting marked increases across the board in gross revenues, net income, employee workforces, capacity utilization and capital expenditures. In fact, in a recent independent Business Confidence Survey (Makati Business Club), an overwhelming majority of the people actually doing business in the country are saying they expect things to get even better in the days to come.

When this government started out less than three years ago, they gave it about six months to survive. Well, this month I will reach my 1,000th day in office — more or less the midpoint of my Administration. I will celebrate it with the full intention of seeing through the balance of my stay as meaningful and as significant as the past 2-1/2 years have been in the life of the Filipino nation.

We still have many more challenges to meet and obstacles to hurdle in our way. The Filipino people are only now beginning to feel the first few gusts of the winds of change that have reached their lives. We must sustain our progress.

That is why we are putting in place the business infrastructure that will encourage many of you to take part in our efforts.

Last year, we passed a New Omnibus Investments Code that provides investment incentives at least equal to what are available in this part of the world. We are now looking at the further reduction of red tape and the simplification of the rules and regulations that affect the doing of business in the Philippines.

We are setting up regional industrial centers throughout the country that will offer the complete range of infrastructure necessary for business to operate competitively in world markets: power, communications, transportation systems and the like.

At the same time, we are pushing through Congress an Omnibus Code for Small Enterprises that will respond to the unique needs of the small business entrepreneur in terms of financing, marketing and raw materials procurement support

We are not wanting in specific viable opportunities for exports and investments. Not far from here, at the Philippine Trade Training Center, the Philippine government and the UN have just opened the Philippine Investors Forum which aims to promote close to 180 identified industrial projects for joint-venture partnerships through equity investments, market access, technology transfer or equipment supply. You may wish to visit and explore the possibilities there.

Let me therefore close with this message.

With the unique combination of its experience, resources and potentials, the Philippines today is unlike any other country in the world. We have emerged from the darkest days of our history into the bright sunlight of a promising future. And we are determined never to look back.

We realize that the journey ahead will be far from easy. Please help us along the way, as our neighbors, our friends, and most of all, as our brothers in our common search for a better quality of life.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].