Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the New York Chamber of Commerce

[Delivered on November 8, 1989]

PROSPECTS OF PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT

Confident that she can tackle the dual challenge of the Left and the Right, President Aquino assures members of the New York Chamber of Commerce on the benefits of investing in a revolution especially if taken in the light of improved political, economic, and peace and order climate, and the resolve of her government to implement much needed reforms. While there are many other concerns that need to be addressed, the Philippine government has drawn up a master-plan for recovery towards poverty alleviation, promotion of social justice, and attainment of sustained economic growth.

Standing before an audience like this three years ago, I said that two things must have been uppermost in their minds; Curiosity about an unlikely looking revolutionary, and was it wise to invest in a revolution.

How could a woman survive forces such as those that had brought her to power? People said I had ridden to power on a tiger and would end up inside.

If I did ride a tiger — meaning the military revolt – I got off quite nicely, as you can see. Of course, it wasn’t as easy as I now make it sound. For between getting on and getting off, I would survive five coup attempts, the last of which was crushed completely. The Army would not leave the barracks again except to resume hostilities, on my order, against the insurgency. The truth, however, is that I was swept to power by the force of the people and the people kept me safe.

When I came to the United States three years ago, the government faced two outstanding threats. One from the Right, the other from the Left.

In July of ’86, I proposed a ceasefire to the communist insurgents to enable both sides to sit down and negotiate a peaceful settlement of the insurgency. I offered amnesty, a rebel returnee program for which, I admit, we had little money, and a chance to start life anew in a free country if they would lay down their arms. Thousands accepted the offer then, thousands are still defecting from the cause. But the insurgent leadership rejected the offer and the Army has taken to the field again — this time with better results. For the Army was now fighting with the people, against the enemies of peace and freedom.

We have prised the insurgents from their strongholds in remote areas. We have them on the run. The most seasoned of their leaders have been captured or been so exposed as to have lost their effectiveness. The Communist Party has chosen to ascribe its losses, not to the basic incompatibility of its thought with the faith of a people so close to God and democracy, but to the disloyalty of its men. Party purges have taken as great a toll on its ranks as encounters with the government.

With the rightwing in the military there was nothing to negotiate. They wanted a share of the government, I told them to get elected first. The role of this military faction in the February ’86 revolution contributed greatly to the outcome. Yet it could not serve as a mandate to share with me the office to which I had been elected by vote and confirmed by revolution. Dissatisfied with the republican honors I heaped on them, this faction attempted several times to overthrow the government – with dismal results for them.

The strongest issue I faced when I was here three years ago was whether our young democracy could survive the dual challenge of the Left and the Right.

The threat from the Right has dissolved in the face of continuing popular support for constitutional government, the professionalism of the officer corps, and my intransigence on the matter of sharing power with anyone who has not been elected.

With respect to the threat from the Left, I can say without fear of contradiction by future events that the communists will never succeed in recruiting from a God-fearing, freedom-loving people the numbers they need for a decisive victory.

And so now I can answer that it would be as wise to invest in the Philippine revolution today as it was to invest in the city of New York after the American War of Independence. With the added assurance that the Philippines will not default on its debt, and cannot call on the Federal Government for a bailout.

To wind up the political picture: In a year and a half we ratified a democratic constitution and elected the Congress and local governments. These elections had the biggest turnouts of any election in any Western democracy in terms of percentage of voter population. A clear demonstration of the depth of democratic commitment in my country. In these elections, too, administration candidates were swept into office by unprecedented majorities, sealing the fate of any opposition except that which will emerge from the ranks of my followers.

In sum, government has achieved a degree of legitimacy that forever precludes any other mode of political change other than the processes laid down in the Constitution.

If the political climate is the first consideration of business, I believe we have addressed that concern completely.

But if the question is peace and order, then I must back down a little and say that in some places in Manila you may feel at home.

In the year and a half before I relinquished part of my power to an elected Congress, I governed as president and parliament rolled up in one. In that capacity, I set in place the structural reforms that have injected new life and revealed the unexpected strength of the Philippine economy.

The economy I inherited had contracted 10 percent in the previous two years. GNP the year before I took office had been negative 4%. Inflation was down to 5.5% but only because 50% inflation the year before had wiped out purchasing power.

Yet, by the time I was speaking in New York, seven months from when I took office, we had turned the economy around and by year-end posted a positive GNP of 1.5%. In 1988, GNP was 6.7%

These figures are modest by the standards of the Asian tigers. But not when seen against the backdrop of 14 years of a government that concentrated on stealing rather than building the Philippine economy. And not when regarded in the light of the Philippine debt, which annually carves out 40% of the national budget for debt service. On the contrary, they reveal the fundamental strength we have built back into the Philippine economy and the discipline and resolve of the new government in implementing the necessary reforms.

I had directed the National Economic and Development Authority to draw up a masterplan for recovery: the Medium-Term Development Plan. It set forth as broad objectives the alleviation of poverty, the generation of productive employment, the promotion of social justice, and the attainment of sustainable economic growth.

Towards these objectives, we implemented several structural reforms — such as tax reform, trade liberalization to inject competitive quality into Philippine manufacture, eradication of monopolies and other economic distortions through political influence, and the privatization of government-controlled enterprises – but not at fire-sale prices. The government does not intend to be robbed twice. The thrust of these reforms is to restore to private enterprise its proper role as the main engine of the economy.

As growth figures indicate, business has responded to these basic improvements – mainly Asian business. We regret the current diffidence of American enterprise that once played an important and, we believe, necessary balancing role in Philippine economic development. We are told that there are still some disadvantages to investing in the Philippines which Americans would want us to address, such as limitations on foreign equity. While we shall try to enlarge the areas that allow bigger foreign equity, may we say that these limitations do not seem to bother Asian investors as much, or at all.

Other concerns must be addressed. We are doing our best but it has not been enough. We are reaching — if we have not exceeded – our energy-generating capacity. Power outages are a case in point. Demand exceeded transportation capacity – roads, ports, public transport – some time back.

The development of new gas discoveries will alleviate our energy problems only in the long-term; as a temporary measure we shall soon operationalize several oil-burning power plants. In Dallas, we shall be inviting US exploration companies to increase their activities in the Philippines. In an area that has been characterized as a sea of oil, there is good reason to believe in the likelihood of a major Philippine discovery.

Downstream, we have prioritized the establishment of a petrochemical industry. Some companies have already signified interest in this. Considering the magnitude of the required investments, we would like to encourage the leading-edge petrochemical companies to join us in this development effort, including through a joint venture with the national oil company.

The French are assisting us in expanding the airport. We shall undoubtedly need another one. We are improving our port facilities. We may need a new one outside Metro Manila to decongest industrial traffic. There are studies being done.

Traffic congestion is becoming legendary; it is almost as bad as in other thriving Asian economies. But for those who cannot bear up with it, there are states in the Indian Ocean where traffic is not a problem.

We might have moved more quickly on these essential projects if debt service obligations did not put a cap on our efforts. Yet we feel that the banks must wish us to continue the progress we have made, for we must grow to pay the debt.

We have gotten some relief through reschedulings with official creditors. We recently concluded an agreement with commercial creditors on a financial package that should cover our external financing requirements for the next two years.

Clearly, the government’s limited efforts must be complemented by foreign investments. Foreign assistance has increased – an indication of the enormous goodwill enjoyed by the Philippines today in contrast to the past under the dictatorship. Substantial promises of larger amounts were made at the Tokyo Consultative Group Meeting last July.

Although we have done better than the majority of LDCs in utilizing aid, we are improving the government’s absorptive capacity for foreign loan assistance to do away with the problem of backed-up aid, which reached $772 million last year. This, by the way, is the correct amount and not the three to four billion dollars that is ignorantly bandied about. We are hoping, however, that the donor countries’ generative capacity for reviewing projects will also improve so that we can make full use of the $6.5 billion net loan commitments that have been made.

Foreign loan assistance, while deeply appreciated, cannot be the lifeblood of the development we envision. For we have set our sights on recapturing the economic status we once enjoyed in the region — as the showcase not of foreign generosity but of private enterprise and democracy in Asia.

We believe we are getting there. Asian and European investors, by their response, appear to share that belief. The most conservative reading of Trade & Industry assessments would put real foreign investments at a billion dollars a year from 1989 onwards.

We had one of the most successful stock offerings in the history of Philippine business – the privatization of a substantial block of the Philippine National Bank. This morning we listed in the New York Stock Exchange the First Philippine Fund, which will invest in Philippine equities. Government will soon be making stock offerings of some of the strongest Philippine corporations today, including some that will soon be listed in the New York Stock Exchange.

The prospects for this are good. A Merrill Lynch report predicts that the Philippines will be one of the best economic performers in Asia in the early 1990s. And, as I said this morning, I hope the symbol of the bull in Merrill Lynch stands for confidence.

Let me conclude by saying that the role of American enterprise in Philippine development is still there — as necessary now, we believe, as in the past; and so is the place of Americans in the affection and trust of the Filipino people.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].