Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Fulbright Scholarships

[Delivered at the Philippine Plaza, December 6, 1988]

A BENEVOLENT INFLUENCE

The President sees on this occasion a time to remind ourselves that the best hope of a lasting friendship between America and the Philippines lies not in a shared perception of international risks but in the renewal of our faith in that gift and common heritage.

In the Fulbright Program, she recognizes the education of her government where she sees in its roster of distinguished alumni people who are now working closely with her.

The Philippine-American educational program — better known by its flagship, the Fulbright Program — had a movingly symbolic beginning. The program was established immediately after the Second World War. It was to be administered by the U.S. Educational Foundation in the Philippines using funds from the sale of war surplus property. The Fulbright Program was almost literally an attempt, in the aftermath of history’s most terrible war, to beat spears into pruning hooks, and swords into plowshares to work the rich heritage of human learning,

On the level of national strategy, it was a rare attempt to build an enduring bi-lateral friendship, not by partnerships of military and economic convenience, but in the hearts and minds of two peoples who held certain truths to be self-evident. Such truths as that God created all men equal, that all men have certain inalienable rights, and that the subsequent inequality of men through the violation of these rights give rise to the duty to change the government and erect another more truly dedicated to the safety and happiness of the people.

These words need not be identified. They express the heritage of all men, yet also America’s greatest gift to mankind.

I am happy to be invited to this occasion, for it is time to remind ourselves that the best hope of a lasting friendship between America and the Philippines lies, not in a shared perception of international risks nor in accommodations to each other’s economic interests, but in the renewal of our faith in that gift and common heritage.

Certain moments in the dramatic restoration of Philippine freedom brought back a taste of the original purity of our two peoples’ democratic commitments. I think of the broadcast journalist who interrupted an argument on the Political impracticality of an official US commitment to Philippine democracy, with the words, “But this is family.” He was implying that certain things are beyond strategic calculation and must be decided by faith.

All that seems so long ago. On both sides, the talk since then has been about military necessities and economic pressures which seek to bend our original high purposes to lower and more pragmatic ends. Where we both once spoke of a second economic chance for the people to complement the rebirth of freedom, we are careful now to be practical, to accept a lesser improvement in the lives of the common people to avoid greater dangers to the country as a whole. “Prudence” is the watchword, in a setting where friendships fired by idealism are fast fading away.

We note these changes with some regret, yet also with a firmer resolve to forge ahead and achieve all we can of the vision that awoke the heroism of a race. We forge ahead in the hope and in the faith that we of this generation shall still see that vision completed.

A great part of that hope is grounded in the belief that idealism still abounds on both sides of this relationship. The sterling proof is the Fulbright Program, to which I can say I owe practically the education of this government. For I see in its roster of distinguished alumni many of those who struggled and worked beside me. To name only a few: Presidential Spokesman and reluctant everything, but now, just the same, Senator Rene Saguisag; Customs Commissioner and now, to his intense relief, Senator Bobby Tanada; and that courteous companion and fellow worker in our struggle for freedom, now Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Marcelo Fernan. I see the names of current members of my Cabinet also.

And I see the name of another Fulbright scholar who learned to love freedom not wisely but too well, and gave his life to give it back to his people. He reminds us that there are things — principles and goals — that are beyond calculation and compromise.

These names prove what I have said: That America cannot exercise a more benevolent influence in the affairs of other nations than by building in the hearts and minds of men.

I wish the Fulbright program and other programs like it every success and express the hope that they will continue to generate, among our people, brave and able workers for their welfare and unyielding protectors of their freedom.

Thank you and good evening.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].