Sugar Industry July 21, 1988

A Partnership for Common Advancement

The President admonishes the country’s sugar planters to study market developments abroad as a reaction to their thinking about a production quota. Government feels that a rational credit policy is probably the best way to rationalize production.

Only four months ago, I appeared before a smaller convention of sugar planters. But this I understand is a bigger affair, in fact the first Joint National Convention of Planters and Millers in many years. I am pleased to note the large attendance and the bouyant mood of the assembly. This is of course what pleases me most, that the occasion is a celebration of great and wholly unexpected achievements.

In October 1986, I expressed before a gathering in Bacolod the government’s profound skepticism about the future of the industry. Not only our own economic and agricultural experts, but officials from abroad had grimly assured us that “sugar is finished!

A look at the sugar industry then confirmed the prognosis. Sugar fetched low prices both here and abroad; access to the U.S. market was severely limited; there was little financing available, and Nasutra back accounts with the industry remained outstanding.

Domestic prices were at less than P200 per picul; world market prices at about 6 cents per pound. Our U.S. quota was down to 150,000 metric tons. Sugar production, from a high of 2.4 million metric tons had dropped to 1.3 million in 1986-87. Areas planted to sugar cane fell from 460,000 hectares to 269,000 hectares, and this was pure abandonment, not planned diversification. Hunger stalked these abandoned lands, in which insurgency quite naturally began to grow.

We were told that no help should be extended to the sugar industry because it would create false hopes and therefore cause delay in the diversification to other crops which was insistently demanded by these experts and officials.

I felt however that government had to offer some help and so I pledged to get government off the back of the sugar industry and return the initiative in sugar back to the people who are in sugar. Nasutra was dismantled. I then issued directions for the organization of a task force to oversee the restructuring of the industry.

After many consultations, I issued Executive Order No. 18. This is the law which struck down Philsucom and erected in its place the leaner and more effective Sugar Regulatory Administration, and two private foundations for research and socio-economic programs.

But the essence of my approach was to leave the industry to take care of itself, sink or swim; prove its mettle or its critics correct. I am proud to say that sugar came through with flying colors.

To a great extent, of course, the recovery of sugar was a consequence of the general improvement of the economy. The expanding purchasing power in the countryside revived a corresponding demand for sugar. From 800,000 metric tons for domestic consumption, we are now approaching 1.4 million metric tons. This was not only an injection of life but a reorientation of the industry away from over-dependence on the U.S. market. Domestic demand took virtually the entire production of sugar, compelling us to import for our commitments. The importation also eased the upward pressure on domestic prices that might have forced industrial users to switch to substitutes as they have done abroad.

It was a wise move, events have shown. Had we not closed the import contract with Thailand early enough, we might have been caught in the rising spiral of world sugar prices that came soon after. I understand that the price is now 14 cents a pound.

I know that this was an unpopular measure among you. But I think we must agree in retrospect it was a wise move.

Now I am told that you are worried about a production surplus and are thinking of a production quota “to rationalize the industry.” I put that in quotes because it reminds me of past “rationalizations” of agricultural crops.

I suggest you give this proposal a long, hard look. Think of the timing. Study market developments abroad, and of a domestic economy that is definitely on the upswing. Consider your own experiences with “rationalizations,” and of moves abroad away from market interventions.

Government feels that a rational credit policy is probably the best way to rationalize production. We have done away with the politically motivated liberal credit policies of the state banks in the past and have prescribed normal credit standards in the approval of your loans. Market forces throughout economy will dictate more wisely than anything else in the directions sugar should take.

The problem of insurgency in the sugar areas, and in other parts of our country is of course ever present in our deliberations. New military initiatives are planned, of which I shall speak on other occasions. For now let me say that the best cure for the insurgency is development and justice, a better life for the great body of our people.

With special regard to sugar, let me say that your best security lies in the care you take of the people who work for you. Give them a decent and livable wage; go among them and learn their needs and problems. Transform the sugar industry in a general partnership of worker, planter and miller working for their common advancement.

In the larger context, I ask you to take a sober view of the present “boom” as part of a cycle of ups and downs, and to prepare for both a further improvement in the industry and a downswing that seems built into it. Do not be complacent. Learn from the past.

The introduction of high yielding varieties and the wider adoption of more rational practices in the field can no longer be postponed. The milling sector must also respond by upgrading their plants so that the sugar in the fields is not lost in the mill before it ends up in your coffee.

Per capita domestic consumption of sugar can be raised through more efficient distribution. The elimination of occasional shortages in certain areas in the country will result in a steadier expansion of the market.

Now is probably the time to consider establishing a buffer stock to take advantage of market developments abroad and ensure the sufficiency of local supply. The venture will of course be funded by you. Yet, let me emphasize again that government stands ready to help.

I created an Inter-Agency Committee on Sugar to provide a mechanism for the identification and resolution of problems in the industry. This agency is meant to represent you in the councils of government. Use it to your fullest advantage.

The ownership of the Republic Planters Bank has been resolved. It will be rehabilitated and its expertise in sugar financing will be tapped to assist you. In time it will be privatized consonant with standing policy.

CARP is now in place. I know that many of you are not happy with it even as a concept, let alone with the details of the new law. I don’t think my talking to you now will make you change your minds but I do ask you to keep an open mind about it. It is a reality that cannot be escaped, but more fruitfully, I ask you to consider it as a challenge you are willing to take up: a challenge to make all the people of the sugar areas partners in the general progress of the industry. It cannot go on as it has done for centuries. The world is swiftly changing, and so must we. The new spirit in the land demands a more meaningful sharing in the good things of life. Let us not begrudge that. The age of masters and men is over. A sense of brotherhood with our fellow Filipinos from all walks of life is more in keeping with the time. More and more planters are acquiring this sense of fraternity, this willingness to share as shown by the improved standard of living in the countryside, the increase in the purchasing power of rural folk.

I thank you for inviting me to address you. Good day and God bless you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library