Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Feast of Sacred Heart of Jesus

[Released on June 6, 1986]

PEOPLE POWER THROUGH PRAYER

Millions of Filipinos discovered freedom and truth at the point of despairing of ever crushing the dictatorship under which they had been suffering. People’s power did it because there was prayer power behind it.

It was in the solitude of his cell, facing the prospects of summary execution or endless solitary confinement, that Ninoy discovered real freedom.

It was freedom from the weight of his cares and ambitions. In the absolute silence and emptiness of his cell, it was freedom to pray without distraction or interruption. It was the freedom to become like a child again. Absolutely trusting, absolutely believing that God held all the levers of his fate. He knew, because Christ had assured us, that the hairs of his head were numbered, even as no bird fell unnoticed and uncounted. And that certainly he, who had suffered so much, had lost nearly everything, who had prayed so hard and so fervently, had his purpose and would have his redemption.

Ninoy, I am certain, must be smiling today because million of Filipinos had discovered the same freedom and the same truth under the crushing weight of a dictatorship. Filipinos had discovered freedom and the strength to act only when they had lost all hope of easy freedom and effective action. The dictator had betrayed a clear intention to win the election by every means, fair and mostly foul, at his command. It was at this hopeless juncture that the Filipinos felt the weight of helplessness lifted from their breasts and were galvanized into action.

Why is it that the Filipino is moved to action when there is no pragmatic reason for it anymore? Because that is when the Filipino believes in the power of prayers and finds the strength of faith. That is when the Filipino believes with all his or her heart that God will finally work a miracle, in His appointed time, of course, but always through his or her effort. God moves in mysterious ways but always through His people.

When the Filipinos therefore had done everything in their power and brought the dictatorship to its knees they brought out the images of Christ and His loving mother so there would be no mistake to whom the credit should go. For Christ and His mother had moved us mightily, using die strength of our prayers and faith. “People’s Power,” a phrase that is popular and seems apt, is more the result than the moving force of our revolution. The better term is “Prayer Power,” Didn’t Saint Paul say: “If Christ is with us, who can prevail against us?”

And so Ninoy is smiling today. For years back, when he sat in his cell, baffled by events, all he could be sure of as he held the rosary, that direct line to our Holy Mother, and through her to Christ, that he was being heard and would be answered. God would let His people go, I can almost hear my husband saying, “I told you so,”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].