Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Signing of the Act Providing for an Organic Act for the Cordillera Autonomous Region

[Delivered on October 23, 1989]

DEVELOPMENT THROUGH FREEDOM

In tackling the constitutional mandate and agenda for the proposed autonomy in the Cordillera Region, President Aquino considers the pressing needs of development in the rural areas of the devolution of powers and functions from the national government to the autonomous region. Autonomy must address the full spectrum of the political, social and economic aspirations of the constituent communities. And the people, she avers, must understand the benefits and responsibilities that they must bear.

Pursuant to the constitutional mandate for autonomy, Congress has passed this law that I signed today, providing for the Organic Act for the Cordillera Autonomous Region. In doing so, we have again kept faith with the Constitution.

As in the case of Mindanao, the precise terms of the autonomy remain controversial. For very similar reasons, some will be for rejecting the law because it does not offer enough powers to the autonomous region; others because it gives away too much.

The proposed Organic Act acknowledges the cultural distinctiveness and the ancestral claims of the peoples of the Cordilleras, while clearly and repeatedly defining them as inseparable elements of our one, sovereign nation.

As we proceed to discuss and tackle the agenda for the proposed autonomy, we continue to bear in mind the pressing needs of development in all of our rural areas. The devolution of powers and functions from the national government to the autonomous region must take all this into account.

For autonomy must address the full spectrum of the political, social and economic aspirations of the constituent communities. In these communities, the people’s basic concerns will remain: potable water, health facilities, schools, livelihood opportunities. As I said before, when I signed the law providing for the Organic Act for Mindanao, autonomy must translate into the more effective delivery of these services. The national line agencies and the future autonomous government have a shared responsibility for moderating the disruptions inevitably resulting from change.

We must now let people in the proposed autonomous region decide for themselves in a plebiscite whether the law meets their objectives. As before, I have directed the relevant government agencies to mount a massive information campaign to help the voters understand the basis of the autonomy law, its content and its implications so as to give them a better foundation for making a rational decision. For the people must understand not only the benefits that autonomy will bring but also the new responsibilities that they must bear.

The citizens must exercise their right of free choice on a fundamental change in political arrangements. We must abide by this principle as the one most consistent with the constitutional bias towards greater local autonomy and individual freedom.

Through freedom will come development. And through development, this nation of ours will preserve the peace that it has so painstakingly achieved.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].