Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines For the Banking and Business Sectors

[Delivered on November 6, 1989]

PRESIDENT AQUINO CALLS FOR EXPANDED CANADIAN INVESTMENTS

Expanded Canadian business projects in the Philippines would be beneficial to both countries. Philippine economy has grown steadily the past three years. Structural reforms have been implemented, unleashing free market forces. However, the country’s debt is still a burden. With the support of Canada’s banks, the Philippines will get some respite from this burden through a new financial package. Investors from other countries have been drawn to the geographical advantages, skilled working force, modern managerial class, responsive government, and vibrant economy of the Philippines. The recent increase in Canadian investments is a welcome development.

A number of the Canadian companies represented here do business in the Philippines. I should like to take this opportunity to underscore the mutual benefits to be derived from new and expanded business projects in the Philippines.

The Philippines has had three successive years of economic growth. A number of Canadian companies have participated in this expansion through trade and direct investments. Of note is the fruitful partnership recently entered into by the Bank of Nova Scotia with a solid Philippine bank. We welcome such joint ventures motivated by a farsighted view of Philippine prospects. It is to such partnerships of investment and growth that the country looks for its continued economic progress.

In support of this objective, public expenditures have risen to expand infrastructure so the country can absorb new investments.

We have also made structural reforms to promote efficiencies in the use of public and private resources, we have dismantled monopolies and special privileges, liberalized trade, and privatized public enterprises. In sum, we have unleashed free market forces, and returned the economy to the private sector as the leading engine of growth.

These structural reforms as well as the investments that have poured in, need time to bear fruit. But a heavy debt continues to drain scarce foreign exchange and budgetary resources that might otherwise be invested for robust growth. The Philippine debt will be about $29 billion by year-end 1989, and will account for around 72% of GNP. Debt service will take about 40% of the national budget this year – 40% that might otherwise have gone to high priority areas including essential infrastructures.

We have gotten some respite from this debt burden through past rescheduling negotiations with our creditors. More recently, within the framework of officially endorsed voluntary debt reduction schemes, we have succeeded in agreeing on a financial package with our commercial creditors which provides new money and efficient debt reduction that would cover the external financing requirements of the Philippine economy for the next two years. We look forward to the support of commercial banks in Canada for this financial package. This will help sustain economic growth that will enhance profit opportunities and provide the fundamental solution to our debt problem.

In attaining our growth objective, the Philippines will join the fast-growing economies of the most dynamic region in the world today. To the advantages of geography, we shall be adding a highly skilled, English-speaking work force, a modern managerial class, a responsive government, and a fully restored and vibrant Philippine economy. It is in this economy that we invite you to invest.

These are the factors that have drawn heavy investments from Hongkong, Taiwan and Japan, particularly in the export sector. Canadian enterprise has started to come in. Recently, Canadian entrepreneurs have been equally bullish, increasing their investments by 280 percent in the first eight months of 1989 over the total of the last three years. This is a welcome development which we hope will continue.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].