Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry

[Released on July 21, 1986]

REVVING UP THE ECONOMIC ENGINE

Despite gains made since the ouster of former President Marcos on both economic and political fronts, President Aquino deplores that big business has been slow or even reluctant in making significant investments that will give the economy a much-needed push. She tackles grievances: that the Minister of Labor should be replaced (under today’s prevailing circumstances, he is the man for the job); that the PCGG is going beyond its bounds (efforts of PCGG have been aimed at preventing illegal transfers of shares, assets and monies); that import liberalization will wreak havoc on the export industry (the need is to make our export industry competitive and efficient).

It is now nearly six months since I spoke to you on February 3rd. How many of us really believed that deliverance was near at hand. I do not know. But it was clear that we were all terribly determined to deliver ourselves from bondage. And that was more important. The determination was even greater after Marcos stole the election from us and we embarked on a campaign of civil disobedience. At this time, a foreign emissary came to me and asked me when I thought our victory would take place. I answered him. Perhaps in three months, maybe six, who knows? All I know, I told him, is that I will not stop whatever the price I would have to pay. He told me, Mrs. Aquino, if you had given me a definite time when you would definitely take power, I would have dismissed your efforts. But now that you tell me realistically that you do not know but that, regardless, you will not stop, I know you will succeed. It is all in the will.

I remember how wildly you cheered when I last spoke to you, when I challenged you to let your voices be heard and let the power of the people be felt. So resounding was your response and that of the rest of our people, that three weeks later I was your President.

Today I come with yet another challenge. This time, the enemy is no longer an aging dictator. It is fear. Fear and its attendant feeling of uncertainty and reluctance. Fear and the failure of the will. The challenge is to overcome this fear and to join hands with your President and your government in rebuilding our nation. I offer no quick dramatic solutions, now any miracles except those that God will work through our hands, which is the same as the miracle at EDSA. Remember that in our unrelenting struggle we followed no pillar of smoke or fire, but only the pillar of our resolve to be delivered from the house of bondage. So what I offer, once again, is a long and difficult struggle with no more certainty of success than faith and perseverance guarantee. But that, as we have learned, is no small surety.

This struggle that must be nourished by faith and determination must also proceed on a clear and fearless understanding of the events that unfolded and are unfolding in our country today. In the spirit of candor with which I led our struggle for freedom, let us pause and take stock.

The then major opposition forces in the country forged a united front to rid the country of the dictatorship and to establish a democracy. Let me repeat that it was a democracy that we collectively sought to establish and not another dictatorship. Neither a dictatorship of power nor a dictatorship of ideas of how to tackle the problems of the nation. We promised effective government, that is true, but effective in its responses to the diverse demands of the people and parties that propelled us to power. These were demands that the dictatorship had ignored and which I pledged sincere efforts to answer. That is why I promised that my government would be one of consultation and not of unilateral direction.

This government reflects, in deliberating on the problems of the nation, the wide diversity of views of the forces that brought it to power. Some people now think that this was a necessary but, as things have turned out, an unfortunate compromise. Those who think this way do not understand democracy, and if their way of thinking spreads, we won’t have it for long. What would they have in its place? I ask them.

Where some see weakness and confusion, I see strength in a government that is able to listen to the widest range of views and yet is able to move ahead with the kind of resolve we have adequately demonstrated over the last five months. As was dramatically proven by the fall of the Marcos regime, the strength of a government lies, not in its ability to speak with a single voice, as the Marcos government always did, and with a consistently lying voice at that, but in its ability to keep the trust and confidence of its people. And that ability hinges on the government’s willingness to listen to the people. Is the babble of popular voices too distracting for business? Remember that the decline of the Marcos dictatorship was marked by the silence of a people quietly withdrawing their support. They had lost all hope of a hearing.

This government is pledged to listen to the people and strains itself to catch every voice. We make no pretensions at a monopoly of knowledge, unlike Marcos. I have learned more about government from my direct contact with the people and their popular leaders in our consultations than I have from the pundits. Certainly more about their needs and how to go about meeting them given our limited resources.

What I am-afraid of is not an increasing number of views but a decreasing ability to heed them all, given the limitations of a pure Presidential government without the benefit of a separate legislature and local governments that are popularly elected and periodically responsible to their constituents.

This is why I have placed such a premium on the swift completion of the drafting of a new constitution. This is why I advised the Constitutional Commission to stick to the work of writing a constitution and not to usurp the legislative and policy-making functions of the representative institutions they are called upon to create. The commissioners were appointed to create the representative institutions of a democracy, institutions in which the preferences of the people would be heard and acted on by the people’s duly elected representatives and no others.

I want to preside over a full-blown democracy, with all the proper institutions and agencies in place that will be acutely sensitive to the public pulse. I said I would lead our people but only in the direction they wish to take. What this direction is, from among the many that various sectors of the nation propose, is something that the duly elected representatives will tell us.

The legislative and local elections will give your government the opportunity to present to our people a set of candidates who will assist us in the rebuilding of our nation. It is to be hoped that the mandate we now enjoy at the national level will translate into an equally powerful mandate in the legislative and local government levels, so that the reconstruction of our nation can proceed with full vigor and dynamism and a minimum of obstruction.

In the meantime, my mission is to strengthen the unity that we as a people displayed in the Campaign and Revolution. I want to bring into that unity even the forces that opposed us, who must know that our victory is irrevocable. For we now face a greater and common foe — the underdevelopment and poverty of our country — and the greater challenge of making its material progress commensurate with the spiritual triumph of the Revolution.

It is against this backdrop then that we must assess our progress to date, and our ability to move forward in the future. As we take stock, it is appropriate to recall what we said during the campaign would be our main economic thrusts:

We said we would restore credible leadership through personal example.

We vowed to drastically reduce, if not totally eliminate, graft and corruption in government.

We said we would relentlessly pursue the ill-gotten wealth of the Marcoses and their cronies. The applause that followed this pledge was deafening.

We said that the focus of our economic policies would be the unemployment problem.

And we said that rural development would be assigned the first priority it has long deserved.

And how have we fared in the five months since we assumed office?

We have reestablished the credibility of the Philippine government not only in the eyes of the Filipino people but before the entire world; this credibility rests not only on a president who, I believe, still enjoys the overwhelming support of the people, but also on cabinet and sub-cabinet appointees who are widely acknowledged to be outstanding, even if also outspoken, men and women of intelligence, integrity, and political sense.

We have significantly reduced the level and pervasiveness of graft and corruption at the higher levels of the bureaucracy. But we have to admit that corruption continues at the middle and lower levels.

We have made very significant gains in our efforts to recover the ill-gotten wealth of the Marcoses and their cronies. At the very least, we have, to a significant extent, neutralized the residual economic power of the forces of tyranny to make a comeback. We have done the same in the political field through the equally controversial policies of the Ministry of Local Governments.

We have made significant progress in the economic field. The exchange rate has stabilized and we are building our international reserves. We have controlled the inflation rate at very moderate single-digit levels. We have introduced a moderate liquidity into the financial system to allow interest rates to drop to levels that should make investments attractive. We have allowed the benefits of lower oil prices to spread throughout the economy in the form of lower fuel, power and transport costs. We have introduced a tax reform package designed to reduce the burden on those who can least afford it, to shift the burden of taxation toward non-essentials, and to stimulate investments in equities. We have also launched an aggressive program to create new jobs over the next 18 months by embarking on a massive, employment-intensive infrastructure program in the rural areas. This program is the centerpiece of our short-term recovery efforts. It is intended to improve the purchasing power of our rural communities, where 70% of our population lives, and thus increase the demand — and therefore improve the markets — for our agricultural as well as industrial products. This, we believe, is the stimulus needed by our economy to nudge it toward recovery and sustained long-term growth.

Obviously, much more remains to be done. Many more jobs need to be created. We have appealed to the private sector to help us get the economy moving. We have pointed out the obvious. We are a democracy; the rule of law has been reestablished, there is no longer a power in the land that can gobble up by fiat the fruits of your enterprise. These things, you said, had dampened the spirit of enterprise. I remember your wild applause when I vowed to remove the obstacles that prevented you from being the engine of our economy.

I have removed the obstacles, but where is the engine?

Five months ago, the excuse was Marcos. Allow me to change metaphors: you gave me the impression that you did not want to put out your best silver because he might steal it, as he had done everything else. Well, he’s gone. So where is it? Perhaps he took it also. Then you should say so. Admit that the private sector no longer has the wherewithal to play a significant part in the economy. But if that is the case, then why has the blame shifted to certain personalities in my government, to the likes of Bobbit Sanchez and Nene Pimentel, to the PCGG commissioners, to Jobo Fernandez and Jimmy Ongpin? At any rate, the small and medium entrepreneurs are still there to hold up this economy, as they have done through all its crisis and predicted collapses. But I like to think that big business will keep its pledge to propel this economy and so I will take your grievances seriously. But because I believe you are intelligent, I will focus on the issues rather than the personalities.

First the labor situation. Addressing myself particularly to those who think that the ultimate solution to our nation’s labor problems lies in the replacement of the labor minister, I invite you to reflect on the causes of our present situation.

In my view, the militancy of Philippine labor is the inevitable result of years of economic plunder and mismanagement, from which you all suffered, but from which labor suffered even more. Surely we can once again blame Marcos and his cronies and technocrats, but should we not also look at ourselves? What did we do during those years to protect the interests of our workers? Is it any wonder that they now aspire to protect themselves?

Whatever its roots, the militancy of labor is now a fact of life that we can neither reverse nor suppress. Instead we should respond constructively to the legitimate grievances of labor. We can begin by making a sincere effort to understand their plight; the same kind of understanding want them to have of management’s difficulties.

The first step toward understanding is dialogue. The labor ministry’s role is that of moderator in this dialogue where the aim is not mutual recrimination but understanding, and then, hopefully, cooperation in finding workable solutions. The labor minister must thus be acceptable not only to employers but also to labor. For suspicions and impasses will continually be referred to him for clarification and resolution. And it is in this context that I reiterate my conviction that Minister Sanchez is the man for the job under today’s prevailing circumstances.

The Minister of Labor, of all people, took exception to my Labor Day Speech as being too liberal. I, on the other hand, found a liberal policy just plain practical. And so I overruled him and went ahead and liberalized the labor laws. It was clear to me that industrial peace would not be achieved by draconian legislation. It went against the temper of the times, not to mention the promises of my campaign. It was clear to me, and finally clear to Bobbit, that industrial peace could come about only by the willingness of both sides to submerge some of their conflicting demands for bigger slices of the economic pie in a common effort to first come up with a pie. And that is why I called, and continue to call, for a six-month moratorium on strikes, so that the nascent recovery we are beginning to see can take firm hold. What is needed is dialogue, not adversarial positions. The things that labor and management will not be achieved without dialogue and consensus.

I understand the PCGG is causing you some distress. I am not going to refer to my campaign pledge to go after hidden wealth, a pledge you welcomed with roars of approval. All I am going to ask is two questions: Do you want these thieves to get away with it? Second, why are you worried about the PCGG? Only those who were involved in the robbery of our nation have reason to fear it. But I understand how such a roving commission can cause you distress. It could err and sequester the wrong business, causing irreparable damage. Marcos was in power so long that quite a number of legitimate businesses had to let him in for protection. I understand this expediency. But as a result of it, the Commission has found it necessary to involve itself, through its agents and nominees, in the corporate affairs of the sequestered enterprises in order to prevent illegal transfers of shares, assets, and monies. This has apparently caused alarm, due perhaps to a misunderstanding of the Commission’s motives. Let me state therefore that the PCGG will disengage from all sequestered enterprises at the earliest time possible. I hope that a definition of the PCGG’s role, that is compatible with the political normalcy we shall soon attain, will emerge from the current discussions about its role. But it should be clear from my assurances that we will not relent in hunting down the wealth that was stolen from our people. I will give one more assurance. If you come across any abuse of the Commission’s mandate, either send it to the press or send it to my office. Just do me the favor of respecting my intelligence by providing some proof.

Let us now shift to another issue which I know you are deeply concerned about. This is the issue of import liberalization. This issue has been extensively debated. Not only under my government, but even under the previous one. This government is for import liberalization because we are convinced that in the long run this is probably the best way of ensuring the emergence of world-competitive and efficient enterprises. I think the direction is, by and large, accepted as the appropriate one to take with a few persuasive caveats here and there. There is a strong argument that what we need is FAIR trade rather than free trade, and that the nations held up as models of development never practiced free trade in its pure form. But the really violent disagreement appears to be over the timing. I have been told that the proposal to erect high tariff walls to ease the transition has been met with less than wild enthusiasm by businessmen who know how porous tariff walls can be.

There is obviously need for further discussion as to the timing and scope of our liberalization thrust and I hereby direct the Minister of Trade and Industry to personally sit down with the PCCI and come up with reasonable recommendations in the context of our economy’s needs as well as our ongoing discussions with the IMF. I would like to receive these final joint recommendations by the end of this month.

The list of issues you asked me to tackle today extends far beyond those I have discussed. I think I have spoken enough. Suffice it to say that these issues will get the same attention.

In closing, let me restate my firm conviction that your government has done what it can to set the stage for economic recovery. I think it is high time that the private sector does its part. But this is a free society. You can choose to gripe instead.

Business wants to think of itself as the engine, of the economy. But it looks to me like this engine wants to be pushed until it finds a gentle downward slope where it can coast along without effort. Well, for your information, we are at the foot of a steep mountain and the flood waters are rising.

My friends in the business community: when I agreed to stand as candidate for the Presidency, I did so with the assurance that I could count on all of you for your support, not only in the campaign, but more critically in the tortuous effort of turning this country around. That support has not been forthcoming. Let’s get one thing clear. The support is not for me, but for your country, for yourselves and your posterity unless you all want to be immigrants. This is your only country. You sometimes give the impression that it is not. That you can afford to stand back and see how this little country turns out before committing yourselves to it. You complain of the uncertainty. I am telling you that it is uncertain because you are uncommitted. This country will be what you, and the rest of our people, make of it. If you want it to be something you can live with, or better still, prosper in, then make yourselves a part of it now.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].