Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the National Convention of the Philippine Judges Association

[Delivered at the Malacañang Palace, July 3, 1987]

DISPENSE JUSTICE SPEEDILY

Speaking before the Philippine Judges Association, President Aquino notes that the country is suffering from a crisis of confidence in its justice system longer than one can remember. Plain justice that should be dispensed by the courts is not working, partly because of the small budget allocated to the justice system. But this cannot be helped. Nearly half of the country’s revenues are committed to foreign debt. Despite this, the men and women on the bench who dispense justice can do their share by resolving cases speedily.

Justice is the first virtue of institutions; it is the first duty of the State. Only after justice is served, do other concerns merit attention. The Lord is first just before he is compassionate; even as the Old Testament precedes the New.

The first in the order of priorities of any state, regardless of political philosophy, is order, order upheld by the rule of law. Not the order of a dictator which is merely the anarchy of his will. But the order of just laws that surrounds and binds us together in a free and orderly society. All our liberties and the rights that protect them rest upon this order of justice. And this order of justice rests on you, the judges.

Our country has many grave problems. Some will require many, many years for their solution: the debt problem, mass poverty. They also call for enormous resources. But some of the gravest problems require only the will to solve them. One such problem is justice.

This country has been suffering a crisis of confidence in its justice system for longer than any of us care to remember. Even under the Old Republic, justice was a joke. And I am not talking about grand ideas of social justice that are hard to pin down as practical programs. I am speaking of the simple justice required in cases that range from the theft of a carabao, the denial of an inheritance, to the swindle of a piece of land, the brazen refusal to pay an incontestable debt, and a plain assault on one’s person.

These small matters make up the life of our society. People have to be secure in their persons and properties, however humble they are, however small their possessions may be.

As it is, it is only the rich, who can afford competent counsel, who dare to go to court. And even they hesitate.

It is because the poor have so little that so much depends on their keeping what they have. Nowhere does the denial of a right wreak so much havoc as among the poor, who can afford to lose so little. And yet, justice in the Philippines – and I mean the plain justice that should be dispensed by the courts – isn’t working. It isn’t even working for the rich. Ask any businessman what he thinks about resorting to the courts to settle any dispute.

Part of the reason is the small budget allocated to the justice system. Our courthouses are shanties and our court personnel, despite some effort on my part to increase salaries, remain grossly underpaid along with the rest of government. But there is no help for it – nearly half our revenues are committed to the foreign debt.

And yet, with all these deficiencies, there is much we can still do, and nowhere more than in the field of justice. In the end, it is not the courthouse, nor the salaries, but the judge – the man or the woman on the bench – who dispenses justice. And he or she can do it jut as well in humble, as in proud surroundings, with a full sense of honor more than with a fat wallet.

Justice today is given grudgingly and is slow; so speed it up. It does not take much experience to spot a delaying tactic by one or the other party to a case. Do not allow the parties to use the law to pervert the law. You can easily spot a malicious prosecution to punish or break the will of a litigant. Do not allow the law to be insulted. Throw out the case and throw the book at the lawyer who allows it.

“Do not pervert justice,” says Leviticus, “show neither partiality to the poor nor favoritism to the great, but judge your neighbor fairly.”

Above all, finish the cases before you as quickly as you can. Delay is not the distinguishing mark of due process, despite what the lawyers say. Finish your cases quickly, there is always an appeal to make up for any oversight. But the worst injustice is the interminable delay that gives victory to the one who can afford it. This is the worst injustice, that nothing can repair.

Remember also, in this connection, that the danger today is not to the independence of the judiciary but to the integrity of judges.

Deuteronomy warns: “Do not accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and twists the words of the righteous. Follow justice and justice alone.”

You must deliver justice; but I, and soon the Congress, must deliver the laws. Justice must have teeth.

In light of recent events and increasing reports of common crimes, especially those involving firearms, I called yesterday for a meeting with the Justice Department and the Chief of Staff to work out the details of the following policies:

Bail for all common crimes shall be increased 10 times, especially crimes against persons and property and illegal possession of firearms.

All mission orders issued by any agency or instrumentality of government, other than the Philippine Constabulary and the National Bureau of Investigation are hereby revoked. Mission orders other than those duly issued by these agencies shall not be a defense in a prosecution for illegal possession of firearms.

I have instructed the Justice Department to call upon the Court Administrator of the Supreme Court and present a proposal by the Executive Branch that the trial of common crimes, especially those involving firearms, shall be given the highest priority and shall be speedily disposed of. As I said, delay is not the mark of due process. The swift accounting for crimes, the certain punishment of offenders, on the other hand, is the first and most essential attribute of justice. And we shall have it.

The fruit of righteousness, we are told, is peace; the effect of righteousness will be tranquility and confidence forever. These are also the conditions necessary for recovery and progress; and, quite plainly, what our people deserve after all they have been through.

Justice for all is one goal that is within our reach and present resources. All that is needed is integrity and the will.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].