Agrarian Reform July 22, 1988

LAND OF ALL OUR PEOPLE

Agrarian reform hopefully will raise up the seven million families below the poverty line. The President intimates her ambition to increase agricultural productivity, improve rural incomes and make agriculture the spearhead of economic development.

Today marks the passage of one year since I promulgated the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program setting the aim of liberating the tremendous potential wealth of Philippine agriculture by giving the vast body of our people a real and rightful stake in the land. One year is not a long time when one is talking about the fundamental restructuring of a country’s economic system. But it must seem an eternity to those who have waited for decades, to a class that has suffered for centuries, for the promise of the soil to come true.

The process of change in a democracy is not an easy one. The move has been slow and difficult from aspiration to articulation in the Constitution, to the enabling act in my executive order and in a law in Congress. After that comes the even more grinding process of implementation in the context of a country strapped for resources, short of efficiency in the various departments of government, and riven still by competing interests on the land.

The reform laws now on the books were a significant and essential step, but the journey is only the beginning. And the way will continue to be hard. But the aim makes it all worthwhile: making this democratic country of ours truly the land of all our people, of the few who are rich and of the multitudes who remain poor.

We must raise up the seven million families below the poverty line so they can see the future we want for us all. We look to agrarian reform to bring this about.

We shall need to acquire and redistribute for Phase One some one million four hundred fifty-four thousand hectares from now until 1992 among nearly eight hundred thousand beneficiaries. With Phase 2, we shall need to redistribute to some 3.7 million beneficiaries about 169,000 hectares in 1988, and over 2.5 million a year from 1989 to 1992.

In the matter of redistributing the land, we have done more than all previous administrations, but it was never my aim to just redistribute poverty. My ambition for our country is to increase agricultural productivity, improve rural incomes, and make agriculture the spearhead of economic development.

So, indeed, much remains to be done. The effort comprehends not only initiatives in agriculture but in every other field as well, of which I shall speak when I deliver the State of the Nation next week.

For today, let me congratulate the Department of Agrarian Reform for the work it has done so far. I commend the dedication of its workers and look forward to even greater success in the years to come. Good day and God bless you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library