Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Inauguration of BFD Offices and Laboratories

[Released on April 30, 1987]

DEFINING THE ELEMENTS OF A NATIONAL DRUG POLICY

The Government will cooperate with all sectors to ensure the availability of necessary drugs and medicine. In doing this, the public interest will be its first concern. Public interest dictates the reduction of drug prices. Hand in hand with this is the assurance that drugs are safe, effective, and are made available to the great majority of the people.

We inaugurate today the offices and laboratories of the Bureau of Food and Drugs, an agency whose mission and functions are enshrined in our Constitution. Section 12 of the article on social justice and human rights enjoins the State to establish and maintain an effective food and drug regulatory system. What we inaugurate here today is a concrete step towards realizing the Constitutional mandate to see to the health and welfare of our people through food and drug regulation.

First, let me address the health professionals involved in food and drug regulation, particularly the men and women of the Bureau. Your task is no ordinary task. Your work is our people’s assurance that what they take for sustenance or cure will not harm them instead. Knowing how poor the vast majority of our people are, your work maximizes the value of their hard-earned wages in terms of health protection.

But even as your work is intended to maximize benefits, its failure can maximize hurt even to succeeding generations. The world has not forgotten the example of thalidomide as a tragedy of regulatory failure. Your work touches all of us, you and me, and our families personally.

Second, may I address our foreign friends. In behalf of the Government and people of the Philippines, I would like to thank the government and people of Japan whose generosity made this building and its facilities possible. In particular, I would like to thank the World Health Organization for extending sustained technical support for many of our past and present food and drug regulation initiatives. Secretary Bengzon tells me that WHO has been invaluable in helping us formulate a national drug policy. I would also like to thank the many other governments and individuals who continue to extend various forms of assistance in this area. The gratitude of our people cannot be measured.

Having addressed myself to special publics, I would like now to address myself to the public at large, whose health and medical needs, particularly drugs, have been largely unmet. In all my consultations in the various regions, a recurring issue is that of the quality, availability and affordability of drugs and medicines. From Department of Health reports, it appears that health is one of those things that the poor must also do without.

The lack of affordable, safe, effective and good quality drugs and medicines is a central concern of this Government because these things are a vital component of health services, and because they are the major, if not dominant factor in the overall cost of health care.

As a nation, we are not properly utilizing our already deficient resources for drugs and medicine. There is clearly a need for better coordination of Government efforts in this area. To that end, Secretary Bengzon has been hard at work formulating a national drug policy. I understand many meetings, consultations and discussions have gone into this effort. I would now like to outline the major elements of our national drug policy.

The national drug policy will, first of all, be built on the bedrock of competent, fair, honest, effective and thorough regulation. We are committing this Government to strengthen the Bureau of Food and Drugs – legally, organizationally, technically and financially. The reorganization of the Department of Health will include a substantial expansion of the Bureau’s capabilities. The food, drugs and cosmetics law, as well as the pharmacy law, will be amended to strengthen the legal basis of food and drug regulation. We are undertaking a manpower training and development effort in order to provide adequate support to our inspection and registration activities. In short, a Bureau worthy of its offices and facilities, and of the commitments hereby made by Government.

I expect the Bureau to spearhead the removal from the market of fake, banned, harmful and ineffective drugs. I expect that its stamp of approval will be widely accepted as an indubitable mark of safety and quality. This can only happen if its policies are sound, its technology solid, its personnel adequate, and its procedures appropriate.

As a second element of the national drug policy, the Government will be a more aggressive participant in the procurement, production and distribution of drugs and pharmaceuticals. As the biggest buyer and user of pharmaceutical products, Government will systematize its procurement in order to maximize its limited budgets for health. Such measures as bulk purchasing and contract manufacturing will be utilized to bring our people the best drugs at the lowest prices. We shall start up and operate our four herbal processing plants and expand our vaccine and biologicals production. We shall pursue the Botica sa Barangay project and link this with our national network of drug distribution for rural health units and hospitals. We shall take advantage of our dominant role in drugs and medicine to benefit our people. As we do this, I expect the Bureau to apply the same stringent standards and regulations on government as well as on private entities.

A third element of national drug policy shall consist of a package of initiatives designed to provide the right information to physicians and patients. Adequate and accurate information is a key requirement for the rational use of drugs. Some measures to control the proliferation and reduce the number of brands in the market are needed to focus scarce resources on the most essential drugs. Another initiative involves the adoption of generic labelling as a tool for educating doctors and patients on the characteristics and use of various therapeutic preparations. Our policy shall seek to encourage full information and discourage misleading or inaccurate claims.

The final element of our national drug policy is the coordination of investment and trade policies in order to achieve self-sufficiency in pharmaceuticals, while assuring good quality and affordable prices. I myself have sounded the call for a revival of free enterprise, but that call has not deafened us to our people’s pleas for better health care, nor has it blinded us to the current realities. Our local pharmaceutical industry is underdeveloped and cannot respond to the specific conditions of the local market. Many companies are captives of their mother corporations; uncritical reliance on the free market system neglects the majority of our people whose low purchasing power has made them an uninteresting market for industry. Industry can afford this neglect. Government cannot countenance this situation. The poorest are also the most ill; they are the most in need of medicines, and the least able to buy them. A democracy cannot survive when its industry cannot respond to one of the most basic needs of man.

The Government will cooperate with all sectors to assure the availability of necessary drugs and medicine. We recognize and respect the interests of various sectors but the Government has to put itself squarely behind the public interest. In drug policy, public interest clearly lies in reducing drug prices, and in assuring the safety, quality, effectivity and availability of drugs, and their intelligent use. These are our goals to which I believe we can all be committed, being Filipinos first before anything else.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].