Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the participants of the 3rd ASEAN Journalists’ Exchange Program

[Delivered on October 21, 1988]

THE GIFT OF COMMUNICATION

In welcoming the participants of the 3rd ASEAN Journalists’ Exchange Program, the President reminds them that despite differences in ethnic origins and culture, it is still possible for journalists to work together, to communicate with one another and to form friendship based on understanding and a common commitment to peace.

I am happy and gratified to welcome you, the participants of the Third ASEAN Journalists’ Exchange Program, to Malacañang and the Philippines.

I am happy because I am given the opportunity to meet you and to share my thoughts with you, the men and women whom I recognize as among the leading information specialists and opinion makers from our part of the world. And I am gratified because I see in you, and in the Journalists’ Exchange Program, the workings of a wonderful idea whose time has come, an idea that should bring about greater understanding, friendship and peace among the peoples of ASEAN.

The beauty of the exchange program is that, in bringing all thirty of you together, you are given the chance to know each other. To interact with one another. To discover for yourselves that, despite the differences in your ethnic origins and your culture, it is still possible for you to work together, to communicate with one another, and to form friendships based on understanding and a common commitment to peace.

As you gain a better understanding of the ASEAN nations and peoples in the course of your tour, you should be able to deal more effectively with news originating from ASEAN countries when you report back to work. While others may tend to sensationalize or exaggerate our problems, I hope you will treat them with insightful objectivity as you become conscious of our shared problems and developmental needs.

Just as important, if not more so, is your capability to influence public opinion and policy makers on political matters. I have talked with your heads of government during the ASEAN Summit held in Manila last year as well as during my state visits. But I must count on your support to make sure that your people cooperate with us, especially during critical times.

I am happy to note that, included in this tour are some of my countrymen. They can apprise you of the background and present status of some of the problems we are confronted with here in the Philippines, including developments in the South arising from our proximity with some of your countries.

After your swing through the countries of the ASEAN region, you can all go back to your respective homes with a valuable lesson, and that lesson is this: given some amount of goodwill, it is possible for all of the peoples of ASEAN to live together in peace and harmony – if only they are given the opportunity to know and understand each other.

As journalists, you have the gift of communication. I urge you to use that gift so that, before long, you can bring ASEAN countries even closer together. And you can make them one in their desire to forge a region-wide commitment to progress, prosperity and peace.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].