Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the National Artist Award Conferment

[Delivered at the Cultural Center of the Philippines, June 11, 1987]

WHERE THE ARTIST IS FREE TO CREATE

Conferring the National Artist Award on Atang de la Rama, President Aquino says that the best in culture and the arts is achieved in a climate of political freedom. A democratic republic is one which guarantees the freedom to create, with no special instruction attached.

I regret I am not seen often enough attending cultural events. I know my presence in expositions and celebrations of the arts is not as marked as that of first ladies of past administrations, most specially the last. It is not that the new Government does not concern itself with art and culture. It does, and not only by natural inclination, but, more dependably, by the injunction of a Constitution which, in five sections, defines the State’s responsibility to preserve, enrich and encourage the dynamic evolution of Filipino culture. However, this Administration does have one limitation. It does not have a First Lady. Or rather, I am both the President and First Lady, and that imposes the most unusual and stringent demands on my energy and time.

Culture and the arts certainly have a place in our new climate of social and political freedom. I would even say that many barriers limiting their growth and evolution have been removed. For one, the stigma of political patronage and control has been lifted. Culture, especially when subsidized by the State, is no longer regarded as a propaganda tool. The rich tapestry of our ethnic heritage is no longer used to cover the multitude of sins committed by a gross and tribal tyranny. Also, the atmosphere of favoritism, elitism and exclusiveness has been largely dispelled.

I admit that I and other members of the Government have our individual tastes in the arts. But the last thing we would do is impose our tastes on an entire country.

Patronage should not impose its taste, however liberal it may be. What should be supported is not a particular kind or style of art, or any special theme, but the talents that make art happen in all its rich diversity.

As a consequence, I will be brief. What art serves, I leave to the artists to decide. A democratic republic guarantees, but cannot impose any special instruction on the freedom to create. All I can say is that, if we go by the historical record, the best is achieved in a climate of political freedom. But I’m no expert in the history of art, and if after all I am wrong, and slavery has produced art, it can’t have been worth it – at least from the viewpoint of the slaves, which is the only viewpoint that counts, because it is the human viewpoint. And if art has a moral purpose, then it should never be achieved at the cost of freedom.

It is my privilege today, and proof of Government concern and support for the arts and for those who have devoted their lives to it, to witness the conferment of the National Artist Award on Atang de la Rama. Honorata de la Rama-Hernandez, also known as Queen of the Zarzuela, “Reyna ng Kundiman” and “Mutya ng Dulang Tagalog,” deserves more than our awards. She deserves to be known and remembered by all Filipinos. She did not only give the best years of her life to Philippine drama and song, she was also a fierce and tireless patriot.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].