BACKBONE OF THE NATION

On the 72nd Anniversary of the Department of Agriculture, the President honors and congratulates our farmers and fishermen who form the backbone of our nation. Her dream is to see the farmer and the fisherman standing proud and secure in the thought that the government as their partner is continually creating an environment conducive to agricultural growth.

First, I would like to greet all the Filipino farmers and fishermen today. Long live you all, my fellow farmers and fishermen!

As we celebrate the Department of Agriculture’s 72nd Anniversary, we honor once again our farmers and fishermen who form the backbone of our nation. This is the least that a grateful people can do for the agriculture sector, which comprises 70% of the population and employs half of our labor force. For our farmers and fishermen not only feed the nation, they contribute approximately one-third of our Gross National Product and nearly one-third of our export earnings. Who is to dispute that indeed, they are the salt of the earth?

I am also happy to welcome our Asean neighbors who have come to celebrate with us the first ever Asean Farmers Week. Their presence adds significance to this year’s celebration. They likewise prove again that the commitment towards Asean cooperation forged here during the 3rd Asean Summit remains just as strong.

We in this region have been blest with long coastlines and peninsulas crisscrossed by bodies of water. It follows, therefore, that fishing, long before other industries were developed, was the mainstay of the very early inhabitants of our countries, our forefathers.

Having been so lavishly endowed by Nature, it is but our duty to cherish our waters and its marine life. Unfortunately, modern technology has brought about despoliation of our natural resources. Industrial toxic wastes pollute the waters, thus poisoning all forms of life that abound therein.

If only to preserve mankind, all of us are called upon to make common cause with fishermen and farmers to arrest the wanton destruction of what is both our staple food and principal means of livelihood.

Today, as we celebrate, we give due recognition to this year’s outstanding agricultural workers and organizations for what they were able to achieve, thus providing models that the rest can well emulate. I, therefore, congratulate all our awardees for surpassing themselves. While I urge you winners and all past awardees to make striving for excellence a habit, I also ask you to share your techniques with your neighbors, in true Asean spirit.

This year’s theme – “Higit sa Isang Butil ang Hangad at Handog ng Magsasaka” – is an apt choice. For despite the tremendous contribution of the farmer and the fisherman to the nation’s economy, they have received so little in return. As an agricultural nation like most of Asean, the Philippines is expected to give its farmers and fishermen a better deal than what they have now. Benefits for them have been long overdue.

This government has, therefore, taken steps to improve the conditions of those who toil in the farms that there may be adequate food on their tables. We are pump-priming rural economy through support programs to enable our farmers to lessen production cost and correspondingly increase their profits. These programs are what we can now share with our Asean friends.

In November 1987, the Department of Agriculture launched the Rice Productivity and Enhancement Program (RPEP) that provided farmers with subsidized fertilizer through a “buy-two, take-two” scheme. The program covered 624,000 hectares in 70 provinces, and by April 1988 had distributed fertilizers to more than 400,000 farmer – beneficiaries, increasing harvest by 8.78% cavans per hectare.

Encouraged by last year’s success, we will soon implement an expanded version of RPEP, involving not only fertilizer subsidies, but also funds for other production and marketing needs.

And then, we take pride in being the first country to adopt Integrated Pest Management (IPM) as a national crop protection policy. That was in 1986. Since then, IPM has significantly increased farmers’ profits, reduced health hazards and decreased pest outbreaks.

To encourage lending to our credit-starved farmers, we have launched the Livelihood Enhancement for Agricultural Development (LEAD) program last year.

Under LEAD’s bank-assisted program, loans provided by banks to farmers’ groups are backed by government guarantee mechanisms which assume up to 85 percent of the risks involved.

Our programs have delivered results even in the short haul. Our agricultural exports earned a total of US$1.7 billion in 1988, indicating a growth of 13% over the previous years’ exports. Worthy of particular mention is the phenomenal growth of the local prawn industry from an inconsequential rank to the 3rd ranking export as of last year, bringing in around US$250 million. On the local front, average farmgate prices of principal agricultural commodities have risen steadily since 1986, gaining for our farmers additional gross revenues of P8.86 billion. Hence, I also congratulate the officials and all employees of the Department of Agriculture for giving importance to what our farmers and fishermen have been doing to help increase productivity.

This government, as you can see, is committed to give the millions of farmers and fishermen in the countryside their just share in the process and benefits of development. I am confident that with closer coordination between government agencies and the people’s full cooperation and support, agricultural development will proceed despite difficulties.

We, members of Asean, all aspire to be among the newly industrialized countries in the 20th century. Three years ago, I made a commitment to place agriculture and the farmer at the center of the nation’s recovery program. There is no contradiction in these two statements. For, as the Philippines slowly veers towards industrialization, it continues to anchor itself on agricultural production.

For such is my vision of the farmer and the fisherman – standing proud and secure in the thought that the government as their partner is continually creating an environment conducive to agricultural growth. This is how we can give to the millions of farmers and fishermen in the countryside their just share in the benefits of development.

Here is where I find parallels between the Philippines and the other Asean countries. Being similarly-situated and having almost similar economic levels, with few exceptions, our countries have similar agricultural-related problems. It is to our common benefit that we share our experiences and adaptive technologies with each other.

For Asean is friendship. Asean is sharing. And as we share our strengths as well as our woes, we can develop together in a manner that none of us could achieve singly.

Finally, I congratulate again all the awardees for agriculture. And to the Department of Agriculture as well as the organizers of the Agri-Aqua Fair, my felicitations for work well done.

Good day to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].