Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Ateneo Law Alumni Homecoming

[Delivered at the Mandarin Hotel, June 19, 1987]

WE’RE HOME, BACK IN A DEMOCRACY

President Aquino reacts to complaints of a sense of drift under her Administration. Her reply to those who make such complaints: “Get yourselves an engine and set yourself goals. The rest of the nation has done so.” Now that Filipinos are back home in a democracy, it is not a time to whine but a time to keep going.

I understand that this is the first time an Ateneo Alumni Homecoming has the President of the Republic as guest of honor and speaker. That is because this is the first time you have a President who is virtually an Atenean. Aside from honorary doctorates from three Jesuit universities – Ateneo, Xavier and Fordham – I also get a lot of advice from Jesuits, some of it is even good.

I want to use this opportunity to react to one particular advice or complaint that I have received.

Some complain of a sense of drift under my Administration, and urge me to do something about it. Not too long ago, they complained of a sense of being pushed around and dragged into disaster. Father Bernas here knows that when we planned our march to freedom, we all believed that liberty would spontaneously give us back a sense of purpose.

At that time, it was the lack of freedom that gave us a sense of drift, because the rudder had been taken from our lives. We did not know where dictatorship was taking us, and so we gave up having any long-term aim in life. We drifted from day to day, waiting on rumors, living on speculations.

And then one man died and showed that a brave decision could end the sense of drift. That man’s death gave us all a sense of purpose. Suddenly there was no question, among the best of us anyway, about what we wanted and what we needed to do. We were going for freedom – and we were prepared to do what was needed to get there.

You chose the man’s wife to lead you. Not just anywhere she wanted, but to freedom, as we had all stipulated – to the freedom where every Filipino would have the right again to make of his life what he wanted.

We got there. We got to where we are now: the land of the free and, as it turned out, the land of the brave as well. For our journey was marked by astonishing acts of heroism and is now the most stirring chapter in the story of democracy.

Why, therefore, do some people complain of a sense of drift? Let’s face it, 14 years of slavery has given them the habit of obedience, of wanting to be led by the nose.

Well, I’m not going to do it. Furthermore, the best of us don’t want to be led by the nose. The best of us are enjoying our newly won freedom and are determined to make something useful out of it. By the best I mean the vast majority of our people.

As a result, the economy is taking off. All the studies show that, and, more reliably, you can feel it in the air. The energy and optimism are there again.

Democracy is firmly in place – its structure is complete. A Constitution and a Congress complete and balance the democratic institutions with which we started last year: a people’s Presidency and an honest Supreme Court.

These things could not have been achieved by a people in drift.

And in fact, they were not. The people weren’t drifting. They knew what they had: a democracy, and they backed me in defeating every challenge to it. They were with me all the way when I faced down threats to democracy from the Left and the Right. They were with me when I called for an all-out vote for a new Constitution that would enshrine our liberties and proclaim our hopes. And they were with me again when I called for a new Congress to support me.

Now I am asked to repudiate what the people have given us: a Congress that is both of their choice and of my sympathies, just to show that I’m in charge and we’re not drifting. I am asked to steal a march on this grand assembly of men and women who, alone with me, enjoy the mandate of the people.

And who are those who ask me to derogate from the dignity and powers of this co-equal branch? People who will never get elected in a free election.

The elections left me a residual power to legislate until Congress convenes.

I shall use it.

Not sparingly, nor excessively; but wisely , as needed.

And yes, I shall use it to enact the initiatives I have made in regional autonomy and agrarian reform. But those initiatives must be informed by wider consultations.

The watchword is wisely. For in everything I do, I aim for success. It is not enough to be right; I also have to win. That is why my enemies, whom so many feared would overwhelm me, are all scattered.

I would rather achieve a modest success than be initially praised for taking ambitious courses that will, most likely, lead to total failure. It is not my way to grandstand. I must proceed like a President, with the due care and deliberation that the fate of a nation deserves.

To those who still complain of a sense of drift, all I can say is: Get yourselves an engine and set yourselves goals. The rest of the nation has done so. This nation, firmly secure in its freedom, is well on the road to recovery.

I am sure there are no drifters in this audience. My message this evening can be summed up briefly: we’re home. This is where we longed to be through 14 years of shame and fear and slavery: back in a free country, with a chance to start over.

That’s where we are, back in a democracy. And we have made, by all accounts, an impressive start. The nation’s strength has been restored. The wounds have healed. The confidence is back. The pride in itself is such as the country has never shown before. All that remains is to keep going, stop whining, and keep building on the many things that we have already accomplished. That much still needs to be done should not daunt us, because this nation has done so much already.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].