Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 17th PNRC Biennial National Convention

[Released on December 17, 1987]

A RECORD OF CARING AND SHARING

The President pays tribute to the Philippine National Red Cross for its humanitarian endeavors and the impressive record of service of its professional workers and volunteers.

Your convention is a special occasion for me to pay tribute to the good work the Philippine National Red Cross is doing as a trusted private, voluntary and independent organization assisting the Government in humanitarian endeavors. I also accord that wholehearted tribute to all of you, the delegates — adult and young volunteer leaders — who are the backbone of the Red Cross in our country.

As one of the 165 nations that are signatories to the Geneva Conventions, the Philippines stands committed to the goals and objectives of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. I fully recognize the role of the Red Cross especially in our country today, not only the PNRC but the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. I am glad to know that the PNRC and ICRC are working in tandem right in the center of humanitarian needs brought about by the insurgency menace which our Government now is trying hard to put to an end. And that the PNRC and the League have joined hands, too, in a concerted effort to help our Government improve the health care delivery in the rural areas, among other things of equal value.

Although your aim, as true to the mandate of Red Cross the world over, is mainly to alleviate human suffering and to protect life and health, you are promoting to a great extent the spirit of peace in the process. For the Red Cross transcends all ideologies, race, creed, religion and politics in the performance of its duties. Therein lies the uniqueness of Red Cross. And since the Red Cross serves everyone and is open to all, who are willing to help humanity, it is considered a potent instrument of peace. In all its actions, the Red Cross fosters understanding, friendship and cooperation among the people of the world. Ultimately this will lead to harmony and peace.

In your convention, I understand you are aiming for a stronger Red Cross in terms of manpower and financial resources so essential in the delivery of your services. I know your biggest problem is funding. And so, I encourage you to try again to ask for bigger support for your service programs.

Our Government and the general public have high regard for your Organization, not only because of its impressive record of service but the devotion of your professional workers and volunteers as well.

It is heartwarming to know that you are striving to make the broad spectrum of your nationwide service programs more relevant to the present-day needs of our society. Like disaster preparedness and relief, the blood program, safety, youth leadership training, primary health care, home and community nursing care, which you have started to innovate and refurbish, little by little, as funds come in. All these are in cadence with the aspiration of this Government: to take the challenge of building a better and stable future for all of us Filipinos.

Let us therefore continue to work harder together towards that direction – in the spirit of solidarity and in the highest degree of moral sensibility to caring and sharing which defines man’s humanity.

In closing, I am wishing you all in advance a “Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year!”

Source: Presidential Museum and Library