Stand tall, my soldiers.

The fight for democracy is not yet over. The Armed Forces should remain vigilant – particularly against those who seek to subvert and destroy our freedoms.

In the way of soldiers, I, your Commander-in-Chief, have one direct message for you. You are needed and you are appreciated. The new democracy that you helped establish, you are now called upon to defend. The enemies of our new democracy, the friends of the deposed dictator, have tried to demoralize you by saying that our peace initiatives derogate from the indispensable role and honored place of the soldier in our Republic. But I know your intelligence is proof against their lies. I am pursuing the path of negotiation with the insurgents because I want to spare our country further bloodshed and the loss of precious lives we need for the reconstruction of our country. Every Filipino life is inestimably valuable. This is not appreciated by those who oppressed and murdered many of their own countrymen in the satisfaction of their limitless greed. But you, whose daily life it is to protect the lives and liberties of your fellow countrymen know the worth of the Filipino. Your belief in that value is what justifies in your eyes the daily sacrifice you make. The path of negotiation that I am pursuing finds the best hope of its success in the continued vigilance of the Armed Forces, in its increasing capability to overcome the forces that seek to subvert and destroy our precious freedoms. The end of Communist Insurgency in our country, as I have said, again and again, lies in provision of hope to all our people by the development of our economy and in the insurance of a Reformed Armed Forces. And so I say to you, stand fast, my soldiers by the Flag and the Republic for which it stands, stand vigilantly for the safety of our people, stand tall with pride in your indispensible part in the rebirth of our nation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].