Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On education

[Delivered at the Philippine Normal College, March 31, 1987]

EDUCATION: SHAPING A NATION’S CHARACTER

Elementary education should go back to the basics: reading, writing and mathematics. A leaner but harder curriculum, which has fewer subjects that are taught well, should be provided. The inequality in education, inequality in access to books, classrooms and subsidies, should be corrected.

All these, however, would come to naught without the total commitment of the teachers, who, on the other hand, have to be better supported by the government.

When I ran for the Presidency, I pledged to give education the first priority it deserves in a free nation. For it is by learning that we become free: Free from the poverty and oppression imposed by ignorance, free to be all we can be as a gifted and daring people.

The dictatorship ignored education, except to pervert its content: to make our youth believe that tyranny is the Filipino way of politics and thievery the way to success. But. our youth were not duped. Although they had no experience or memory of freedom, they joined the fight for its return.

If the dictatorship’s efforts to distort our values had no effect, not so the general neglect of our education. Scholars abroad reported that, unlike other educational systems, ours does not contribute to Philippine development. Our educators, I understand, could not deny it.

This is not the first time I address the education sector. But it is the first time that I shall try to tackle, in a more comprehensive way, some of its issues. Today, in particular, I want to address the problems of basic education. This is appropriate, I think, in the circumstances. For I address today the 1987 graduates of the Philippine Normal College, the unchallenged leader in teacher training for our elementary and secondary schools.

Your concentration on these levels is what makes your work so important. When a child is brought to you for education, it is at its most malleable stage. When the child leaves your care, it is permanently fixed in the ways you have taught it. All it can do thereafter is build on the skills it has learned. Your work is foundational and therefore critical to the future of the child – and that of our nation.

I want that foundation solidly built, well grounded in the basics of education: reading, writing and mathematics -in the two languages of our country, English and Pilipino. These are the basic skills that liberate the tremendous potential of the average Filipino child – to contribute as an adult to the liberation of the country from underdevelopment; and to his own liberation from poverty.

That is why I believe in a leaner but harder curriculum. This is the strength of the Japanese. They are taught few subjects but well. All the rest are learned through experience. Civic virtue and nationalism, for example, are not taught as subjects. They grow spontaneously out of the genuine achievements of the Japanese nation.

Back to basics will be the thrust of Philippine educational policy. But in the meantime there are problems that we must address immediately. These are essentially problems of inequality.

Some children have schoolbooks; many do not.

Only 66 out of every 100 who enter Grade One finish Grade Six. And of 55 who enter high school, only 42 finish. The statistics of our cultural and poorer communities are shamefully lower. Some classes have over a hundred pupils. In many schools, pupils still sit on the floor or bring their own stools. Students in some state colleges receive twenty thousand peso subsidies, others only a thousand. Students in private schools receive no government assistance whatsoever, and yet the public school system cannot begin to meet the educational requirements of our people.

These inequalities in our school system are clearly inconsistent with our obligation to make ours a society of equal opportunities and conducive to the full development of man.

Our system of elementary education is the only experience the State has designed which reaches every Filipino home. It is therefore the first and most important link of the Filipino child to that community which has primacy over all others – the nation.

The present effort to improve elementary education in the World Bank-supported “Program for Decentralized Educational Development” or PRODED must therefore be continued. Its objective to improve neglected schools, and therefore equalize conditions, must be supported. We have extended the life span of this Program by two years. And until its objective is met, we shall continue to support it beyond that period.

We must also extend its benefits to secondary education.

To cope with the modern world, we need more than six years of elementary education. A solid high school education is equally important. The Constitution recognizes this need and has made it mandatory on the new Congress to provide it — and for free. We have asked our countrymen, in the spirit of the Revolution, to give more of themselves. It stands to reason that we must enable them to improve their capacity to do so.

But all our objectives and programs will come to nothing without the total commitment of our teachers. They are the key element.

The present sorry state of education is the responsibility of the teachers. But the sad state of the teaching profession is the responsibility of the government. And yet we expect our teachers to be first in recognizing the tremendous liabilities that came with this government.

Nonetheless, we have made valiant efforts to improve their condition. Last year, we implemented a 20% wage increase, exclusive of P2,000 in health allowance and a one-month, year-end bonus. This year we have ordered a second 20% increase, which, compounded, makes a 44% increase in little over a year.

We have increased the budget for education from P8.7 billion last year to P12.3 billion this year, to reflect the priority I give to education as mandated by the Constitution. But, as you know, 97% of this budget goes to salaries. The other necessities for a relevant and effective school system, such as books, laboratories, school buildings and other instructional aids, remain unprovided for. Next year, these I needs must be addressed. How we shall do so simultaneously with meeting the need for better teacher compensation is the challenge that our team for the Senate has set itself.

The Senate team has prepared proposals to continue increasing teachers’ compensation together with non-cash benefits, that could equally well meet teachers’ needs, such as health care and free college education for their children.

In the meantime, we are studying the role of the GSIS in the improvement of education. There was a time when 55% of GSIS contributions came from teachers. Today, that percentage has dropped to 35%. Still, teachers compose the largest single block of employees paying GSIS premiums. I therefore expect to see the interests of the education sector reflected in the management and investment programs of the GSIS, and of the government at large. For instance, I expect policies that affect education, such as those touching on the importation of paper, book publishing and sales, school supplies manufacturing, investments in schools, to reflect both the high priority we place on education and the problems we have committed ourselves to solve: a better life for the teachers, a better education for all.

What we have talked about here will probably not excite the public interest. But you and I know that what passed between us here today will decide the future of our nation and individual happiness and fulfillment of our people.

Congratulations to the graduates. I hope I have impressed upon you the great importance of your mission and the need for patience and sacrifice.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].