A BETTER LIFE FOR FARMERS

The bottomline of Government efforts in agriculture is to increase the income of the Filipino farmer. After setting the basic conditions for profitable farming, the Government is determined to make Philippine agriculture robust, long-lived and strong.

I congratulate the Department of Agriculture, its personnel and officials, on the joyous and meaningful celebration of your seventieth anniversary. It is not surprising that this department was one of the first established, initially as a bureau in 1901, of the new Republic of the Philippines. This only proves the importance of agriculture to our livelihood as a nation. And it also proves the historical and important responsibility placed on the shoulders of the Department of Agriculture and the farmers of the Philippines.

It has been a year since I last stood before a gathering like this.

One year has passed since we gave honor to our nation’s farmers. For, no sooner had we struck off the shackles of political slavery than we proclaimed the revival of Philippine agriculture to be the first priority of our new democracy. We would do this, we declared, by making farming a truly paying proposition for the farmers. Our first goal would be increasing immediately the income of our farmers. That would be the bottomline of any and all initiatives we would take in agriculture.

Today, one year later, we can say that we have set in place the basic conditions to make farming profitable. We have put life back into Philippine agriculture. What remains is to make it robust, long-lived and strong.

This is still a tall order. A lot remains to be done.

Public investments must support the productive work of our farmers and agribusiness entrepreneurs. But, since our resources are limited, Government investments should be focused on those activities and projects that will have the most immediate impact on farmers’ incomes.

We should therefore invest in irrigation systems, in farm-to-market roads, and in communication and information systems that will enable the farmer to learn new methods and find immediate markets for his produce.

Along with these, and other measures such as improving extension services, we must provide adequate credit.

In these measures, I assure you the Administration will extend the fullest cooperation and support to the Department.

I said I would govern by consultation. I am pleased to note that this has been followed by your Department through the national agriculture and fisheries councils. Let me assure you that the feedback you have given us from these councils, in which the private sector is represented, will inform our decisions regarding agriculture.

Lastly, let me dwell on agrarian reform. First let me state the first principle of any policy in this area: Agrarian reform must produce a better life for our farmers. It must increase incomes. It must be sustainable and effect a real and durable improvement in the lives of Filipino farmers. Distribution for the sake of distribution is not enough. The principle we defend and for which we shall work and devote all our energies and the prestige of our office is a better life for the Filipino farmer.

In the past few weeks, a lot has been said about how we should go about land reform. Several issues have been raised; issues of legality, of technical feasibility and financial capability. Although most of the issues regarding land reform have been resolved, several issues regarding legality, technical feasibility and financial capability remain unresolved. Saving the resolution of those issues for a later occasion, let me state certain things that will not change:

One. I truly believe that agrarian reform is necessary for our people and for our future, and thus I have pledged to see that agrarian reform is carried out, and carried out soon;

Two. I believe that in order to successfully implement agrarian reform, we should develop a program that is within the present capabilities of our Government to manage and finance;

Three. I believe that agrarian reform is a process to which our Government and the public are jointly committed and engaged. This requires intensive consultation, consensus and cooperation between all Filipinos. To generate such a commitment and cooperative involvement, our agrarian reform program must have a strong training, education and community organization component. I have seen what these factors can produce in San Simon, Pampanga. There I saw self-reliance produce dignity and generate energies that many said our farmers were not capable of.

Finally, let me go back to my first principle. I am for agrarian reform, not for the sake of the thing, but for the improvement it promises in the lives of Filipinos. I am for agrarian reform because it promises to give the farmer a better life. It is not enough for us to subdivide our present miseries on the land. Division must produce improvement. We shall go for an agrarian reform program that will succeed. It may not be everything everyone wants. But it will succeed in doing what it sets out as its goal. That goal is a better life for the farmer.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].