Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the signing of the Organic Act for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao

[Delivered on August 1, 1989]

FOR A MEANINGFUL AUTONOMY

Affirming and defining the principle that citizens must exercise their right to free choice on a fundamental political change, President Aquino establishes the need to subject the law to a plebiscite, where people can decide their future for themselves. But this exercise serves only as a gateway to the more difficult task of making the autonomy work for the benefit of the people. This is the test for our resolve and our commitment.

Nearly seventeen months have passed since the convening of the Mindanao Regional Consultative Commission. The length of time it has taken to craft the law allowing autonomy in Mindanao reflects the contentious nature of the issues both the RCC and the Congress had to grapple with. But the constitutional mandate for autonomy was clear and, in enacting the law, we have kept faith with the Constitution.

The issue of autonomy remains controversial. Some will reject the law because it does not offer enough powers to the autonomous region; others because it gives away too much.

The law acknowledges the cultural distinctiveness and the ancestral claims of the Bangsa Moro and the tribal Filipinos. But it also clearly and repeatedly defines them as constituent elements of one, indivisible sovereign nation.

Congress has recognized the need to manage the transition to a new structure of government. It has provided in the law for an Oversight Committee, composed of officials from both the Executive and Legislative branches of government, to supervise the devolution of powers and functions from the national government to the autonomous region.

Autonomy addresses the political aspirations of many Mindanao communities. But even in these communities, the people have other, perhaps more basic, concerns: potable water, health facilities, schools, livelihood opportunities. To be truly meaningful, autonomy must translate into the more effective delivery of these services. The national line agencies and the future autonomous government have a shared responsibility for moderating the disruptions inevitably resulting from change.

We have travelled a long way towards redeeming the constitutional pledge of autonomy, but still have far to go. The people in the proposed autonomous region must decide for themselves in a plebiscite whether the law meets their objectives. Because the law is complex, I have directed the relevant government agencies to mount a massive information campaign to help the voters understand the basis of the autonomy law, its content and its implications so as to give them a better foundation for making a rational decision. The people must understand not only the benefits that autonomy will bring but also the new responsibilities that they must bear.

Against those who insist that we dictate the decision on our people, we once again affirm the principle, ordained in our Constitution, that the citizens must exercise their right of free choice on a fundamental change in political arrangements. We must defend this principle as the one most consistent with the constitutional bias towards greater local autonomy and individual freedom.

Yet even the completion of the plebiscite will not mark the end of the journey. The plebiscite only serves as the gateway to a more difficult terrain. Making autonomy work for the benefit of the people will test our resolve and out commitment.

For the Muslims, the Christians and the Lumads alike, grant of regional autonomy will usher in a new era ofmore complex political dynamics. Learning to maneuver in this new political environment will require of them great patience, fortitude and faith. But the success of this undertaking will promote the peace and progress we all desire for our people in Mindanao and in the rest of the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].