Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Command Conference

[ Held in Camp Aguinaldo, February 11, 1987 ]

AFTER THE TRUCE

The ceasefire has ended but at least, peace was given a chance. The government vows to continue to explore all possibilities of a peaceful resolution of the conflict with insurgents. In the meantime, President Aquino orders die Armed Forces of the Philippines to resume operations against the insurgents and to ensure law and order in the land. She instructs them, however, to exercise utmost tolerance and respect for human rights and lives. While the soldier must fight to protect those whose lives he is charged with, he must do so without losing sight of the values of honor, humanity, and the ideals of democracy.

The truce is over. History will decide who is to blame for its end. I know that, for our part, you and I, did our best to explore the path of negotiation to the utmost.

The truce, is over, but all hope of peace is not lost. We shall continue to explore the possibilities of regional and provincial negotiations with the insurgents. We shall soon be implementing a rebel rehabilitation program to attract non-ideologues back to the law.

Our economic recovery program should, over the longer term, significantly reduce the root causes of the insurgency. In the meantime, we are pledged to secure the persons and properties of our citizens.

To that end, the New Armed Forces will resume operations against the insurgents. We shall have law and order throughout our country, so that the people can work in peace and security in the reconstruction of our country.

The New Armed Forces now fight for a new order; an order marked by the highest respect for human rights. In its operations against the rebellion, our soldiers are expected to conduct themselves with honor and humanity against the enemy, and the utmost solicitude for the safety of the people. We are assured by the General Staff that we can conduct a successful counter-insurgency without violating our principles. I expect our soldiers to reflect in their conduct the values for which they fight: honor, humanity, and the rights and freedoms of a democracy. The noble nature of the soldier’s calling requires it. The laws themselves demand it.

The truce is over. Send this message out to all our troops so that none may be misled to relax their vigilance — to their peril and that of the people they are charged to protect. They must take care of the people, who will be their best security and friend.

Even as we prepare for the struggle to come, let us continue to pray that God may yet snatch us from the brink of war and set us gently down in peace.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library