NEW AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES

The President welcomes the ASEAN Heads of Government in a joint declaration meeting to strengthen Intra-Asean cooperation in Science and Technology. In that declaration, a development of an intelligent and productive work force is called for. She added that Asean’s growth lies in the development of further technologies and sharing them with the rest of the Asean region.

I am pleased to welcome all of you to the Philippines.

We are certainly honored to host the Second Asean Science and Technology Week.

At the Third Meeting of Asean Heads of Government in Manila in December 1987, all member States signed a joint declaration stating, among others, that we would strengthen Intra-Asean cooperation in Science and Technology to improve the quality of life in this part of the globe. This gathering is but one step in support of this pledge to help one another.

In developing countries, poverty and culture are often blamed for the creeping pace of Science and Technology. For it takes intensive education, specialized training and tremendous research to breed scientists. Then too, a huge outlay is needed to bridge the gap between the theoretical and the applied or practical sciences. Unfortunately, most of us in Asean do not have these finances. Thus, we suffer the irony of being economically disadvantaged due to our lag in technology. Which lag, in turn, is due to our being economically deprived. And so, pure science and research have become luxuries for a select, highly qualified few whose potentials are subsidized and gradually developed by whoever can afford it.

For some of us in Asean, technology has taken a back seat to other priorities. The needs of the majority are still the basics of food, shelter and medicine. So that whatever technologies we have developed have been directed toward feeding and housing our teeming millions, keeping flesh and bones together.

But let me ask you: If we are to become the newly-industrialized countries of the 21st century, should we, at this point barely a decade away, still continue to concentrate on basic needs alone? Must we still follow the old notion that third world countries should solve the problems of hunger and poverty only through traditional approaches? That, to my thinking, would relegate us to the status of forever developing. Of being perpetual receivers of second-hand processes and goods from better-developed nations. Of being favored dumping grounds of outmoded technologies.

I believe you agree with me on this. That is why your theme for this conference is “New and Emerging Technologies”.

This is not to say that we should change our priorities. Our primary task is still to solve the problems of food, clothing and shelter. We need to do so, if we are to aim for peace and prosperity. We can pin our hopes on adaptive technology to increase our harvests. To maximize the use of our resources. To improve communication and transportation. To unify peoples fragmented by language, geography and beliefs. And while we do so, v/e can welcome more advanced technology so that we may compete in the world market, and thereby lift ourselves from the morass of poverty.

I fully support the two-pronged approach in Science and Technology that was included in the agreement drawn up at the Asean Summit of 1987. In that declaration, we called for the development of an intelligent and productive work force capable of keeping up with international advancements in Science and Technology while it evolves its own knowledge and experience from a Southeast Asian perspective.

Allow me then, to call your attention to this phrase – From a Southeast Asian Perspective . Today, we lag behind the West in Technology. And so we borrow: we borrow technology; we import sophisticated machinery and trained technicians to operate them; and at the worst, we import the whole product itself.

But someday we will become leaders in some scientific fields. This conference buoys up our hopes.

For now, we can, perhaps, take as models the experiences of our industrialized Asian neighbors. We can adapt. We can innovate. We can copy and then improve. Or, hopefully, we can draw our very own set of methods and processes, develop our own equipment to manufacture new, Asean-discovered, Asean-made products — but all from an Asean perspective.

The key to our growth is technological self-reliance. Only with it can we rid ourselves of any form of technology and import dependence. And, to a large extent, of that albatross around our necks called foreign debt.

But to achieve together this coveted rise in status, we need to share our knowledge, our resources with each other. We must balance out each other’s needs. For instance, I understand that with all the gigantic strides that Thailand is making in new fields, the country is hard put getting the trained manpower to operate at optimum levels.

In the Philippines, we have a large pool of engineers and capable technicians. With a little retraining to suit the needed technology, an exchange of resources could be made possible: know how vis-a-vis manpower. With this, we can help each other out.

I want to emphasize the necessity of full cooperation among Asean member nations. For no single Asean nation has a monopoly of the scientific advances and resources needed to propel us all to the future as NIC’s. I am glad to note that cooperation is clearly spelled out in your conference s objectives.

In the spirit of cooperation, therefore, each nation must identify its strengths and weaknesses in new technologies. I am aware of the broad range of specializations that you intend to compare in this conference. May I encourage you then, to be open with your latest discoveries, as well as your needs?

We, in the Philippines, are happy to share with the rest of the Asean region our modest discoveries in new and emerging technologies.

For instance, we have noteworthy accomplishments in software generation for information technology. We have made significant strides in Biotechnology for agriculture. From a native weed called Talahib, our Biotechnologists have isolated a nitrogen-fixing bacterium that reduces in half the nitrogen fertilizer input for rice and corn. Our forest biologists have succeeded in increasing the height, diameter, volume and bio-mass of trees.

Our scientists have generated simple, low-cost devices for dehydrating perishable rootcrops so that these may be converted into stable and ready-to-mix forms. I have also been informed of new approaches to animal feeding and new in-vitro fertilization techniques.

Our researchers have also established the possibility of utilizing pulverized charcoal as a substitute for imported fuels.

Likewise, we have formed a task force to identify the scientific and technological activities which will boost Philippine economy to the level of a newly-industrialized country by increasing our gross national product annually. By the turn of the century, hopefully, our annual growth rate shall have reached ten percent a year.

Let this growth be our humble contribution to the Asean dream of reshaping this region through technology.

It has been said that a country that does not undertake research is bound to stay hungry and frail and, therefore, politically unimportant. This is where our thrust towards new and emerging technologies in Asean becomes most significant. We cannot forever depend on handouts from the super-rich.

As I welcome you, so do I challenge you now, the best and the brightest of our Asean scientists and technolgists. Your most important contribution to Asean’s growth lies in your development of further technologies, truly Asean discoveries, that will pull us out of hunger, of sickness, of poverty. Technologies that will emancipate us from our dependence on non-Asean expertise. Technologies that will eradicate want and bring happiness and economic abundance to all of Asean.

Once again, I welcome you all and wish you success in this cooperative undertaking. Long live you all.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].