QUALITY STANDARDS AT HIGH LEVEL PRODUCTION

President Aquino believes that our products can attain and sustain the high quality demanded of world-class goods. Filipino ingenuity and creativity combined could produce goods that are beautiful, functional and of unsurpassed quality.

In the more than three years that I have led this government, I have constantly pushed for increased productivity, especially in the government sector. I am glad to find a forum dedicated to this goal. I, therefore, congratulate Secretary Follosco and the Philippine Productivity Movement for sponsoring this Congress, and for choosing a theme which, if closely adhered to, will be of utmost significance to us.

I wholeheartedly agree with your theme. It is high time that we made quality a way of life. As you may be aware, I have never tired of prodding our people to give their best to whatever they do. My State of the Nation Address last July clearly reflected this support for productivity.

In the government sector, we have adopted several measures to increase the efficiency of public servants. Our 1990 budget’s component for productivity concerns has been increased by 15.9%. We have set performance targets for each agency. We duly recognize excellence in public and private endeavors, holding up such exceptional records for the public to emulate. And, Congress has supplemented our efforts through the enactment of the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees which defines the performance expected of civil servants.

A reinvigorated Civil Service Commission has applied measures to reward effectivity and punish inefficiency. Foremost among these is the proposed Civil Service Code that puts together all scattered laws and policies of the Commission in one comprehensive act. The Code has been endorsed to Congress to facilitate its passage.

Most importantly and in recognition of the direct relationship between productivity and fair remuneration, we have started the implementation of the Revised Compensation and Position Classification Law which upgrades salaries and standardizes pay for basically similar work in government. I understand that some government agencies have readied the release of their respective salary differentials. In keeping with government’s call for increased productivity, I am using this occasion to direct the Department of Budget and Management to hasten the implementation of the revised rates to all concerned. And, when salaries shall have been fully standardized, we shall start the measures geared at promoting only on merit basis.

Time was when public service had perfect specimens of sluggish performers, or even non-performers. I will not tolerate employees on the so-called 15/30 basis – the ones who report only on the 15th and 30th of the month to collect their pay checks. And those who are referred to, in jest, as 80% out, standing – that is, they are standing outside their offices, 80% of their official time. With these recent measures and forthcoming ones, I hope that these will be occurrences of the past. Only improved efficiency will bring back the lost glory of government service.

I have said it before and I shall say it again. This government will not put up with the service of laggards. We shall keep up the pressure on every department and agency to improve its productivity and efficiency.

I understand that the private sector also faces challenges to improve productivity. I view this as a healthy sign. To achieve our goal to be among the Newly Industrialized Countries of the 20th Century, to alleviate the poverty that has been our unfortunate legacy from the oppressor, and to consistently meet high standards nation-wide, private and public sectors must work harder together. Government and private sectors should now take larger steps to optimize all our resources.

Among the countries that have recovered from economic devastation, perhaps none has fared better than Japan. The Japanese experience of rising from the ashes of war to become an economic superpower in only 40 years is an oft-told tale. Japan has been wielding again its economic might because of its people’s united efforts to attain the highest standards of production. The key word here is unity. For no other reason has the country been known as Japan, Incorporated.

If we examine closely the miracle of Japan’s ascent to power, we will observe that beyond the high level of technology that they have achieved, beyond the high quality of their products today are a disciplined people, united in their belief in their capabilities and bound stronger by their determination to succeed.

This is what I want to share with you, therefore: that if we should aim for even a portion of what Japan has done, we must first be united in our goals and directions. Our vision is that of one people, one government, one economy. For after all, we are One Nation.

Perhaps, the question that bothers some of us is whether our products can attain, and then sustain the high quality demanded of world-class goods. My answer is – why not? Although our present standards still need improvement, I am confident that we can eventually do it. While I am disappointed to know that the market for “patis” and “bagoong” for Filipinos in the U.S. is dominated by another country, I am heartened to know that a local beer has consistently been rated as belonging to the best of international beers.

Setting up standards of excellence acceptable to foreign markets should not be too great a problem for us. Filipino ingenuity and creativity, known all over the world, can combine to produce goods that are beautiful, functional and of unsurpassed quality. But we ought to pay more attention to maintaining original standards. It seems that when we go into mass production, the quality of our goods suffers. So many international markets have been lost this way I challenge the management experts and the science and technology savants to devise better ways for our producers to maintain quality standards even at high-level production.

I know that we have been the mentors of other Asians on productivity and technology – Korea, on car assembly; Thailand and Taiwan, on agricultural technology; and others, on utility vehicles. If we can teach them how to improve their wares, I see no reason why we cannot produce these goods with the quality required by the international markets.

But beyond the call to improve the quality of our goods and services is the compelling need to unite as one people with one vision. Then, the vision will be fulfilled by the singular commitment of one nation to produce at optimum levels and with the highest possible standards.

Hence, I ask you, who are involved in furthering our nation’s productivity, to underscore the need for unity in your campaigns even before you rally the different components of our productive efforts to your cause. I commend you for remembering to gather here all the major sectors of society involved in production. I call on these different sectors now to actively respond to your initiatives:

On my fellow workers in government, to declare the pursuit of productivity and quality as a national priority;

On both management and labor in the agricultural, industrial and service sectors, to work together in directing and supporting productivity and quality improvements in their operations;

On the academe, to set higher standards of performance and to instill in our youth the desire for excellence;

On the Science and Technology community, to accelerate their efforts to arrive at more productive processes and products.

And above all, on every Filipino, to dedicate himself to the attainment, maintenance and enhancement of productivity and quality.

In conclusion, I am pleased to endorse the Quality Manifesto drawn up in your 7th National Productivity Congress, thus: “Quality is the way to a better life. Quality is a strategic business imperative – essential to market leadership. Quality improvement, more than being a business strategy, must be an attitude that demands commitment…”

I fully agree with these principles. But if we want our products to be exemplary, we must unite in our aspirations, in our ideals, and in our goals. Let us all work together so that the people may achieve development, prosperity, and peace.

Good afternoon to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].