A COMMON YEARNING FOR PEACE

Sa mahabang kasaysayan ng ating bansa, ang kapayapaan ay laging naging pangunahing adhikain ng bawat Pilipino. Ito ay hindi lamang kawalan ng digmaan, kundi isang kalagayan kung saan ang bawat mamamayan ay may pagkakataong umunlad, magkaroon ng magandang kinabukasan, at mamuhay nang malaya mula sa takot at pangamba. Ang kapayapaan ay pundasyon ng isang matatag at maunlad na lipunan.

Ngunit sa kasamaang palad, ang ating bansa ay nakaranas ng maraming pagsubok na humadlang sa ating pangarap na kapayapaan. Ang mga armadong labanan, karahasan, at kawalan ng katarungan ay nagdulot ng pagdurusa at pagkabahala sa ating mga kababayan. Ito ay nagresulta sa pagkawala ng buhay, pagkasira ng ari-arian, at pagkabalam ng ating pag-unlad.

Kaya naman, ang ating pamahalaan ay patuloy na nagsusumikap na makamit ang pangmatagalang kapayapaan sa pamamagitan ng iba't ibang programa at inisyatibo. Kabilang dito ang pakikipag-usap sa mga rebeldeng grupo, pagpapalakas ng ating mga institusyon, pagtataguyod ng rule of law, at pagtugon sa mga ugat ng karahasan at kahirapan. We believe that through sustained dialogue and inclusive governance, we can address the grievances of all sectors of society.

Ang kapayapaan ay hindi lamang responsibilidad ng pamahalaan. Ito ay isang kolektibong tungkulin ng bawat Pilipino. Kailangan nating magkaisa, magtulungan, at magpakita ng malasakit sa ating kapwa. Let us all work together to build a peaceful and prosperous Philippines for ourselves and for future generations. Ang ating sama-samang pagkilos ang magiging susi sa pagkamit ng ating mga pangarap para sa ating bayan.

The Peace Corps and the Philippines share a common faith: love for and belief in peace. Filipinos believe peace has a chance in their country. They have made a great investment, individually and as a people, in order to see it work.

Your organization, my government, I as a private individual and my late husband, Ninoy, share a common faith and foundation. We love and believe in peace, and we know it is attainable.

My initiation into the search and discovery of peace was first necessitated by personal need. I learned to seek peace when circumstances conspired to have me lose it. I was 21 and had led a life of relative serenity when I married the most intelligent, articulate and endlessly driven man I had ever known. He had my head, my heart and then my entire life caught in a spin. He became our country’s youngest mayor, and then governor, and then again its youngest Senator and I had to keep in step as the politician’s wife.

That was the beginning of the end of my days and nights of quiet and peace.

Ironically, it is to a dictator who upset the established, if hectic, pattern of my life, that I owe my search and attainment of the deepest, most satisfying inner peace I was yet to experience. And Ninoy owed this to him, too. We found this under a climate of persecution during the dictatorship, in the confines of Ninoy’s prison cell where he was isolated for almost eight years.

Little did the dictator know that by throwing Ninoy into jail, he actually set him free. The yoke of Ninoy’s cares, career and ambitions were abruptly lifted from his shoulders. This was painful, for Ninoy had grown attached to these things which weighed on him, indeed, but had imparted a certain ballast and meaning to his life.

In his cell, Ninoy became a man of prayer and reflection. His endless search for the summit of political achievement became a quest for the center of peace within. It was in prison where he developed his own unshakeable personal philosophy. Its central values were reconciliation, non-violence, religious faith. And the yield of all these was peace.

I on my part had to cope with the world from which he had found a retreat. I found myself the pioneer of the opposition cause, a rather lonely state of affairs considering there was to be no significant opposition to the dictatorship for the next ten years. I, too, shed quite a number of encumbrances: a large collection of fair weather friends and associates, my family’s place in the center of political and social events, all easy means towards emotional and psychological well-being.

In adversity, I found the strength I needed to cope, the grace not to be bitter, the wisdom to cling to the moral values and political ideals that Ninoy in prison symbolized and that many Filipinos privately espoused, though they were devalued currency in the New Society. The secret source of this fortitude and renewal was, like Ninoy, our Faith. For even in our poor country, that was always in abundance.

But it was during the worst of times, at the height of my anguish over Ninoy’s suffering that I found the core of real peace. Ninoy had completed a gruelling 40-day hunger strike, and a military commission had sentenced him to death by musketry. Left with nothing, and facing the bleakest prospects ahead, we found the most unexpected and unshakeable peace. We had also discovered the limits of power.

It was that same perspective, that same grounding in adversity and Faith that must have galvanized my countrymen when we opted for peaceful political change last February. We were a people who, after 20 years of suffering and shame, had come to terms with ourselves. When the troops of Marcos and the unarmed forces of our people stood face-to-face on the streets last February, we saw in each other’s eyes not pride, or zeal for our respective causes, but a mutual love and a common yearning for peace. That was all we had, and all we wanted to keep.

We gave peace a chance then, as we continue to do so now. At this stage, we are striving to promote peace in the cities and in the countryside, using methods the Peace Corps is most familiar with. We are employing emergency measures and economic incentives to immediately alleviate hunger, disease, homelessness and poverty. We are trying to bring such resources and services as the government has to the grassroots level.

Simultaneously, we have opted to pursue ceasefire negotiations with the communist rebels as an initial measure, rather than escalate hostilities.

Peace has a chance in our country. We have all made a great investment, individually and as a people, in order to see it work.

May I close by commending the various activities, objectives and sacrifices made by your organization. You are fortunate indeed, for peace is a great and worthy cause.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].