Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During her visit to Bicol

[Released on July 16, 1987]

RECOVERY AND PROGRESS FOR BICOL

President Aquino expresses her deep concern for the problems of the Bicol Region. She stresses that the success of the region, and the economy as a whole, depends on private initiative and the corresponding infrastructure to make enterprise productive and profitable. Thus, in addition to credit which has been released, the prices of energy in the region will have to be studied. The President also vows to end all threats to peace and freedom before her term ends.

Let me start by thanking the men and women who worked tirelessly to make these consultations a success. Two of them are religious. Archbishop Legaspi, the Chairman of the Regional Coordinating Body, and Secretary Ting Jayme, known in the Cabinet as The Monsignor. May I also thank co-chairman Judge Bonto, and the man that my surprised staff in Malacañang calls the less controversial Arroyo, Commissioner Jack Arroyo.

Levity aside, may I say that every concern that has been expressed here has been duly noted. They will be referred to the appropriate Departments for consideration and, if merited, for immediate action.

In the meantime, we have noted the deplorable condition of the Maharlika Highway, for which I hope we can come up with a better name. Attention has also been called to the need for more school buildings and the repair of farm-to-market roads as well as the provision of bridges.

The success of our economic recovery program turns on private initiative. It is therefore imperative to provide the basic infrastructure to make enterprise productive and profitable.

Initially, I would like to announce that we have released almost P300 million of the P568 million that has been programmed for this region in 1987. I would like to announce the following releases for infrastructure projects in Region V:

I am hereby directing the Secretary of Public Works to include in the budget of his Department for 1988 the amount of P75 million for the Quirino Highway. For the Maharlika Highway, in addition to the P20 million allocated for the restoration of portions of the highway, he is directed to provide P2 million for detailed engineering work so that the P290 million project can be submitted to the OECF for additional funding.

We have released all funds for school buildings, totalling P38 million.

Again, our thrust is recovery and progress through private enterprise. We are aware that credit is the lifeblood of enterprise and that it is very hard to get it for small and medium scale industries. I should like to announce that P808,000 has already been released to the Department of Trade and Industry to help this sector. The Development Bank of the Philippines has meanwhile resumed regular lending operations for agriculture and small/medium scale industries.

In addition to credit, a further, and perhaps the most critical factor in development, is energy.

We shall consider the issue you have raised about the prices of energy in the region despite the proximity of energy sources. This is an issue that requires deeper study. In the meanwhile, may I reiterate our policy of encouraging private sector participation in small power generation. The NEA has also programmed the construction of several small hydro plants in the region: two in 1988, five in 1989 and four in 1990.

We recognize the continuing threat to the security of persons and property in the region, posed by the New People’s Army. Let me only reiterate my vow: to end all threats to peace and freedom before my term is over. And to that end we are bending every armed resource we have.

I ask you to be patient, and to be brave. For I have called for a People’s War against the Communist insurgency and against continuing fascist attempts to destroy our freedom. The hurt they have inflicted has been terrible indeed. But they have lost the war, even if they continue fighting. Democracy has been their irreversible defeat. And democracy is here to stay. We shall, as I have vowed, mop up these elements and give this country the wide and permanent peace that it richly deserves.

Again, may I thank the organizers of this consultation. To the people of Bicol, may I say that you are always in my thoughts, and high in my esteem. You stood solidly for freedom and democracy even through the dictatorship, and gave me and my Government some of the widest and strongest support in the country. My thanks to you. In the days and months to come, you will see how well I have remembered this day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].