Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before FINEX

[Delivered on October 9, 1989]

NOT JUST MONEY MANAGERS

One of the essential elements of our monetary policy is the constant balancing act to maintain a sound financial environment that will keep inflation within acceptable levels, encourage savings and increase investment, production and employment. Beyond this, however, President Aquino hopes that the main value that will be impressed on all finance executives and business levels is that they are Filipinos first before they are money managers.

Let us make this a profitable morning by talking about certain issues that should be uppermost in both our minds.

We have here, in this audience, among the best paid, and therefore, the best trained workers in the country. At least that is the presumption. You also call yourselves the cutting edge of the Philippine economy: the men of money and management who make the economy go and largely set the direction of its growth. That is, I think, very accurate. You share with the Central Bank the control of the country’s money.

As we all know, every individual endeavor and every national effort – be it to start a small business, to invest in a small farm, or to capitalize a large enterprise – will sink or swim depending on access to money. You are a very important part of the national life.

Money is the lifeblood of thriving economies. Today it is very much in the news, although it is certainly never far from our minds at any time of the day or night. Money was made by man to facilitate economic activities and generate wealth. As with all things man-made, it can accomplish that purpose or backfire and take on a destructive life of its own.

At the level of the over-all economy, an excess of money sparks and fuels inflation. Incomes and savings lose their value, and hard work and dedication lose their driving force. Men’s minds are turned from national productivity to naked survival. Wage increases are demanded, worsening inflation and eroding our competitive advantage in the international economy.

On the other hand, shortage of money drives up interest rates, makes productive investments prohibitive, closes firms, and aggravates unemployment.

A balance must be struck between these two extremes. Because of the volatility of money, that balance is not a steady state but a constant effort to maintain it. One of the essential elements of our monetary policy is this constant balancing act to maintain a sound financial environment that will keep inflation within acceptable levels, encourage savings, and increase investments, production and employment.

Fiscal policies have to be conducted in a manner consistent with this objective. We should avoid temptations of immediate solutions and short-term gains at the expense of long-term growth. This objective is the underlying consideration for the monetary and fiscal measures taken in recent months to force inflation down again to single digit levels. The consequent increase in interest rates is the price that has had to be paid. Yet, already, forceful measures have arrested the depreciation of the peso.

You, as finance executives and business leaders, should appreciate the need for holding down inflation. Nothing will sap the spirit of enterprise and hard work as effectively as the devaluation of wages. Nor is there anything more unjust to the worker than to destroy the value of his work faster than he earns it.

You too will appreciate that the rise in interest rates could have been less traumatic had the fiscal position of the national government been stronger.

Fiscal strength arises from taxes. With your cooperation, we can increase our strength and improve our ability to calibrate our responses to inflationary trends and avoid the drastic measures we have had to take. You will lose more, when a cash-strapped government cannot respond adequately to inflationary pressures than your accountants have saved you in taxes.

I have said that you are an important part of the national life. You are also its most cosmopolitan element. Money is the international language. There is no language barrier that cannot be overcome by money. Bankers and businessmen can understand each other with a minimum of words because numbers virtually tell it all.

Because of your cosmopolitan outlook, you may be more at home in Hongkong and Tokyo than in this developing country to which we belong. Surely, you must have caught yourselves, saying impatiently, Why aren’t things as they are in Tokyo and Hongkong? And in our exasperation with the slow pace and complicated condition of our own country, we may give up too easily on our responsibilities. We may fail to do the part that our expertise has cut out for us in the development of our country. This is the danger. You may be so far forward in your minds as the economy’s cutting edge as to leave behind the national life as it is really lived in our poor cities and struggling countryside.

The theme of this conference is “values in action.” If we can realize this in some measure, our time will have been well spent today. The first value that I hope will be impressed on all of us is that before we are money managers we are first Filipinos.

We belong to that part of the world that is often the victim of the vagaries of international finance and the illegal and immoral manipulations of local finance. Here, as in all Third World countries, the easiest money is made always at the expense of the country and its people — whether it be at the stock exchanges, in financial sector or in real estate for the rich.

The harder, more challenging and useful task is to make money while making the country grow – by enlarging the industrial sector, generating employment, increasing the productivity of the land, and improving the nation as a whole. In these gigantic tasks, the immediate returns are smaller and, the risks are greater. The greater benefit is really to the country, so that business takes on the character of patriotism.

You might say, Come down from the clouds. Patriotism has never been a prime motivation in business. If the economy grows, it will be incidental to the individual search for personal gain. I suppose that is true of spuriously growing economies — like the Philippines immediately after Martial Law and just before the crash in the prices of our traditional exports, and during the boom years when we racked up our foreign debt and the behest loans and when the stock markets were shamelessly manipulated by a few. Instant fortunes were made in those days, and for a few indeed the country was the best of all possible worlds. But the cost was the near permanent erosion of confidence in several vital institutions of the country: the banks and the stock exchanges which play so essential a role in the generation of capital for growth, and the standstill of the economy.

The profit motive is as strong in Japan, Korea, Singapore, and Germany – but its self-imposed limit is the toll that an opportunity for personal profit may take on the national future. Nowhere will we find a country that became great by setting out just to make a few of its people rich. In these fast developing countries, you will find an ethic that looks at how a man has made his money, as much as at how much money he has made.

I hope that this ethic is inculcated among us because without it, the tremendous efforts we are putting into growth will come to very little here. I think a start has been made. FINEX has been active in the Coalition for Transparency. Our heads are not so easily turned anymore by instant wealth. We are less inclined now to admire people who brag of their connections to the government and the BIR.

But there are still holdouts. The spirit of reconciliation has been extended to the blind forgiveness of those who fronted for the dictatorship, and who have yet to make restitution to the nation. My critical attitude towards this development has been called vindictiveness. There was a time when you and I, protesting in the streets against these very people and boycotting their businesses, called it justice, I do not know what has happened since then. What worries me about this is not so much that the guilty are escaping censure, but that the millions of innocent Filipinos will lose faith in the value of morals.

I hope that the moral edge of the past will be restored to our judgments, and that we will stop crying for those who laughed all the way to the bank.

The challenge to the members of FINEX is to find the moral vision that will serve as the framework for the profit motive, which is the life of free economies. We must find the formula that will reconcile profit and patriotism in a synergy that will lift up even the lowest 30% of the population mired in poverty.

It is my hope that you will bring to the task of situating profit in the larger context of country the same competence and drive that has brought you such success in business. You have shown that you can do things right; the time has come to concentrate on doing the right thing.

No one can read the future. But it lies in our power to write it — by our decisions and by our work, as guided by a vision of how things should be. That vision must inspire all our efforts and hold our main attention. We must not let anything divert us from the attainment of the free, just, and prosperous nation we promised ourselves.

The greater tasks ahead are staring us at the face. We must continue to direct our energy and attention exclusively to the work ahead. We have not begun to exhaust the strength in us to make this country all it can be, given its advantages.

I do not believe we have begun to tax our strength in the private and public sector. As we approach the start of a new decade, I envision a greater burst of energy from a reinvigorated government and private sector. We shall leave the concerns of the past behind, and, hopefully, without wasting time looking back, stride into the bright future that can be ours.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].