Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the IBM Golden Anniversary

[Delivered at the Philippine Plaza Hotel, July 13, 1987]

PEOPLE AS THE GREATEST ASSET

People are the foundation of IBM’s great success. The company has regarded people as its greatest asset and the human mind as its most important resource. Thus, in IBM Philippines, the greatest value added is the Filipino himself. IBM has also focused on support to education and on giving recognition and reward to intellectual achievements. For all these the President congratulates IBM on its 50th year.

First, let’s get a few things straight. Pinky was working in IBM before I became President, and Manolo met her there. And they are not the reason Rey Reyes is in my Government. Although I must admit that his standing in IBM was the best testimonial of his talents and the invaluable contributions he could make to my Government.

I have to clear up these things because anything I say tonight will be judged in their light. Especially since I shall speak of merit, of the talents and dedication of people that are the foundation of IBM’s great success.

If size and wealth were all that IBM is about, I would not say more than “Congratulations” this evening. But few companies have so pointedly regarded people as their greatest asset and the human mind as their most important resource. In IBM, by the nature of its work, the greatest value added is the human being; in IBM Philippines, the Filipino himself.

It is not surprising that IBM has made the development of the human being, inside and outside the company, the principal focus of its efforts. For IBM is as dedicated a profit-taker as any business in the world, and better at it than most. Its business just happens to be people.

IBM makes its money by using the best in people, by improving their intellectual command of their environment, and using their talents to the fullest extent in the operation and development of machines and programmes to which IBM has addicted the world. I must add that this has been to the world’s great improvement and benefit. (I am still a mother and Pinky is working here.)

It is again not surprising that, in discharging its corporate social responsibility, IBM has focused on support to education and on giving recognition and reward to intellectual achievements. To celebrate its anniversary, a million has been earmarked for scholarships in higher learning. That’s the essence of IBM’s social thrust: to make people smart, smart enough to use IBM. This also means helping the country develop so it will need and use IBM.

There is nothing wrong with that. On the contrary, there’s everything right with it. Nothing is more useful and lasting than an activity that draws on the most number of instincts to support it; on compassion as much as on calculation, on enlightened self-interest as on the most generous impulse of philanthropy. IBM has had the luck to be both good and smart, for itself and the country.

Before I conclude my remarks, may I extend my congratulations to Dr. Rafael Guerrero for receiving the IBM Science and Technology Award. His achievements in improved food production have earned him the recognition of his science peers throughout the world and the gratitude of many nations, not the least ours.

His methods, however, deserve equal recognition and greater notice. For Dr. Guerrero achieved success by making the most of the little he had to work with. Particularly notable is his use of easily available, cheap native resources. That is why his work is so useful to us. For Filipinos have little to work with.

While it is true this country has made a fresh start, it has had to do so with old burdens: the burdens of mistakes that others made and we must pay for.

This injustice is a given. So is our determination to succeed despite it. And people like Dr. Guerrero are showing us how. We are grateful to IBM for calling our attention to his work.

To IBM, my congratulations on your 50th anniversary. I wish you another 50 years in the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].