Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Armed Forces

[ Delivered at Camp Aquino, Tarlac, December 14, 1986 ]

THE PATH OF PEACE

As commander-in-chief, President Aquino commends the Armed Forces for their steadfastness in pursuing the cause of peace in the midst of provocation.

I am pleased to be here in this camp whose name honors an illustrious forebear and Filipino patriot. General Servillano Aquino foreshadowed the brave and tenacious Filipino soldier who stood fast by the flag and the republic – loyal to duty to the end. His career exemplified the martial virtues that will protect our new democracy in the challenging times ahead.

Courage, loyalty, a democratic faith, an unflagging vigilance for the rights, liberties, and safety of our people, an earnest desire for peace and a keen preparedness for war – these virtues will stand us in good stead in the weeks and months ahead. They are virtues already apparent in the New Armed Forces, which has shared my patience under provocation and my abiding faith that the path of peace we have taken only yield us good.

In this period of ceasefire, we have reposed great faith in your discretion and expressed the highest confidence that the New Armed Forces will know how to act. We have not been disappointed.

Equally, we are pleased that the work of reforming the Armed Forces, of honing the sword of the nation, has achieved much progress. Our confidence that the peace initiative will yield us good and no harm rests on the insurance of military reform. Our resolve to see the peace initiative through was strengthened by the promise of Minister Ileto. He said, on the eve of the ceasefire, that the military leadership would see to it that the sword unsheath would stay sharp and shining in its scabbard. Sharp with the willingness to sacrifice, and shining with commitment to protect democracy against its natural enemies.

With unquestioned strength and the lightness of our cause, the cause of freedom and peace, success can only crown our efforts. And no small measure of the credit and honor will go to the Armed Forces when an honorable and enduring peace finally reigns in our land.

As the day of the birth of the Prince of Peace draws near, it is fitting that I should make my first statement, in this week of Christmas, here among soldiers. For no one loves peace more than the soldier, who is always the first to suffer its loss. In this season of peace therefore, let us savor and thank the Lord for its blessings. Let me wish you and your families at least the humble but inestimable joys of this season: the joy of reunion, the joy of sharing a happy and holy event with your loved ones, and the joy of faith renewed in God’s providential care that right shall win in the end and that our prayers for lasting peace will be answered. Merry Christmas to you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library