FOR THE LIVING HEROES

President Aquino reiterates the Constitutional provisions specifying that the State shall provide immediate and adequate care, benefits and assistance to war veterans and their families, as an expression of the gratitude of the Filipino people for their heroism during the war, and proof of this administration’s continuing concern for them. She cites concrete actions and measures taken to ease the plight of the protectors of freedom, whose sacrifices have long been unrecognized.

I am pleased to meet the defenders of our tradition of democracy – the living heroes of World War II, and all other campaigns we had involved ourselves in to defend our freedom.

Being a veteran myself, although of a more recent and non-violent fight, I know how your heart swells with pride at the mention of your hours of glory. You and the veterans of EDSA fought to defend the same cherished freedom we enjoy now. But your wars were more protracted, and therefore, riskier. You had to brave volleys of gunfire for longer periods. You suffered more physical and emotional pain in the uncertainties of your wars.

Perhaps, it was the experience of staring death in the face that had tempered you to become extremely patient in times of peace. Over these long years, you had patiently waited to receive a fragment of the rewards due you. And even when your patience was running thin as when you held a nationwide rally to dramatize your cause last year, you did so with admirable restraint and self-discipline.

You do not only have courageous hearts. You possess the virtues only true patriots have — fierce in war, gentle in peace. Such is the spirit that has made your Federation, the only one honored with a Congressional Charter under RA 2640 in 1960. It is this same spirit that has prompted the framers of the 1987 Constitution to specify in Article XVI, Section 7 that: “The State shall provide immediate and adequate care, benefits, and other forms of assistance to war veterans and veterans of military campaigns, their surviving spouses and orphans.”

Indeed, even our Constitution recognizes that giving you honor is not sufficient to express the gratitude of the Filipino people. You, who risked life and limb and whose unfortunate comrades fell in battle to preserve our freedom, should enjoy the protection of the State, at least in the twilight of your years.

I am aware that our veterans and their immediate families had not been properly attended to for so long. Benefits previously granted to you had not been adjusted to accord with the times. The veterans who fought in World War II as members of the USAFFE were granted by the Joint RP-US Veterans Commission of 1966 only six of the 12 items of their claims.

The Veterans Memorial Medical Center, the hospital created to treat you and your kin, is now short of services to accommodate the increasing number of disabled or sick veterans needing medical help. And there is a threat to diminish its services further if the U.S. Bill introduced last June by U.S. Congressman G.V. Montgomery will be passed into law. HR 2659 of the U.S. Congress seeks, among others, to terminate in 1990 all assistance and grants for the Veterans Memorial Medical Center.

Even your bank, built with war reparations money, was taken away from you through Presidential Decree 326 issued by my predecessor. The deposed dictator, although claiming to belong to your breed, placed the Philippine Veterans Bank under receivership, purportedly due to liquidity problems.

We cannot allow your quiet suffering to continue. I understand that some of your provincial chapters have passed resolutions for your leaders to make representations with the President that they may further plead your cause. Your request has not fallen on deaf ears, as you can see. My presence here reaffirms my continuing concern for you. This administration need not produce fake medals to sympathize with you.

Your waiting will not be for long. Last year, I authorized the Department of National Defense and the Department of Foreign Affairs, under Administrative Order No. 100, to work for the furtherance of the outstanding claims of our World War II veterans. These claims had been held pending by the Joint RP-US Veterans Commission of 1966. The remaining claims were taken up as Item IV in our Memorandum of Agreement of 1988 with the U.S. government which amended the Military Bases Agreement of 1947.

In my forthcoming visit to the United States, I shall honor our RP-US World War II veterans when I lay a wreath at Arlington Cemetery on the occasion of Veterans’ Day. Sad to say, despite their heroism in Bataan and Corregidor which proved crucial to American victory, their sacrifices have hardly been recognized by the U.S. government.

In keeping with the Constitutional mandate to give consideration to war veterans and veterans of other military campaigns in the disposition of public lands and the utilization of our natural resources, the Department of National Defense and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources have entered into an agreement to allow our veterans to participate in the government’s forest development program and engage in livelihood projects utilizing forest by-products. Negotiations to enable landless veterans to acquire land are underway.

Likewise, last year, in response to your clamor and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of National Defense, I created a special Presidential Committee to study and review the financial condition of the Philippine Veterans Bank which suffered unmitigated plunder during the past regime. I authorized the release of P865,824.00 from the contingent fund to meet the expenses for the audit of the bank s accounts and the valuation of its assets by a professional appraiser.

Likewise, the Department of Budget and Management has increased the allocation for veterans in the proposed budget for 1990 by 11.48%. This increase will mainly go to the maintenance of the Veterans Memorial Medical Center.

Our Congress too, is doing its share to improve the lot of our veterans. The House of Representatives introduced the Veterans Benefits Bill or House Bill No. 25553 and the Veterans Code or HB 4117 while the Senate has several equivalent bills for our veterans.

I am prepared to certify a bill increasing benefits for veterans. The Department of Budget and Management has assured me that funds will be available for its implementation. If passed into law, this will standardize and upgrade a scheme for pension and other benefits to be extended to all veterans, and will include as recipients those who have rendered military service for at least five years.

As you are aware now, we have taken several steps to ease your burden. All these may seem painstakingly slow for those who have waited for almost a lifetime to receive what is due them. But you understand, of course, that instant solutions are not possible considering the constraints that obstruct the best of our intentions.

Perhaps, for this shorter waiting time, you can be sustained by the knowledge that there is no better reward for freedom fighters than to live in the freedom they had fought for. Let me use this occasion then to ask you to help us preserve the liberty that you fought so hard to keep. For we in government will continue to see to it that your sacrifices will be justly rewarded.

As an expression of the Filipino people’s gratefulness for all your sacrifices and as proof of this Administration’s continuing concern for you, I have signed Proclamation No. 466 declaring April 5 to 11 of every year as Philippine Veterans Week and Proclamation No. 467 authorizing the Filipino War Veterans Foundation, Inc. (FILVETS) to conduct a year-long nationwide membership and fund campaign effective on the date of its promulgation.

I once again salute you. You are the ones who toiled and sacrificed to protect our situation. May your burning love for your homeland never fade.

Good morning to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].