Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the Management Association of the Philippines

[Delivered on May 30, 1988]

CHALLENGE TO THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR

The President underscores one of the overriding concerns of her administration – employment. The general focus of the effort centers on the reform of agricultural policies so as to improve the delivery of basic services and make farming a more profitable enterprise. The Livelihood Enhancement for Agricultural Development Program (LEA) therefore intends to move farmers from their present subsistence level to a stage where they can sustain business enterprises on their own.

During my first meeting with the Cabinet this year, I underscored one of the overriding concerns of all our endeavors – employment. When I said this however, I did not mean we were to do it all by ourselves.

The agricultural sector in particular, with its huge, underutilized and undercompensated labor force, poses a challenge that requires more than all the efforts, expertise and resources the government can provide. This sector, as you know, comprises almost seventy percent of our country’s population. Its contribution to our economy constitutes a third of our gross national product. And yet it is this sector that remains mired in the lowest stages of underdevelopment. Rural families account for about 80 percent of the poorest 30 percent of our total households. Furthermore, the disparity between urban and rural incomes has widened steadily over the past years. The average farm family income is only 40 percent of the urban income, down from 75 percent in 1975. Such economic and social inequities have served to fan the flames of insurgency in the rural areas over the past decade.

At the start of my administration, I had already identified the rehabilitation and development of the countryside as a priority thrust of the new government. As a start, we moved to abolish agricultural monopolies that has stunted the growth of small, independent farming enterprises. We also lifted the burden of export taxes, eliminated or reduced tariffs on farm inputs and initiated reforms inputs and cultural credit system. We also disengaged ourselves from the trading of agricultural products and inputs to allow the free and more energetic interplay of market forces. The general focus of our efforts was on the reform of agricultural policies so as to improve the delivery of basic services and make farming a more profitable enterprise.

While we continue to remove the stumbling blocks and impediments in the way of agricultural growth, we have also become increasingly aware of other needs and difficulties that prevent farmers from taking full advantage of the freedom and space provided for such growth. While many farmers’ associations would like to embark on specific livelihood projects, they are unable to secure financing from commercial banks for several reasons. These include a lack of know-how in project packaging, no track record in running such projects and enterprises, no known linkages with existing commercial banks and lack of collateral and equity.

It is precisely for the purpose of meeting these needs that the Department of Agriculture recently launched the Livelihood Enhancement for Agricultural Development Program or LEAD. As Secretary Dominguez has already explained to you, the LEAD intends to move farmers from their present subsistence level to a stage where they can sustain business enterprises on their own. This involves assistance in setting up business enterprises, the provisions of mechanisms to move foreign grants and other funds to the countryside efficiently, and the implementation of these through private-sector led local agriculture and fishery councils. The envisioned effect is the raising of farmers’ incomes from the present P1,330 and below a month to at least P2,000 a month. And while the LEAD, as it is aptly named, has taken the initiative in this direction, it has called on the private sector to help in fleshing out the major thrusts of the program. These are the provisions of management skills and market orientation and link-ups for the farming sector. And it is to this call that the Management Association of the Philippines has so quickly and generously responded.

Since government initiated the launch of a Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program, it has been observed that the sharing of resources must go beyond the mere reallocation of such a basic commodity as farmland. The agreements that have been made between the Department of Agriculture and the Management Association of the Philippines addresses this issue squarely by redistributing one of the most vital and valuable resources of all – the brains and expertise of big business. The profits of such a partnership, I am sure, will go beyond the normal expectations of any public or private enterprise. The yield is a better climate for peace and prosperity, and the knowledge that where it counts, business and the bureaucracy can indeed walk in step and in the same direction.

I hope that like all the best partnerships, yours will be sustained, harmonious and productive way beyond the honeymoon stage. In behalf of all the families and individuals your combined endeavors will benefit, I thank you and wish you all success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].