Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the National Science and Technology Authority

[Released on July 11, 1986]

CREATING INDIGENOUS TECHNOLOGY

Our scientists must adapt foreign technologies to local realities and develop indigenous technologies that will make full use of our native resources. Filipino science and technology plays an important role in the new self-reliant posture of the country.

I will be brief as I always am. My interest in science and technology is utilitarian. I must measure the importance of any activity by its potential contribution to the work of national reconstruction. I have been given statistics indicating that the national allocation of funds to science and technology in the Philippines is much much smaller than in the industrialized countries, old and new. This says the obvious. We are economically backward because, to some extent, we are weak in science and technology: and we are behind in science and technology because we do not have the kind of economy that can support their vibrant growth. These facts will not excite anyone to contribute readily to local science and technology, especially as your brief to me indicates that it is easier, even if it is not cheaper in the long run, to simply buy the foreign technology in finished products or pay royalties for its use. The private sector goes for the short-term gain, principally because the local private sector does not have more than short-term resources. It must invest in immediate growth because it can rarely support a long-term investment. These are the facts of life that undoubtedly throw a damper on your enthusiasm but they must be faced. It is a vicious cycle, but I accept that the government has a measure of responsibility in breaking it. Government must invest more in scientific and technological research and development, if only to keep the best brains among our people at home. Its investment, directly or through incentives for private sector to support research and development efforts, is like its investment in education. It does not offer immediate gains but it is the height of irresponsibility not to support it generously, for government has responsibility not to the present but chiefly to the future of the country. However, because the resources of our government are scarce and because we are pressed on all sides of competing priorities of unquestionable urgency, such as the alleviation of mass poverty, it is necessary for long-term investments to justify themselves by offering some prospects of immediate returns. In short, it’s got to pay and now.

In the case of general education, it must show itself to be relevant to the social and economic conditions of the times and to the objectives that we have set ourselves for the immediate future. We want relevant education, meaning to say, educational programs that turn out graduates with a place in the system such as it is, and who will contribute to make that system what it aspires to be. The same with science and technology.

I have said that the first priority is the alleviation of mass poverty, which is found principally in the rural areas. Urban poverty is just the result of the bad conditions in the countryside that have driven the people to seek a better life in the cities. The main thrust therefore of our economic recovery program is in agriculture.

This thrust will take the form of massive infrastructure investments in the countryside that will make farming again a viable and, perhaps also, a profitable venture. We aim to build farm-to-market roads, irrigation systems, silos and other post-harvest facilities that will permit the farmer to increase his productivity because he has the assurance that his products will readily find markets. We also want to acquire the facilities in a manner that immediately generates employment. We have strongly emphasized the need to use labor-intensive efforts in these projects. But we want these methods also to be efficient. We cannot afford to subsidize the unemployed in digging holes and filling them in again. In short because of our situation, one approach must yield as many results as possible. It is here that Filipino science and technology must prove its immediate usefulness.

We need our scientists to adapt foreign technologies to local realities, and better still to develop indigenous technologies that will make full use of our native resources. I have said that we shall lift ourselves by our own bootstraps because there is no one around to help us carry the full weight of our problems. I acknowledge the role of Filipino science and technology in the new self-reliant posture of the Philippines. And it is an acknowledgement that will find concrete expression in government support for its growth and development.

In concluding, however, I want to express my own interest in Filipino science and technology apart from its immediate contribution to the national recovery effort. I delight in expressions of the power of the Filipino will and intelligence to find unique solutions to impossible dilemmas. I saw this in our Revolution where we found a unique and simple response to an armed and intransigent dictatorship, a response that had eluded all other nations suffering the same political affliction. You know what I mean. You lived the answer yourselves at EDSA. We found our way out of that problem. I trust you, who are among the best brains in our country, to help us find our way out of the problems we inherited. There will be many more Philippine revolutions before the work started out by the February Revolution is completed. Filipino science and technology should spearhead one of them.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].