REORGANIZING THE CABINET

WHEREAS, the President of the Philippines deems it necessary to reorganize the Cabinet to ensure effective governance and the efficient implementation of government programs and policies;

WHEREAS, there is a need to streamline the functions of certain departments and offices to avoid duplication and promote coordination;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, [President's Name], President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Reorganization of the Cabinet – The following departments and offices shall be reorganized as follows:

(a) The Department of [Department Name] shall be renamed as the Department of [New Department Name]. Its functions shall include [list of functions].

(b) The [Office Name] shall be transferred from the Department of [Department Name] to the Department of [New Department Name].

(c) A new office, the [New Office Name], is hereby created under the Office of the President. It shall be responsible for [list of responsibilities]. This is a *very important* task.

SECTION 2. Transfer of Personnel – All personnel affected by the reorganization shall be transferred to their new assignments in accordance with existing laws and regulations. *As needed*, the Civil Service Commission shall provide assistance in this transfer.

SECTION 3. Funding – The funding requirements for the reorganization shall be sourced from existing appropriations. Any additional funding requirements shall be subject to the approval of the Department of Budget and Management.

SECTION 4. Implementing Rules and Regulations – The Department of [Department Name] and the Department of Budget and Management shall jointly formulate the implementing rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order. *Para mas mabilis*, they are directed to submit these within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Order.

SECTION 5. Effectivity – This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Aquilino Pimentel is appointed Adviser on National Affairs. Jaime Ferrer is named Minister for Local Governments.

As I announced last week, the process of renewal of our Government shall be a continuing one in keeping with our desire to forge a government sensitive to national concerns and truly responsive to the needs of the people.

I have always valued the counsel of Minister Aquilino Pimentel, which was invaluable throughout the period of our struggle for justice and freedom. He was one of the chief architects of the People’s Victory in the last election. And he has proved himself a devoted servant of the people, ever vigilant for their rights and liberties. I have therefore appointed him to be my Adviser on National Affairs, with the rank of Cabinet Minister, to help me discharge my responsibilities to the vast constituency of our nation. Mr. Jaime Ferrer will replace him as Minister for Local Governments. Jimmy Ferrer is known to all of us for his great rectitude, his fearless stand against dictatorship, his staunch protection for the integrity of the democratic process. He brings his probity, patriotism, acumen, and long experience in government to the Ministry of Local Governments.

Other changes will be announced by me shortly, as I conclude my consultations with the affected sectors.

Let me say at this point that even as we make these changes in government, the burden of making our new democracy work still rests on all of us, on government and the people, for the task of reconstruction and progress requires no less a truly national effort.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library