THE OIL PRICE ISSUE

Because of positive developments abroad, the President orders the reduction of customs duties on crude oil importations from 20 percent to 15 percent, as well as the prices of gasoline, kerosene, diesel oil, and LPG. She urges the people to “roll with the punches delivered abroad.”

Raising petroleum prices was bad politics but a necessary measure at the time it was made. Government is not a popularity contest.

Last March, we asked our people to brace themselves for a mid-year increase in petroleum prices because the world crude oil price had risen from $13.15 to $ 17.03 per barrel.

The Oil Price Stabilization Fund enables us to adjust petroleum prices gradually whenever there is a world oil price increase.

We should have increased petroleum prices as early as March 1987. But we wanted to delay as long as we could a decision that would undoubtedly burden our people. By June, however, we had emptied the Stabilization Fund. Meanwhile, the international crude oil price continued to rise.

Towards the middle of this year, our decision to increase prices was reinforced by certain adverse developments in the Middle East. These developments specially affected our principal oil suppliers in the Middle East.

The world continues to follow these developments with great apprehension as tankers negotiate the mine-filled Gulf.

Anticipating a turn for the worse, the industrialized countries began stockpiling oil supplies both for the coming winter and a worsening situation in the Gulf. As a result, oil supply tightened, and the price rose further.

Again, we were affected by these developments.

It pains me to allow the increase in the prices of various products stemming from oil, but we were compelled to do so.

I know that this step will cause hardship for all of us. But the truth, and we all know it: We do not control the price of oil.

Just the same, Government made sure that the price of fuel oil directly used for generating electricity or for powering factories was increased only 31 centavos per liter. This means that despite the increase, cost of production increased only by a very small amount for manufacturers. As a result, we did not expect prices of goods in the market to increase a great deal. We relied on the conscience of the business community not to treat a smaller increase in fuel oil price as a source of profit, but as a means to moderate the prices of their products in the market.

As I said, it was a painful decision but necessary at the time. Yet even as I held to that decision, I requested the Energy Regulatory Board to continue studying ways and means to reduce the prices of petroleum products despite the world price increase that had taken place and the further increases we were anticipating.

Today I am happy to announce that a way has been found because of recent developments abroad.

We have noted a reversal in the upward movement of crude oil price. We think, and hope and pray, that crude oil prices will remain stable for the rest of the year. Some experts assure us that it will be lower than the earlier worldwide projection of higher prices by the end of 1987. At any rate, the stockpiling of oil supplies by the industrialized countries is nearly completed, and there is an increased supply of crude in the market. As a result, we expect prices to either drop or remain stable.

At the same time, our strong dollar reserves promise to maintain the current peso-dollar exchange rate.

While we expect these healthy signs to be reflected in lower crude oil prices, an actual lowering hasn’t happened. Still, we have reason to hope.

I am pleased now to translate these hopeful developments into a change in price policy.

By virtue of the powers vested in me by Section 401 of the Tariff and Customs Code, I have ordered the reduction of customs duties on crude oil importations from 20 percent to 15 percent. This will mean a loss of revenues of about P1.7 billion that would otherwise fund projects necessary to economic recovery. We will just have to find some other way to make up for this loss.

To partially make up for the shortfall, I have turned to the Philippine Amusements and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR) to subsidize the price reduction that I will now announce. The PAGCOR, pursuant to its mandate to devote its revenues to sociocivic projects, has been directed to release the amount of P300 million to enable the Price Stabilization Fund, which is now depleted, to be replenished. This will enable the Fund to continue subsidizing lower petroleum prices.

I therefore recommend to the Energy Regulatory Board the following price reductions as early as possible:

Premium gasoline from P8.20 to P7.50. Regular gasoline from P7.85 to P7.15. Kerosene from P5.69 to P5.30. Diesel oil from P5.64 to P5.25. LPG from P4.46 to P4.15.

While we shall seize every chance to reduce prices or keep them low, we will not shirk our duty to do what must be done for the stability of our economy and society. If the situation takes a turn for the worse again, we shall consider another increase in petroleum prices. We are not an oil-producing country, nor are we a debt-free country. We must roll with the punches delivered by developments abroad, even as we carry the burden of debt we inherited. This is our country, these are its weaknesses, which we cannot escape. We just have to face the facts and do the best we can.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].