Manggahan Floodway Project Pasig, Metro Manila July 22, 1988

MAKING MANILA A FAIR CITY

The Manggahan Floodway alone cannot solve the recurring flood problem of Manila. The most important part of the solution belongs to the local governments of Metro Manila and to the people.

This project is truly godsent. Floods have been the bane of Manila since population and waste increased beyond its inherent capability to handle them. Each year, almost a billion pesos are lost as a result of floods. The Manggahan Floodway goes a long way towards the final elimination of this endemic problem. We have much to thank the Japanese Government through Ambassador Tsuneo Tanaka for its critical and invaluable contribution in making it happen.

Yet this imposing project will not solve the problem. The most important part of the solution is the hardest, yet it costs next to nothing. That part is the part that belongs to the local governments of Metro Manila and to the people of this great city. Studies show that 2,034 cubic meters of garbage are shamelessly thrown by the inhabitants of Manila into the drainage network. To this glaring example of lack of self-respect, we must add the selfish and narrow perspective of urban developers who fail to provide adequate drainage facilities in their projects.

Let’s stop blaming Public Works for the annual calamities that visit this city during the wet season. Let’s look to ourselves and to our local government for the solution. That solution is cheap. Let us respect our own surroundings by keeping them clean, by disposing of our garbage properly, and by demanding of our local governments the attention they owe their people.

The national government will continue to do its part. We are studying a program to improve the natural drainage capacity of our rivers, esteros and creeks which drain 80 percent of Metro Manila.

I urge all our people here in the city to do their part in making Manila the fair city and capital it once was.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library