SAVE THE EARTH

Everyone has the human responsibility to prevent the Earth from destruction. President Aquino highlights the need to ensure the protection of global environment from destruction. While Philippine forests constitute a mere 0.2 percent of total world forests, she feels that it is the obligation of everyone, small or great, to contribute to saving the Earth and its forests. Thus, she firmly eyes the transition from net deforestation to net afforestation in the remaining term of her administration, through the National Forestation Program, and a Masterplan for Forestry Development that includes banning of lumber exports and preserving our forests.

The first astronauts to see the Earth from outer space described it as “a blue pearl” floating in space. Indeed, it looked like a pearl in the first color photographs from space. But most of all it looked like a living, breathing thing.

A blue pearl is a rare find in the earth’s ocean. So is a planet like ours in the universe. The chance of finding another Earth in all its vast reaches is less than one in a billion trillion trillion. We may well be the only pearl, a small speck, in the lifeless beauty of the cosmic ocean.

These staggering numbers highlight the human responsibility towards the preservation of that pearl of surpassing beauty and incalculable worth.

There is a line in Shakespeare about the base Indian who threw away a pearl richer than all his tribe. After the second half of this century, humanity started to behave as mindlessly as that fellow.

We are slashing and burning our forests, extinguishing in the process millions of life species we shall never know. We are burning fuels and darkening our skies. We are poisoning our oceans and rivers for a thousand years. It is as though we have set fire to our own house after we had locked ourselves inside and thrown away the keys.

The rich countries are burning fossil fuels and releasing poisonous elements into the air and into our streams. The poor nations are cutting wide swaths of the forests that serve as the lungs of the earth – areas the size of countries.

The destruction of the Earth has gone so far that we have started to notice changes in what man believed were eternal verities: the limitless hospitality of the Earth for human life and the permanence of its scenic grandeur. The simile of the burning house is not altogether far-fetched. We are getting hot under the collar. The globe is warming under the greenhouse effect produced, among other factors, by the rising levels of carbon dioxide in the air.

In confronting the phenomenon of global warming, two distinct initiatives must be taken: One is the rapid reduction of the emissions of greenhouse gases in the industrialized North, and the other is the reversal of alarming trends of deforestation among the poor countries of the South.

The first would require drastic changes in the North’s patterns of consumption.

The second initiative is more difficult, because the destruction of tropical forests is not a matter of consumer preference but of naked survival. Forests are being destroyed to provide living space and livelihoods for the fast multiplying populations of the Third World. In countries saddled with huge and unproductive debts, the government is virtually powerless to slow down or alleviate the increasing misery.

The Philippines finds itself in this situation. Yet, we shall carry our share of the human responsibility to prevent that blue pearl in space from turning into a bowl of dust. Philippine forests constitute a mere 0.2 percent of the total forests of the world and only 0.4 percent of total tropical forests. What we do to our forests may not significantly worsen the global picture, but we do feel the obligation that everyone should: If not now, when; if not us, who will? At least a start is being made in one small country.

In the Philippines we are determined to achieve the transition from net deforestation to net afforestation in the remaining term of my administration.

In 1986, we banned the export of raw logs. This year, we banned the export of lumber.

In 1988, we launched the National Forestation Program which aims to reforest 300,000 hectares.

With the Asian Development Bank, we have prepared a Master Plan for Forestry Development. Its most important recommendation is the preservation of the remaining virgin dipterocarp forests, pine forest and mossy forests and their inclusion into the national protected areas system. The virtual sequestration of these forests will seriously affect livelihoods of many communities.

What the industrial North will do is up to the conscience of its governments. We are doing our part. The best way for Northern governments to help the conservation efforts of countries like the Philippines is to stop the importation of illegal logs into their countries.

There is talk about swapping debt for forests, since most of the tropical forests are found in the 15 top debtor countries. We won’t hold our breaths on that one. There will be occasion for doing so when the atmosphere is entirely polluted. The efforts of responsible Third World governments will not wait on the commitment of the Earth’s primary polluting countries. We look more hopefully towards non-governmental organizations like World Wildlife Foundation for conservation grants.

Let us conclude as we began, with a view from space. That blue pearl in the void, so soothing to the eye, is flanked by two glaring red planets, whose searing temperatures and raging, lifeless surfaces hint at the future of the Earth.

One day perhaps, a consideration such as this on the global environment will end on a bright note of hope. It is too soon for that. The alarm must continue to be sounded

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].