Placing Greater Value on Values

Ang pagpapahalaga sa mga birtud at prinsipyo ay hindi lamang responsibilidad ng pamilya, paaralan, o simbahan. Ito ay tungkulin ng buong bansa. We must instill in our citizens a deep sense of honor, integrity, and patriotism.

Sa panahon ngayon, kung saan laganap ang korapsyon, kawalan ng tiwala, at pagkasira ng moralidad, mas kailangan natin ang mga pagpapahalaga. These values serve as our guiding light, ensuring that we remain steadfast in our pursuit of a just and equitable society.

Kaya naman, dapat nating isulong ang edukasyon na nagtuturo ng mabuting asal, paggalang sa kapwa, at pagmamahal sa bayan. Let us empower our youth to become responsible and ethical leaders of tomorrow. Kailangan nating magtulungan upang bumuo ng isang lipunan na may malasakit, katarungan, at pag-asa.

Ang pagpapahalaga sa mga birtud ay hindi lamang isang adhikain, ito ay isang pangangailangan. It is the foundation upon which we build a strong and prosperous nation. Sama-sama nating itaguyod ang mga pagpapahalaga para sa kinabukasan ng ating bansa.

The role of the teachers in molding and guiding the total personality of the child cannot be underestimated. Uplift of the teaching profession is a major concern of the Aquino administration. The government has started by reducing the prices of oil and oil based products to trigger a lowering of basic commodities, improve the standard of living of the people .

Since I began my campaign for the Presidency, and since I took on that task of the highest office in the land, I have spoken to many audiences.

I have spoken to crowds in the rural areas. To the farmers and fishermen who work the soil and harvest the oceans to feed our nation.

I have spoken to international bankers and local businessmen who raise the capital to create the jobs we need to meet the basic needs of our people and get our economy moving.

I have spoken to the labor force, to the men who must take the yoke on their shoulders and pull with all their muscle and might to dislodge us from economic inertia.

I have spoken to our soldiers, to the men and women who are the shield and sword of the freedoms we fought so hard to attain.

I have spoken to a multiplicity of sectors, each with a pivotal role in the task of national reconstruction, but to none who are as crucial and influential in our total scheme of growth and equity as to this audience that I now address. For you, our teachers; you, the administrators of our schools, colleges, and universities are a class unto yourselves. For all of us have passed through your hands. All have been molded in your classrooms and laboratories. All have been guided by your words and example during our most impressionable ages. Our bankers and businessmen, farmers and laborers, soldiers and priests, our government officials and cabinet ministers, and I myself were once clay in your hands. We are what you made us. You, our teachers, one of the most neglected sectors of our society, are the sector that made all the other sectors what they are.

And I must also say, that in the same way, those who pillaged our economy, debased our institutions, perverted our laws, and corrupted the values of many Filipinos, were also highly educated men and women. They too were once clay in the hands of teachers. But I do not think it was the teaching profession’s fault that they hardened into crooks. These people had the conceit of the half-educated. They knew quite well how to do things but never learned to what good purpose. That, at least, is the kindest thing we can say about them.

You more than any of us are keenly aware that knowledge must always be tempered by morals. That intellect without deep roots in sound conscience may indeed blossom for a brief season but leaves no seed for the next. Our nation was sorely misled, our values twisted, the public interest derided and public faith in government seriously undermined. These wounds on our morals, more than the economic devastation that cripples our ability to give our people the life they deserve, more than the pockets of insurgency, disturb and pre-occupy me the most. For the problems of the economy and the insurgency, with their roots in greed and injustice, are only the effects of the more insidious cause — the corruption of our morals.

And so I say that the audience of educators to whom I now speak is instrumental in the making or breaking of our national destiny. For you must train and guide generation after new generation of Filipinos to be statesmen as well as politicians, gentlemen as well as soldiers, philanthropists as well as businessmen, christians as well as citizens. In other words, we need you to launch as sweeping a revolution in this country as that which swept the dictatorship. We need you to surround and protect the hearts and minds of young Filipinos, as the Filipinos last February surrounded and protected the last expression of the Filipino revolt. We need you to instill in our youth a love for peace, a keen sense of justice and civic duty, a belief in hard work, respect and caring for their fellow men, a jealousy for their rights and freedoms, and an absolute trust and faith in God.

But before we can ask this of you, our people and government should commit themselves to give you what is your due in the light of the high mission you are called to perform. We must restore the esteem and high priority the education sector enjoyed before Marcos. We must let your voices be heard more prominently in our consultations with the various sectors. We must prevent the indignities heaped on you by the previous government. Our teachers should never again be forced to endure threats and intimidation to distort the electoral process or teach the youth flattering lies about the government. And, when we have recovered to some degree from the devastation wrought by Marcos on the economy and the government, we must give you a share of the national budget commensurate with the high mission you are called to perform.

In the meantime, and for the sake of equity, my government has instituted measures that will improve the standard of living of the people, including the public sector. I have reduced the prices of oil products, which should trigger a lowering of the prices of commodities. Other measures along the same lines are being studied. I know your situation, even as I know the situation of others in the public sector. I ask for your patience and cooperation. We are all in the same boat.

In the meantime, this administration will rationalize and reform the country’s educational system as well as the Ministry of Education and Culture itself. We will restructure the central office of the Ministry to achieve integration and a more efficient delivery of services. We have observed that the present setup has too many auxiliary and specialized units that make coordination difficult. The duplication of functions among the different offices has caused unnecessary expense and a wastage of human resources. The Reorganization Committee is well along in its study of these problems.

I have also asked our government reorganization commission to study the possibility of creating a National Commission of Arts and Culture under the MECS. This body will coordinate and integrate the cultural aspects of the Ministry, placing the National Library, the National Museum, the National Historical Institute, the Institute of National Language, a new Institute of Arts and Letters under its wing. But such changes shall not mean the discontinuance of any of the specialized programs of the Ministry. Nor will there be any mass layoffs of Ministry personnel except for true and reasonable cause.

A better organized, efficient and responsive ministry can then function as the spearhead of the drive to reform the educational system. Being a mother myself, I am acutely aware of how greatly the school environment determines the character of the child. The Church, the home, and the community are important influences, but the child spends the better part of his or her day in school. It is imperative therefore that we upgrade the quality of education at all stages, especially in the elementary and secondary levels.

As a first step, the elementary school curriculum should be fully implemented to give our children as well-rounded an understanding of the world and science as possible. The teachers that will impart his understanding must be trained well for the job. We must therefore intensify the training and retraining of some 325,000 teachers and their administrators in gradeschools throughout the country.

A serious inadequacy is the lack of books, facilities and other equipment. While we are looking for the funds to solve this problem, we must further systematize the distribution of books and other instructional materials to achieve a fairer allocation of the scarce resources. We also need to continue with the Program for Decentralized Education Development. This program seeks to supplement the diet of basic skills in reading, writing and arithmetic with sessions on the inculcation of discipline, self-reliance, resourcefulness, nationalism and love of God.

This supplementary values formation program will continue on the secondary level to insure that, in addition to the higher learning therein imparted, the high school student never loses his or her mooring in the fundamental values of our culture.

I am told that in the school year 1983 to 1984, only 64% of the total high school age population of 4,886,401 youths had access to secondary education. We shall endeavor to make high schooling a commitment of the national government along with elementary schooling. And we shall try to achieve this without sacrificing quality.

On the tertiary level, we see a need to rationalize our state colleges and universities, which have grown tremendously in number but declined seriously in the quality of the education they impart. They put a tremendous strain on our national budget without a commensurate benefit to the educational improvement of our people.

I understand that the Ministry of Education is studying, alongside an integrated approach to public and private education, a flagship system for higher education. For instance, in the area of agriculture, which is our thrust, the Ministry will identify, with the help of the Agriculture Ministry, one national agricultural university, three zonal agricultural universities, 13 regional agricultural colleges and one technical agricultural institute in each province. This in short means marking out the best schools toward which the bulk of educational funding will be directed. Scholarship programs in such a system will also be improved.

I hope you will share mine and the Ministry’s enthusiasm for these programs. I know, however, that your chief preoccupation is your income. I must repeat my call for patience and cooperation. The previous government was liberal in its promises but it was also prodigal in the use of the funds that could have gone into the fulfillment of those promises. The future of better paid teaching was spent in the last election. I ask you now to join with me in recouping our losses, in gathering a new harvest of national resources so that many of your dreams and mine for better a country can be realized. We all suffered under Marcos. We must all sacrifice to recover from the experience. But if we persevere, we shall all, I believe, partake of the progress that lies our power to achieve.

This is our only country. The school youth in your charge are our only future. Stay the course with this government and our people and we shall have a country that we are not only proud of, but in which we shall enjoy the peace and fulfillment we have been long denied.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].