Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Upon signing of Private Education Assistance Bill

[Delivered on June 10, 1989]

A WORTHWHILE INVESTMENT

Education has always been the top priority of this government. This is the reason why the government is providing substantial assistance to private education. The President is positive that the Department of Education, Culture and Sports will work towards the smooth and speedy implementation of this law.

It is with a very special sense of pride and satisfaction that we sign into law this bill providing government assistance to students and teachers in private education, since we are aware that this represents in many different ways, truly landmark legislation.

It is in the first place a bold step forward into government providing substantial assistance to private education. This bill makes real in a very decisive manner the constitutional mandate for the integration of the public and private school systems, and recognizes what we have all known and taken for granted: that private schools serve as partners of government in delivering to our citizenry the public service of education.

This bill also represents perhaps the widest coverage of direct individual assistance to our citizens. When school opens this Tuesday, more than 1.7 million out of our country’s 2.5 million private high school and college students will get some form of individual assistance from government, in tuition supplements, textbooks subsidies, scholarships, and allowances. The impact of such concrete help to millions of families in an area as important to them as education will be felt throughout the whole country for a long time to come.

Finally, we are proud of this landmark piece of legislation, not just because of the product, but also because of the process. We know that the final shape of this bill was forged at the anvil of public scrutiny, with constant inputs in public hearings, media, and other venues from students, parents, faculty, administrators, and other concerned publics. We know it was forged in an atmosphere of sustained collaborative consultation, not just between both houses of Congress, not just among the different executive departments, but also between the legislative and executive branches as well, with technical groups working collaboratively and jointly to see that deliberations in different fora were proceeding within a common framework and objectives.

As we sign this bill into law today, we are aware that while it represents a meaningful first step to assist private education, much remains to be done. It is therefore not a panacea that will solve all problems, and not all will be happy. Schools will want larger increases, teachers will want greater protection, students will want wider coverage of tuition subsidies. But this represents the best and most realistic response to the present situation, and it now remains for the Department of Education to work towards the smooth and speedy implementation of this law, and for the beneficiaries to cooperate with this implementation positively and wholeheartedly.

Education has always been the top priority of this government. In the first budget approved by this administration, education was immediately restored to its primacy as the sector with the largest budget. The following year, legislation was enacted making public high school education free of tuition for its two million students, for the first time in Philippine history. This year, we are now assisting 1.7 million private high school students with close to one billion pesos. Unlike most other forms of government expenditures, the commitment of resources to the education sector does not produce instant results. But we are confident that when this commitment eventually bears fruit in the better educated generations to come, it will be vindicated as ultimately the wisest use of our resources.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].