Ang halaga ng kababaihan ay hindi masukat sa kanilang pisikal na anyo, kundi sa kanilang puso, isipan, at kakayahang magbigay-buhay. They are the nurturers, the builders of families, and the pillars of our communities. Their contributions to society are immeasurable, spanning across all sectors – from education and healthcare, to politics and business. 

Sa kasaysayan, ang kababaihan ay naging instrumento ng pagbabago at pag-asa. They have fought for their rights, challenged societal norms, and paved the way for a more just and equitable world. Their resilience and determination serve as an inspiration to all.

Kailangan nating ipagpatuloy ang pagtataguyod ng karapatan at kapakanan ng kababaihan. We must empower them to reach their full potential and create a society where they are valued, respected, and given equal opportunities. Ang kanilang tagumpay ay tagumpay nating lahat.

President Aquino acknowledges her country’s gratitude to the Asian Development Bank (ADB) which was the first to cast a clear vote of confidence for the country and to the ADB Women’s Club which perhaps influenced that decision.

She says that she is bent on proving male chauvinists wrong by showing that a woman can rule the Philippines effectively.

If it is true that behind every successful man, and every major decision a successful man makes, there is a woman, then our country owes much to the ADB Women’s Club. We will always remember that the Asian Development Bank was the first international lending institution to cast a clear vote of confidence for our fledgling government. The loan extended by the ADB to our country earlier this year, as well as the continued construction of the ADB Headquarters, was not only a signal to others to invest in the Philippines, it was an encouragement to all Filipinos as well.

I am pleased and rather flattered that the decision-makers in the ADB, who are predominantly men, chose to place their trust in a country led for the first time by a woman, and one that was a housewife at that. Perhaps I had a little help from their wives. For we women know what we are capable of. It has often been said that Marcos was the first male chauvinist to underestimate me. He was not the last to pay for that mistake.

One distinct quality I have observed in the men who would discount my abilities, diminish my role, or who cannot bring themselves to imagine that I shall rule this country for the entire term of a presidency, is their ability to out-talk me at every opportunity.

Take the old dictator. He out-talked me on all television channels, on all radio stations, in every crony newspaper and magazine in every city and province throughout our country. And his speeches, unlike mine, were always longer and more verbose.

And then lately, and I know you must have been aware of this, for they have said mouthfuls on TV talk shows, conventions, radio, print, and bullhorns in public places, there have arisen a crop of garrulous men with better and brighter ideas on how to run my government or what I should do with myself. And again their addresses have been longer, wordier, and delivered with more dramatic inflections, better-placed pauses, more body English than I could ever manage on a rostrum. For those who love to hear themselves talk do work hard at it.

But after all is said and done, or should I say, said and undone, I would like to think that I have managed to have the last word, and the last task of having to put things back in order after these men were finished.

All the bright people in this country, as well as those abroad who followed events here, had lists of those who might succeed Marcos. I was never on any of the lists. And I might add, it is not I who has been consigned to the bedroom of history.

As we women know, we have our own timing, our own ways, and our own worth. And that is why I say that our country owes much to you, and will continue to rely on your support. I speak not only of the civic projects that your association so generously and zealously finances and organizes, but also the help you extend to the country through your men in the ADB. And so I say, more power to you. And may we women continue to stick together in making this country a better place to live in for ourselves, our men, and our children.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].