Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy

[Held in Baguio City, February 19, 1989]

IDEALS FOR THE MILITARY

The President enjoins all Filipinos to dedicate the next generation of officers to the ideals of the Revolution: freedom, justice and national reconciliation. She urges the graduates to fight the enemies wherever they appear and threaten our people — the Communist terrorist in city and barrio, the right wing Conspirator in our military camps, and the lawless elements who seek to deny unity to our country.

This will be the last PMA class to have witnessed from this hill the great historic events that unfolded in our country below.

The Academy’s commencement exercises have been moved closer to the anniversary of those events. Not deliberately to connect the two events, yet the change has produced the deepest symbolism.

Now, each generation of officers must step forward and take their duties in the shadow of the People Power Revolution of 1986.

Now, each generation of officers must take their commissions under the burden of proving themselves worthy of that event, and the obligation to uphold the ideals it represents.

In that light, I ask all Filipinos to join in dedicating the next generation of officers to the ideals of the Revolution: freedom, justice and national reconciliation.

Three years after EDSA, the freedom is unquestionable. But the work of justice has barely started. And national reconciliation is still a dream.

Yet the duty stands, incumbent on officers and men, on President and nation, to complete the work of justice and realize the dream of national reconciliation in the fullness of freedom that we enjoy.

Those who made the Revolution may never see reconciliation completed. For some, the wounds have been too deep to ever heal completely.

Yet we cannot give up.

We cannot concede that we and our posterity must forever array our forces on lines of opposing views-the Left against the Right, and both against the Center. For this would be the ultimate betrayal.

It would be the betrayal of those who fought and died, he and many others, in the dark night of the dictatorship for just such a reconciliation.

It would be a betrayal of the spirit of the people who turned a near bloodbath into a miracle of compassion.

No, the work must go on—to reconcile the factions that still threaten to rend our society, and the opponents of democracy to our unshakeable resolve to make it endure.

But if we cannot mend the quarrels and divisions of the past, at least let us not hand them down to the next generation.

To the enemies of freedom, the armed opponents of our government on the Left and the Right, I address these words:

Let us sit down and try to settle our differences by talk, and if we cannot, by all means let us do so by arms. But let us not infect the next generation, in civil society and in the armed forces, with narrow causes and partisan hatreds from the past.

Let us save the future generations for the task that still needs to be done: to reach by the work of every Filipino hand the goal that once united us—a nation free and just and peaceful, united and strong.

Let us keep the future pure for that end, especially the future that stands before us today in the proud uniform of idealism and sacrifice-the next generation of officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

To the graduates of the Philippine Military Academy, Class of ’89, I say, You are leaving the walls of this Academy at a time when important changes are taking place in the country. You will step forth from this day into a country of refired hopes, of real progress, and of better prospects of peace than our troubled land has had for a quarter of a century.

As you come forward to receive your commissions, you will receive into your charge the gains that our country has made in the past three difficult years.

These gains are very important. They were made in the face of the gravest threats and the most daunting challenges. Every step forward was bitterly contested, and stoutly held. Not an inch of ground was surrendered. In three years, we reversed this country’s descent into economic collapse, political disintegration, and social revolution and started our ascent to the future.

It is so easily forgotten how bad the situation was. But those of us who have helped raise this country from desolation and despair remember it well. We built it up, stone by stone, in the teeth of our enemies, who mocked the halting progress of the country they had crippled. We plodded on, we persevered—to reach this day and beyond it to the future that we all seek.

Those who sapped the strength of this country will ask you to join them in exploiting its weaknesses. Ignore them.

Ignore them out of patriotism. Ignore them out of prudence.

This country, this government, and this leader have more strength than appearances suggest.

It is the character of democracy to look weak. It is the fate of its vanquished enemies to feel its strength.

Four years in this Academy have taught you your role in the scheme of progress. Your duty is to defend what your government and our people are building.

The intervention of the military in Philippine politics under the dictatorship and in the Revolution is supposed to have confused the military mind.

There is no confusion.

The military serve for honor and the sum of military honor lies in this: the professional soldier always obeys the Commander-in-Chief and never runs from a fight.

You have my orders. You know the enemy: the Communist terrorist in city and barrio, the rightwing conspirator in our military camps, and the lawless elements who seek to deny unity to our country. Fight them wherever they appear and threaten our people, our work, what we are striving to make of this country.

The battlefield is everywhere. That is the nature of the threat, the challenge to your intelligence and leadership. The mission is to protect our people and establish the social conditions of progress-law and order. The prize is the loyalty and respect of our people, the peace and prosperity of our country.

Your government cannot give you all the men and logistics for the task. You are expected to make up for the shortage of both with an excess of dedication and zeal. A lot will be expected of you, which only an extraordinary self-discipline and courage will enable you to fulfill.

You will be continuously under fire—from the guns of the enemy and the attacks of front organizations that seek to instill in the people fear and loathing, rather than confidence and respect, for the uniform you wear. At times it is you who will be painted as the enemy. But the discipline imbibed in this Academy will enable you to survive these assaults and complete your mission.

That discipline is also the key to breaking the insurgency. For what we seek to win in feats of arms are the hearts of men.

Let no one find in your actions faults that would prove to the people that the enemy is the better choice.

To the enemy, show the fighting qualities for which you have trained long and hard at the Academy. To the people show the utmost concern for their safety and the most careful regard for the human rights you are sworn to defend.

This is the fight into which you have asked to be called. All the rest is politics, of which this country is beginning to have too much.

The long grey line that passed in review this morning includes those of us, in or out of uniform, who share its spirit of total service. It extends beyond the graduates here to those who have passed before and left us memorials of their courage. It reaches farther back still to the birth of the nation, to the examples of our heroes, to the root of all service in the Republic: duty, sacrifice, and love of country.

Thank you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].