Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Philippine National Bank’s 70th Anniversary

[Released on July 22, 1986]

LAUNCHING A PEOPLE’S NATIONAL BANK

The PNB was established to counterweight the foreign banks that dominated the financial system. As the premier bank of the agricultural sector, it helped in the growth of the Philippine economy.

Now as it turns 70, President Aquino believes that with the right leadership the PNB can again be instrumental in the country’s bid for economic recovery.

The anniversary theme of PNB is Working Together for Economic Recovery and President Aquino reminds them that in her administration, economic recovery means “rescuing the majority of the Filipino people from the poverty and underemployment that wastes their potential for prosperity and growth.”

PNB’s new mission is’ to return to its traditional role as the mainstay of agricultural development; friend of the small farmers and small entrepreneur — be the People’s Bank.

When Joker gave me the PNB invitation, he said, “If you think EDSA was a miracle, look at this: PNB is turning 70.” I have had to work with cynics. But I am not surprised that the PNB has endured this long, even if it has to celebrate this anniversary in black. The PNB had built up such a fund of goodwill from the days of its establishment that only another year of Marcos could have finally done it in.

The PNB had a long and venerable history, closely tied to the aspirations of our people to be independent. Independent not only in the sovereign sense, but equally importantly, in the sense of being economically strong and progressive. It was established as a counterweight to the foreign banks that dominated the financial system. For many years, it served as a central bank. It was the custodian of other banks’ reserves, the sole depository of the government, and the clearing house of the banking system. Alone among the banks, it had powers to issue circulating notes. It played a key role in the post-war reconstruction of our country.

The PNB was the premier banker of the agricultural sector, which amounts to saying it banked the Philippine economy. Without the PNB, it is doubtful whether those traditional industries that were the main props of our economy, such as sugar and coconut, could have grown as rapidly as they did. That these industries did not have the prudence and, in many cases, the honesty, to build up wisely from such fortunate beginnings is no reflection of the public service rendered by the bank.

The PNB, like all instrumentalities of government, does not make policy. It is an instrument of policy made elsewhere. The reckless and profligate course it took under the previous regime should not therefore be blamed on it. What the PNB needed was a leadership worthy of its tradition of service. That is why I appointed Ting Jayme to be its president.

I felt that he was one of those who could bring the spirit of the new morality and patriotism that triumphed at the Revolution into such necessary instruments of Philippine progress as the PNB. He is the right man to lead you in the new course we have charted for it.

The theme of your anniversary celebration is Working Together for Economic Recovery. It would be good to remind ourselves that economic recovery and progress has been amplified, under this administration, to mean more than mere advances in production, income and the usual economic and financial variables. Our chief concern is rescuing the majority of our people from the poverty and underdevelopment that wastes their potential for prosperity and growth.

Within the context of this broad goal, the PNB’s new mission is to return to its traditional role as the mainstay of agricultural development, the friend of the small farmer and the small entrepreneur. To be the people’s bank. Its extensive branches networth and long experience in agri lending argues strongly for its success in this mission.

I understand, however, that a new direction is not enough. It must be reconditioned for its daunting mission. Your management has already submitted a rehabilitation plan which is at present being considered by the government. Essentially, the plan calls for the transfer of the bank’s non-performing assets and liabilities to the government, so that the Bank can have a fresh start. Whatever the final configuration of the plan, I can assure you that you will have an easier time with your NPAs than I will with mine.

We pledge that the Bank will never again be misused by government. But we won’t always be the government. I advise you therefore to use this period to rebuild your tradition of integrity and competence, and build it firmer than it has ever been in the past. Make this Bank impervious to anything but a sense of patriotism and responsibility for the common good.

I would like to congratulate you on your anniversary. I will not wish you success, because I know it is certain to come. I have put Joker Arroyo here as Chairman to keep me posted of the certain progress of this institution, since I know Ting Jayme to be also a very modest man. You have all the ingredients of success: professionalism, integrity, and leadership. I know that it will not be long before our people can again lean on the PNB for the requirements of Philippine progress, without fear that it will give way, and with every confidence that it will willingly support them.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].