Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To President François Mitterand of France — a State Banquet at Palais de L’Elysees

[Delivered on July 11, 1989]

GENTLENESS WILL TURN AWAY WRATH

Uniquely characterized by a courageous people and a compassionate army, the Philippine Revolution of 1986 nevertheless shares with the French revolution the “sudden popularity of self-sacrifice, the astonishing ordinariness of courage, and the solemn commitment to uphold at any cost the dignity and the rights of man.”

Monsieur le President, rest assured that I shall spare you another parallelism between our revolution and that of your forebears whose bi-centennial we celebrate. Perhaps, if the French Revolution had occurred three years earlier 200 years ago, such a comparison would have been irresistible, and the earlier revolution, inevitably, would not have come off too well against “the cheapest revolution ever” – a quick and bloodless revolution that stormed no citadel but simply walked away with freedom down a road.

After the Revolution of 1986, it seemed that something new had taken place, unprecedented in politics: revolutions had developed to the point of acquiring good manners. We still think so. But we cannot think anymore that thenceforth, tyranny in any country might be shown the door and freedom as quietly ushered in.

Recent events have shown that a rifle in the hands of a Filipino soldier facing his brother is a much less lethal weapon than a knife in a Central American election. And that tank commanders in my country respect the disparity between flesh and armor.

We see now that the bloodless character of the Philippine Revolution resulted from the interaction of a people with the sudden courage to stand their ground for freedom, and of an army with the unexpected compassion to yield its positions to a higher patriotism.

We see now that the wisdom of Solomon – that gentleness will turn away wrath – waited two thousand years to prove itself: but once only, in one revolution in a single country in Asia.

We see now that people will adopt the technique of liberation best suited to the temper of the times, to the weapons at hand, and to the nature of their adversary. And that the only things that successful revolutions have in common are the sudden popularity of self-sacrifice, the astonishing ordinariness of courage, and the solemn commitment to uphold at any cost the dignity and the rights of man.

It is these elements that liken a sanscullote picking up a cobblestone in this city two centuries ago to a sister kneeling on a highway in the shadow of a tank — in a distant Asian land, just yesterday.

What we shall honor on the 14th of July is not the victory of these values but merely the first affirmation of their centrality in our lives. For self-regard has proved more persistent than self-sacrifice; courage is unbearable for too long periods of time; and human rights must share the vulnerability of those who are the perennial victims of their violation — the poor, the weak, the people.

Speaking of my own country, the restoration of democracy has sharply curtailed, if it has not erased, the violations of human rights by the military. I cannot say the same for the heightened brutality exhibited by those who propose yet another revolution towards old people, women and children, and even to their kind. In mentioning two infamies of vastly differing magnitudes in the same breath, we do not suggest striking an accounting balance of respective responsibility. Yet it bears noting that the systematic use of terror as an instrument of policy has passed from a state that is now democratic to a cause that is indistinguishable from crime.

Yet, neither violation absolves or diminishes the other. We would do well to avoid the cynical dialectic that sets one wrong against another, in a spiral of accusations in which, as Camus said, “une seule chose ne change pas, la victime, toujours la meme..”

It is not a debate that the victims would enjoy. What should concern us is not the measure of blame on either side but how to stop it altogether on both. Certainly, our side has tried for a peaceful settlement of the insurgency on terms other than the surrender of our society to a movement that cannot distinguish between the battlefield and human communities.

Revolution and democracy have yet to correct the fallibility of human judgment and the weakness of the human character for taking advantage of fellow human beings. And so those who make revolutions must return to the fountainhead of the revolutionary enterprise — to France, to the event that proclaimed not just liberty and equality but the principle that gives them life: the recognition by all men of their essential fraternity.

May I propose a toast: to the French Revolution and to the people of France who gave us the dream and the impulse of human freedom. May I toast as well to the good health and continuing success of the President of France and of Madame Mitterrand, who perhaps understands better than anyone what liberation demands: the individual commitment of each and every one of us.

Mabuhay!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].