Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the awarding of the King Faisal International Prize to Senator Ahmad D. Alonto

[Delivered in Malacañang, March 17, 1988]

TRIBUTE TO A GREAT MUSLIM

A great Filipino and a great Muslim, Senator Ahmad D. Alonto was awarded the prestigious King Faisal International Prize for his tremendous services to Islam in the Philippines. This man symbolizes the wisdom of Islam and brotherhood among Filipinos.

We are privileged to honor today a great Filipino and a great Muslim, Senator Ahmad D. Alonto, who received the prestigious King Faisal International Prize for his tremendous services to Islam in the Philippines. As many of you know, Senator Alonto was one of those I wanted to appoint to the Regional Consultative Commission. But he declined most humbly, citing his age. I was sorry for it was the wisdom of his experience I wanted to tap in the Commission.

For over 30 years, Senator Alonto served our country. He was at the forefront of efforts to promote Islamic education, religion and culture and to advance the political and economic development of the Muslim Filipinos. His most recent service was as a member of the Constitutional Commission, where he worked hard for the recognition of Muslim regional autonomy.

The award conferred upon Senator Alonto establishes the common ground upon which the two great cultures of our country, the Christian and the Muslim, can unite: the ground of excellence in the pursuit of the progress and well-being of all Filipinos.

But, in preparing for these remarks, I learned from the words of King Faisal how much Muslims and Christians have in common, for he said:

“What does man aspire to? The good. That is in the Islamic Shariah.

“He wants justice. That is in the Islamic Shariah.

“He wants security. It is there also.

“He wants freedom. It is there.

“He wants progress. It is there.

“He wants remedies. They are there.

“He wants science. It is there.

“Everything is there, inscribed in the Islamic Shariah.”

Although I do not know Arabic, I can conclude that the meaning of the Islamic Shariah is the heart of man, for all the things that are there are in our hearts.

Today we are pleased indeed to honor a man who brings us all closer to the wisdom of Islam and the brotherhood of all Filipinos, Senator Ahmad Domocao Alonto.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].