TEAMWORK FOR DEMOCRACY

President Aquino outlines her agenda for 1990 in four words: momentum, mass, morale and maximization. These stand for strategic control of the enemy, mass-based forces to preserve momentum, improvement of morale of frontline soldiers, and optimum use of government resources. Given the magnitude and urgency of the task at hand, she appeals to soldiers and civilians alike to help each other in unity and solidarity to make democracy work for development. For this, teamwork and heroism are foremost.

I am honored to join you again this time to celebrate your anniversary. Congratulations to you all. I am aware that the Defense Department and the Armed Forces are striving hard to live up to their stated commitments to the presidency and the people.

For the first time in four years, there has been a substantial drop in the level of dissident-related violence in 1989, thus freeing more of our underprivileged people in the countryside from the clutches of uncertainty. The leadership of the underground movement has been decimated, and intrigue and demoralization have swept the enemy ranks.

Present indicators of the counterinsurgency campaign are positive and encouraging. Insurgency-affected barangays are on a steady decline. Similarly, the manpower strength of the enemy, as well as their armory count, continues to diminish.

Our victory is a tribute to both the soldier and the people. The people claim their peace and security from the services of the soldier. The soldier claims the legitimacy of his cause from the will of the people. This covenant was broken in the past. It has been resealed in the present.

I am grateful for the successful implementation of the National Reconciliation and Development Program. It is best that wounds are made to heal rather than that they be reopened to induce mortal encounters.

I would like to make special mention of the fervent determination of army engineers to finish the Lopez-Catanauan road in Quezon, despite their loss of comrades-in-arms in a treacherous ambush perpetrated by the New People’s Army. Thank you for this faithful response to government’s policy of peace and reconciliation with honor.

Despite the strings of victories, I must caution all against two important dangers that can shake the integrity of this covenant between soldier and people.

The specter of corruption and abuse still hovers over us, threatening to erode the meaningful relationship between the man in uniform and the civilian populace.

And then, I feel I must warn you against a possible disregard for the welfare of the innocent caught in the crossfire between our forces and that of the enemy. This latter danger has lost us a number of potential supporters who have accused the men in uniform of callousness. I ask the Defense Department and the Armed Forces to guard against these dangers and to resolve them as quickly as they arise.

Our agenda for 1990 can be capsulized in four words: Momentum, Mass, Morale and Maximization.

Momentum means we must not let up the pressure we have now exerted upon the enemy until we can attain strategic control and containment.

Mass means we must fully utilize our three-tiered defense organization consisting of the Bantay-Bayan, the territorial forces and the mobile forces to the extent that we can effectively preserve momentum.

Morale of our soldiers is what we should keep. For it, we must seek more ways to further improve the lot of the frontline soldier. I am glad to announce to you that I have just certified as urgent administration measures two identical bills, now pending in both houses of Congress, regarding expanded benefits to our veterans. House Bill 25553 and Senate Bill 1235 both provide for standardized and upgraded benefits for our military veterans and their dependents. My certification will hasten these bills’ passage and thus give our veterans the benefits long due them.

Maximization is the optimization of government resources by tightening the inter-sectoral and interagency linkages that support the counterinsurgency campaign, particularly the peace and order council system.

My fellow citizens, the Department of National Defense can be likened to our arms, strong arms that defend and help for the good and livelihood of the entire body. We can recall, just a few years ago, that we Filipinos joined arms at EDSA. Thus, joining arms became a symbol of our unity as Filipinos, and as siblings.

Today, let us relive the memory of EDSA. As we face this heavy task, let us join arms again. Let us help each other.

My friends, given the magnitude and the urgency of the tasks before us, and the amount of time and resources at our disposal, “magtulungan tayo” is more than a suggestion. It is an appeal which sums up our unity of purpose and our solidarity. But it is also our stirring battlecry expressing our plan of action. Because the daunting job that lies before us is nothing less than our country’s growth with equity, we have to be very sure that we are indeed working as a team.

Consider this: if we can’t help ourselves, who else will? The stark truth is that we must work together because we are one family, one economy, one government, and most importantly, one nation. Family, economy, government and nation. These are the living symbols that our people will not only accept but also energetically rally around and actively support.

There are those who criticize the government. They say government does not have a very clear vision of development. To them I say, there are none so blind as those who refuse to see. They refuse to see that it is already morning after a very long night for our country. They continue to live in the past because they are afraid of the present and even more afraid of the future. And so they continue to undermine what we are trying to build.

After three and a half years, we can finally say that our political agenda has been completed with the full restoration of our democratic processess and democratic institutions. It is now time to make the dream more appropriate to the times. To make democracy work for development.

Indeed, our vision is of one nation, of one society, and of one economy that is propelled forward by People Power. Of a free people capable of handling their heritage of freedom, united in goals and values, and forever vigilant against threats to rend their liberty apart. Of a government with the moral authority to lead the people without dominating or emasculating them. Of a constitutional democracy that equally exacts public discipline from its leaders and citizens, supported by a professional, patriotic and self-reliant military to guarantee peace and order. Of a national economy largely fueled by private initiative and resources. And towards this vision, we now aim for growth with equity.

The crucial challenge before us is to make the Philippines economically one. We shall pursue a balanced agro-industrial development, encouraging clusters of small and medium industries in the countryside. Private initiative shall be harnessed. And science and appropriate technology shall be applied.

The economic empowerment of the marginal sectors shall be our primary objective. This means that the economically disadvantaged, including the poorest 30% of our population, shall be the immediate beneficiaries of government attention and assistance.

We must not forget our brothers and sisters who lack everything. We will give them opportunities that may be even greater than those of our siblings who are well-off in their lives.

This is simply to declare that “those who have less in life should have more in terms of opportunities.”

Livelihood projects shall be established throughout the countryside. We will create as many jobs as possible within the constraints of our present resources. But the number of jobs available will grow with the continuing expansion of our economy.

Giving opportunities is not just providing employment. Giving opportunities is also giving life.

The modernization of our farms can be attained by linking them to processing sites and markets as well as modern small and medium industries. All the necessary infrastructure shall be provided, including irrigation, farm-to-market roads, effective delivery systems for farm inputs such as fertilizers, rural credit and rural electrification.

Teamwork must be foremost: among government agencies and between public and private sectors. We shall strive further to enhance coordination among government departments and between government offices and private organizations. Hand in hand, public and private agencies should be able to suitably and adequately respond to the basic and priority needs of different communities and districts.

In terms of our national security, the continuing tasks are clear:

We must first of all ensure that our communities are blessed with law and order so that the market economy will take root and grow in the cities and in the countryside.

We must protect the development programs of the government that they will have a lasting impact on the lives of the poorest of our fellowmen.

We must ensure that government has free and unimpeded access to far-flung rural communities that need urgent and efficient public services.

We must provide full security to the Agrarian Reform Program and ensure that this linchpin of social reform will not be railroaded by conflict and violence.

We must attend to the protection of the environment through the strict enforcement of laws governing the use of our natural resources.

We must continue to maintain a credible posture of long-term stability so that the country proves attractive to investors who will spur economic recovery.

The carriage of development therefore arrives, so to speak, pulled by the two horses of programs which maintain peace and order and programs which encourage development.

The Department of Defense and the Armed Forces of the Philippines definitely play vital roles in the accomplishment of these tasks. As your Commander-in-Chief, I realize that your burden is heavy. But the promise of success is more than rewarding.

My fellow workers in government, in order to achieve our vision for our country, I will have to ask from you and from every Filipino nothing less than acts of heroism. For the Filipino has proven time and again that he is indeed capable of sacrifice and valor. We have no need for super heroes, because a great country is made up of many small heroes, working together as brothers. No one person can accomplish this vision. For economic recovery, that recovery which spells growth with equity, let us link arms once more. Magkapit-bisig tayo, magtulungan tayo.

I salute the men of the Department of National Defense and the Armed Forces for all your achievements and heartily congratulate you all.

Long live the Department of National Defense!

Long live the Filipino!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].