NON-VIOLENCE: THE KEY TO PEACE

Non-violence is not the only force that can collect the power of the people and bring it to near overwhelmingly on an object. Religious fanaticism, class hatred, and military patriotism can serve as well. But only non-violence can achieve a moral purpose without compromising it, especially if that purpose is peace.

I am most grateful for your invitation to speak at Harvard. It was in Harvard where Ninoy found the leisure and atmosphere to reflect on the meaning of his prison years for his country. And it was from our home in Newton, so close to Harvard, that he made his final trip to bring home the fruit of his reflections.

He had written out his thoughts for an arrival statement. His statement said in part: “I have returned of my own free will to join the ranks of those struggling to restore our rights and freedoms through non-violence. . . . According to Gandhi, the willing sacrifice of the innocent is the most powerful answer to insolent tyranny that has yet been conceived by God and man.” He did not have a chance to read that statement. Instead he lay on the tarmac of the Manila International Airport, his head in a bright pool of blood, a vivid statement of his final testament on non-violence and a stark image of insolent tyranny’s response to it. Allow me therefore to tell you the story of non-violence in my country. It is the story of a man, my husband Ninoy. It is the story of a people who, with that stark image before them, still took the course of non-violence. And it is the story of Faith, our faith, that gave us the courage to take it to the end.

Ninoy, before he came to Harvard, had spent seven years and seven months in prison, each day an eternity to a man of his restless energy. It was there in his lonely suffering that he found himself. And it was partly what he read: Gandhi, Martin Luther King, and others. Much more though, it was the personal revelation that came to him as a result of struggle and prayer.

He came to Harvard to rest his thoughts in an atmosphere so different from his tiny cell in Fort Bonifacio. His conclusion remained the same – I shall return of my own free will to my troubled land to join the ranks of those struggling to restore our rights and freedoms through non-violence. It was the hard-earned gift he was bringing home to his people when he was shot down at the airport.

His assassins meant to steal that gift. Instead they ended up playing their part in a chain of non-violent events that was to purge our nation of dictatorship. Two million people threw aside passivity and fear and marched for ten long hours in his funeral procession. Until then, non-violence was the “unpopular alternative”. After that day of mourning it was the face of the Philippine revolution.

The ground swell of non-violent activism grew by leaps and bounds. Demonstrations multiplied. Already one of its strongest elements was emerging: the women. The women in the demonstrations reached across wire and human barriers to the impassive soldiers who kept sullen guard on what was happening. When you touch the humanity of your opponent, you find a way to his basic decency. That is the central part of non-violence change.

In late 1985 the announcement came of “snap elections.” In conventional political terms the opposition was not ready for snap elections. We did not have a unified political ticket. The Marcos political machine – with its guns, goons, and gold – seemed unbeatable. The regime also controlled television and most of the radio and press. It had control of the Commission on Elections and of everything else needed by a dictator who considered elections a public relations exercise for foreign consumption and not the essence of democracy for his people. But for non-violence the timing was correct. Any longer and the forces of conflict and polarization that were building up might have been uncontainable. And Marcos lacked the one thing he needed to keep power when confronted by the full force of non-violence. He did not have the people.

The Filipino people offered their lives to deliver the election from Mr. Marcos. In the case of Evelio Javier, an alumnus of Harvard’s Kennedy School, the offer was taken after he won his province for us. One of my campaign leaders was brutally gunned down; his thumbs and forefingers were slashed off so he could no longer make the Laban “L” sign. Across the land ordinary people, volunteer poll-watchers and campaign workers, offered themselves for the ultimate sacrifice. Women tied themselves to ballot boxes. Still the cheating went on. Authorities announced the results without counting the ballots. A desperate regime sought to construct a win for itself within the secret world of computers. But People Power was everywhere. And from the inner sanctum of the regime’s computer center, computer operators walked out in protest and sought sanctuary in the protective walls of a church. Nervously huddled together, they announced the fraud to assembled newsmen and foreign election observers.

Rally continued to follow rally. And when Mr. Marcos’s paid parliament announced his “election,” a million people assembled at the Luneta Park, where our national hero, Jose Rizal, another advocate of non-violence, was shot, to proclaim their true victory. I announced to them a campaign of boycott and passive resistance. To some it seemed tame. People’s blood was up. Yet what was irresistible was our determination and our numbers; what was irrevocable was his fate. I was advised to capitalize on the nation’s rage and direct it towards a confrontation with the Palace. But I believed that the path we chose to victory must continue to prefigure the end we had proclaimed: non-violent change and reconciliation. Marcos had claimed a hollow electoral victory; and in the final act he fell to the unique force of People Power.

On February 25, seven months ago, I took the oath of office. Across town, Marcos clung on for a few more hours. As I placed my hand on the Bible to take my oath, I knew deep within me that Ninoy’s death was indeed; as the Bible says, the dying seed that had to fall to the ground to bring forth new life. I don’t think that I need say how much I wished for myself and for my children that it had been Ninoy standing there bring sworn in. Yet I understood why it could not be.

Let me now examine more closely with you non-violence, and particularly its Filipino manifestation, People Power.

Imagine if we had come to power through the barrel of a gun. Yes, we could still have emptied the prisons of political prisoners; but would we not have had to fill them again with our new sworn enemies? How indeed could we have effected violent change without creating an opening for the communist insurgents? How, with two-thirds of our people below the poverty line, could we have asked them to come out to fight and then sent them back to their barrios when there was still not enough food in their stomachs and no decent set of clothes on their backs?

I make these points because it is wrong to see non-violence as somehow being the amateur political option. Despite all the wars that have been fought in the name of democracy, may I say that democracy’s essential values are peaceful and are best preserved by peaceful means. Yet I must also admit that a war conducted through non-violence cannot succeed merely through efficient organization. In our case, one has to look to wider roots in Philippine society.

Inevitably one starts with our faith and our Church. People Power is prayer power. That is the force that lifted it up and gave individuals and the mass the courage to do what they did. If you ask ordinary Filipinos for their recollections of the weekend of revolution, more likely than not, the images they recall will have a religious metaphor. For example, there is the story of the old man, with his lunch box in the crowd outside the military camps, breaking bread with a soldier. There were the indomitable nuns at every stage of the election and revolution. And it was the Cardinal’s call that sent hundreds of thousands into the streets to make themselves a human shield for the military revolt. There is the image of the military who joined us, clinging to the statue of the Virgin, for the protection that the guns slung over their shoulders could not give them against the impressive deployment of Marcos tanks that surrounded them.

The non-violence movement began, as I have said, with Ninoy’s funeral procession. From then on masses, religious rites on the anniversaries of significant dates, and a strong religious symbolism throughout, kept non-violence entwined with our Catholic faith. We believe that the revolution was a miracle. By that we don’t mean a flash of divine intervention. That would negate everything I have said about the steady build-up of the non-violence movement. But how, if not by a miracle, did a people find the courage that had eluded them throughout 14 years of abuse and shame? An aborted coup attempt by a brave handful of military leaders who had seen the light was not a promising start for the final act of the struggle. I, myself, had suspected we would have to pursue our campaign of boycotts and passive resistance through two or three difficult months before the dictator would topple from his throne. As one of our bishops has written, “The fact is that the revolution was a remarkably extraordinary event and when it ended four days after it began, no one – absolutely no one – could say that its results were what he or she had expected them to be four days earlier, when it all began.”

That may not amount to a miracle that will satisfy a theologian’s standards. But for the man or woman in the street and for us, politicians, at the center of the struggle, I cannot think of a better word.

Now let me offer some thoughts and predictions on the future of the philosophy of non-violence in the Philippines. My government, you will say, faces an armed and determined communist insurgency, an army impatient to get at them with military means, and the remnants of the right still loyal to Marcos. Faced with these, am I not going like a sheep to the slaughter by espousing non-violence and harmony as methods of government?

Non-violence is a strategy that is politically sophisticated, or I would not have entered the political fray with it. My political strength in the Philippines rests on my popular support. No traditional politician let alone Communist leader can come anywhere close to it. Despite the intimidation and fraud, the conclusion of the international observers, who have reconstructed the genuine electoral vote, is that I won by a historic landslide. Anybody who joined us in the campaign trail will know there was a quality of fervor that is absent from normal politics.

This comes from the niche I occupy as the result of my husband’s life, the circumstances of his death, and the nature of the political movement that grew from it. In other words, my support is rooted in People Power and what made it: the non-violent approach. It would be a foolish politician who jeopardized all that by reaching for a gun whenever he or she is challenged. Other people need guns precisely because they have not got my People Power. In the elections, Marcos had money but I had what he wanted and couldn’t buy: the support, the power of the people.

Does this mean that I reject the use of violence to solve political problems? Let me turn to the words of Archibald MacLeish: “How shall freedom be defended? By arms when it is attacked by arms; by truth when it is attacked by lies; by democractic faith when it is attacked by authoritarian dogma. Always and in the final act by determination and faith.”

I believe in the Christian doctrine of the just war. But that is a war that People Power would never oppose because it would be on the same side.

Let me outline to you the conditions under which I would resort to arms. The moral imperative of my Presidency is that we do not resort to violence where there is a peaceful way. There must be no slippage in our commitment to human rights, democracy, and the rule of law. For on these rest our moral authority and our power. When a handful of drunken Marcos supporters set up court for a few days at the Manila Hotel, the military, as a reflex action, brought up artillery. I could have drowned their revels in its thunder and still have been widely applauded for it. Instead I talked them out of their silliness. More significantly, we have tried all means at our diposal to strike up a dialogue with both the Communists and the Muslim separatists. There is a tacit contract between myself and the Filipino people: I would be the President of all the people and would keep power as I had come to it; through the popular will and the pursuit of peace.

Obviously it is a terrible strain on the military when they are asked to honor a suspension of active hostilities that the other side seems reluctant to follow. But the success of any later military action depends on the moral basis of a sincere effort to explore the path of negotiation to the utmost.

Non-violence is not the only force than can collect the power of the people and bring it to bear overwhelmingly on an object. Religious fanaticism, class hatred, and a militant patriotism can serve as well. But only non-violence can achieve a moral purpose without compromising it, especially if that purpose is peace. For all its unwieldy size, it cuts through to its objective with the precision of a surgical knife, neatly excising the cancer from the body politic without damage to the surrounding tissue. The healing comes faster as a result. Let me pursue this medical metaphor. Non-violence is suited to the political surgeon who wishes to heal the body and not punish its failing. If revenge is the purpose, then a blunter instrument is necessary. That was not our purpose. We wanted a change for the better and the swift healing of the wounds of the past.

Let me close with what would have been the last sentence of Ninoy’s arrival statement. It sums up and predicted the non-violent formula of our victory.

“I return from exile, and to an uncertain future, with only determination and faith to offer – faith in our people and faith in God”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].