A Time for Justice and Retribution

During an orchestrated attempt by misguided elements to take over some military installations and a commercial TV station, President Aquino urges the people to stay calm even as she orders legal action against all those, military or civilians, involved in the incident. Despite such coup attempts, she claims that a civilian government has been firmly installed and full constitutional democracy will be established in a coming plebiscite.

The situation is well in hand. People should keep calm.

Our troops, responding with exemplary speed, thwarted the attempt of certain groups of misguided military personnel to seize key installations. We have captured most of the perpetrators. They are now detained and are under interrogation. We have secured the installations they targetted: Camp Aguinaldo, Sangley Point, Fort Bonifacio and Villamor Air Base, where there was a brief firefight that took the life of one rebel soldier and wounded seven others. That base is now secured.

Their attempt has failed. While these elements were able to take Channel 7, the station is now surrounded by our troops. The rebels are strongly urged to surrender. Their situation is hopeless. Every moment of delay merely compounds the gravity of their crime.

We have reports that a loyalist crowd is massing outside Channel 7 to show support for the rebels inside, and that our people have also started to gather there. I urge everyone to leave the area and go back to work or stay at home. At any rate, I urge our people to leave. There may have to be intensive military operations around Channel 7. Do not stay in the area, you will be hurt.

This attempt reflects the inability of some elements, both in the military and in the civilian sector, to face the fact that civilian government is here to stay and that nothing will derail our effort to establish full constitutional democracy in the coming plebiscite.

Let me make myself clear on this matter: We shall not treat this like the Manila Hotel incident. I have ordered the Chief of Staff to proceed against the officers responsible for this act of rebellion in accordance with the manual of courts martial. The full force of the law will be applied to everyone, civilian and military, who is implicated in this crime. I have ordered their arrest and detention.

There is a time for reconciliation and time for justice and retribution. That time has come.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library