Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 13th Anniversary of the Development Academy of the Philippines

[Delivered on June 23, 1986]

SETTING POLICIES AND SYSTEMS FOR NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

President Aquino points out four areas of concern for the Development Academy of the Philippines: 1) public policy that meets needs of the people; 2) empowerment of the people to enable them to gain control of their lives; 3) public ethics or good government to restore true democracy, and 4) public management based on the policy that government should manage only what it can manage well and what the private sector cannot do as well or better.

I am told that the main weakness of the Development Academy of the Philippines is that it does not receive a budgetary allocation from the government. It must earn its keep by undertaking programs and projects for government as well as private institutions. Like any business, it must keep its customers satisfied; but unlike most businesses, it has a very limited, and in the case of the government, a very niggardly market. The lack of money has been the recurring threat to the survival of the Academy. As head of the post-Marcos government, let me say to you, Welcome to the Club. If you are expecting a favorable change in fiscal policy toward the Academy, let me also say, don’t hold your breath. Rather than offer you financial support, I give you instead the consolation of pointing out that your chief weakness may well have been the source of your greatest strength. Because you have stoutly resisted the financial comfort of a government subsidy, you have remained relatively free to carry out your mandate of supporting and nurturing the developmental forces at work in the nation, and of choosing your involvements according to the broad, disinterested and forward-looking criteria of a professional and multidisciplinarian staff.

In retrospect, the Academy remains with us today because its institutional design — strangely enough considering its Martial Law origin — allowed the Academy personnel the academic freedom to discuss and debate an unlimited variety of approaches to the nation’s problems. Although the Academy has also had a colorful history of strong and divergent ideological convictions, this appears to have in no way detracted from the integrity of its intellectual productions. Ideology has not distorted so much as increased the perspectives from which problems have been handled. In that regard, it is, like my cabinet, an interesting if often misunderstood body. I am as comfortable with the DAP as I am comfortable with democracy.

The DAP, as I happily remarked earlier, has always had a distant attitude to government support. Instead it feeds on challenges. In that regard, I have not come empty-handed.

As you all know, we have really just begun the revolution; the campaign and the rebellion were just the start. As the revolution shifts to the implementation of the vision that fired it, the government must now deal with nitty-gritty of the plans and programs to realize that vision. This is where, oftentimes, the resolve falters, and the vision is in danger of being lost or worse discredited.

The Academy is one of the few government institutions specifically mandated to sustain and guide the forces of development in our country. There are four areas of concern to which I should like the Academy to devote its attention.

The first is the area of Public Policy. Despite the continuing enthusiasm of our people about the new government, in the end its success will depend on our ability to formulate and implement the policies that squarely meet the needs of our people. Strangely enough, I am not deluged with policy proposals. Instead, I am surprised at the dearth of approaches to our problems, and most of these proposals are either tried and tested failures, or patently impossible to adopt in the light of our values, the balance of forces in our society, and our place in the geopolitical scheme of things. I should like to see, not only more creative and socially sensitive approaches to our social and economic problems, but also systematic studies and discussions of these approaches. In that way their implications can be fully assessed and weighed against one another. Only by allowing open and free discussion of public issues and policy proposals can we prevent isolated and rightly unpopular views from becoming final policy and a national calamity.

A second area of concern is the Empowerment of the People. In the February Revolution we experienced a wide and spontaneous display of outrage against the abuses of authoritarian government. People Power toppled a dictatorship. But today that power must still pay for the crimes and waste of the dictatorship. What we need to do to avoid a repetition of our recent tragic experience with uncontrolled government is to increase the control of the people over their lives — over the resources they depend on — in order that they can truly be free to act in their enlightened self-interest. And not only free to act, but to act effectively. That means the organized power of the small. The common people must be empowered and the government must help them be so. The Academy can help design effective and efficient ways of creating and strengthening rural and community organizations.

Empowerment also involves giving effective voice to the people. We must create mechanisms for continuously hearing and heeding the voice of the people. We must regularly take the public pulse through reliable surveys, such as the snap surveys the Academy has been undertaking since the Revolution.

It is not only the government that should know the public pulse, but the people themselves must be made aware of their collective opinion on important public issues, so that they can draw strength from the knowledge and find the resolve to act on these issues. The durability of the dictatorship rested on its success in keeping the people ignorant of their common opinion and collective strength on any issue.

Empowerment involves not only the collection of feedback from the people, but also the provision of feedforward, of information on what the government is doing through its hundreds of agencies and instrumentalities, and through its thousands of programs, projects and activities. The people must know what the commitments of government are; so that they will be empowered, and thereby emboldened, to regularly demand these of government. The aim of feedforward mechanisms is to eventually abolish the role of intermediaries, of “fixers” really, between people and government, and thereby make it truly their own. The Academy is in the best position to pioneer in this effort.

The third area of concern is Public Ethics or Good Government. The people launched a revolution to restore true democracy. By democracy they meant more than the right to periodically elect crooks and suffer their tenure until the next election, but the right to have honest government; preferably also wise, but at the very least “good” government. This government is, if nothing else, honest; and I am going to make sure it stays that way if I have to fire everyone to do it.

I created the Commission on Good Government to retrieve the wealth that government officials and government-connected individuals stole from the people. But that is not enough. We must go beyond restitution and punishment to prevention. The undoubted satisfaction that either will bring cannot offset the irretrievable waste of precious and limited resources and the damage to public faith in government. Nothing the PCGG can do will erase the $26 billion that was misspent or stolen and that we must pay.

We need to study in a systematic way the problem of graft and corruption that has been the way of government in the Philippines. And I am not impressed with the rationalization that that is the way of government in many countries of the world. If that is so, that is the problem the concern of another workhorse of the new government, the Presidential Commission on Government Reorganization under the able leadership of Minister Villafuerte, whose pragmatic creativity has impressed his colleagues in the Cabinet, myself included. The government bureaucracy must be organized to achieve results, not only to undertake activities. The flurry of purposive action in the past government of geniuses, so-called, is still burning a hole in our pockets and our memories. They generated a lot of heat, at great cost, but surprisingly little light. And no wonder, we now find out. What they were really doing needed the cover of darkness.

A fourth area of concern is public management.

The DAP has a long experience in studying the problems of government organization. Its inputs will be more than welcomed by the Reorganization Commission. My own input is simply this, government should manage only what it can manage well, and what the private sector cannot do as well or better.

If this has not satisfied your appetite for challenges, be sure that I have a host of others that will equally fire of their peoples; elimination of graft and corruption in our governments is our commitment.

We are racing against time. As you know, there are rumors already circulating of graft and corruption resurfacing in this government. I must say that those we have looked into appear to have been prompted less by well-grounded suspicion as by the burning desire of the informant to replace the accused as OIC. But I know the virus is there waiting for complacency to set in so it can break out again in epidemic proportions.

I have said that setting the example is a necessary measure to eliminate corruption. But it is not sufficient. The example of national leadership is not enough. It must be imitated throughout the bureaucracy of national and local governments, and by the people themselves in their dealings with government. If moral exhortation will not do, then we must impress on all and sundry that the public official whose favor you buy today will be bought tomorrow against you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].