Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the TOYM Awarding Ceremony

[Released on August 19, 1986]

AWARDS SHOULD GO TO THE RIGHT PEOPLE

The President believes that awards, whether given by the government or by civic organizations, must be given to those who really deserve them: recipients can either give distinction to, or disgrace, the awards they receive. At the TOYM awarding ceremony, she explains why she supports the idea of honoring excellence in the young, and informs the gathering about her move to refurbish the honors and laurels of the Republic.

Awards are intended to honor their recipients, but, if you think carefully about it, it is the recipients who give distinction to the awards they receive. Twenty-five years ago, Ninoy Aquino received the TOYM award. Between then and the present, quite a few other good men received it and a number of scoundrels as well. I point this out for two reasons.

One, it is good to honor excellence in the young. A person should know, before time has spent all his powers, what he has done right and well, while he has the energy to continue and build on that achievement. It is a mistaken prejudice to confine honor to a person’s later years. The drive for excellence is fueled by the thirst for honor and this is nowhere stronger than among the young. Why waste the chance to bring out the best in the race?

The second reason is that awards in this country have been cheapened rather than hallowed by time. Remember what I said about the recipients distinguishing their awards? The high honor of a Nobel Prize arises from its success over time in maintaining the purity of the intention behind it and equally from the distinguished list of the people who received it, and not just from the fact that an explosives manufacturer had the remorse to create it and the wealth to fund it. Even so, recipients can disgrace the awards they receive.

A lot of this happened during the Marcos years when there was a systematic attempt to cheapen everything of real value in our country. I remember hearing people dismiss the courage of the Opposition as insanity, and its persistence as the mark of born losers. A lot of these oppositionists had received high honors under the old Republic and they saw these honors distributed indiscriminately among people who rightfully belonged in jail.

I have started to refurbish the honors and laurels of the Republic. Two weeks ago, I rescued the Legion of Honor from the shameful places in which I found it, around the necks of people who should have been execrated rather than decorated. I therefore conferred it on Senator Lorenzo M. Tañada, whose acceptance of the award raised it once more to its rightful place as the highest civilian honor the Republic can confer. I am going to work on the others, too. I am sure I shall not lack for heroes given the scope of the February Revolution and length of the struggle that preceded it.

As with official honors, so with a great number of awards given by civic organizations. Time-servers have sat on their boards of judges and used these honors to cover up vices rather than point up virtues.

It was therefore with great pleasure that I read the list of the 1985 TOYM Awardees. The selections honor the judges and restore the original lustre to this prized object of youthful striving. To the awardees, I say that the harsh conditions surrounding your particular achievements—a country on the brink of civil war, an economy in ruins—will mark you out for the special admiration of our people for many years to come.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].