Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Necrological Service for Jose W. Diokno

[Delivered at Mt. Carmel Church, March 3, 1987]

MEMORIES OF A NOBLE MAN

Jose W. Diokno stood for many things: Constitutional democracy, justice and reason, hope for the oppressed, the majesty of the law, a brand of politics which mixes power with virtue, and the commitment to the highest ideals and the willingness to pay a high price for it.

He also taught the Filipinos precious lessons: being right is enough justification and reward; only with personal integrity can one do justice to others; cultural uniqueness is enough reason for nationalism.

Ninoy, in his Senate days, called him the brightest of the Senators. But after years of experience, after his world had widened to include the grief and oppression he shared with him, Ninoy revised his estimate and called Pepe Diokno the most brilliant Filipino. Ninoy would tell his friends that Pepe was “the one man he would unquestionably follow to the ends of the earth.”

Brilliant he was certainly. His power rested in his tremendous intellect and his unshakeable integrity. I remember how disheartened we all felt when Ninoy and Pepe and others who were detained with them were brought to the Supreme Court in the first days of Martial Law. The Government had all the power and had exercised it without limit. Congress had been padlocked. Senators and publishers had been arrested, along with thousands of others throughout the country. The law was our only refuge, but the lawyers had taken cover in that abject dictum of surrender: When the guns speak, the laws fall silent. So even there, in the seat of justice, in the last rampart of right, we felt the limitless power of a Government to hurt. Until Pepe Diokno stood up, a black toga draped over his shoulders. Immediately, one felt the cause of law and justice pass from the Court to the accused standing before them.

I do not remember what his arguments were, but I cannot forget the power he exuded. It was the power of right and integrity. Constitutional democracy had found its proper champion. Here was a man equal to the nobility of its cause.

Pepe Diokno would always be equal to the nobility of any cause he espoused.

Whether it was the cause of human rights, constitutional democracy or nationalism, the argument ad hominem would always fail if Pepe was there to defend it. The name of Diokno was a warrant that the cause he defended deserved respect, and, for many Filipinos, unqualified support. If Pepe believed in it, there was sure to be justice and reason in the cause. Time and the truth never belied this first impression.

For those with longer memories, Diokno, in the days of the Old Republic, prefigured the kind of politics that would be possible in this country only after the painful experience of dictatorship. Diokno represented the possibility that you can mix power and virtue, intelligence and popularity, professed devotion to the highest ideals with the willingness to pay the highest price for such commitment.

For those who enjoyed the hospitality of the dictatorship in safehouses, whose anguished cries were heard by no one except the laughing torturer, Diokno was the name of hope. Hope that his or her case would reach him before they were totally broken in spirit and body.

To the men of the law, who stood by the Law, at a time when it had fallen into the deepest disrepute, he was the living example of its majesty. They tell of his prodigious memory that allowed no precedent or statute to escape enlistment in his cause; of his relentless logic and of majestic eloquence from which the corrupters of the law could find no defense except naked power.

Marcos jailed him after Martial Law. To the uninformed, Shakespeare’s saying: ‘The first thing we do, let’s kill all the lawyers,” is an indictment. It is in fact a tribute to the profession as a shield against oppression. Those who conspire against freedom can do no better than to silence its best protectors. Marcos knew that jailing this lawyer was the first priority in his scheme of dictatorship.

We have learned a lot from Pepe Diokno.

Why should we fight against impossible odds? Because being in the right is its own justification and reward.

Why should we be nationalistic? Because no other people will really ever see things from the standpoint of the Filipino.

Why should we put such a premium on our personal integrity, when it is so ill rewarded in this world? Because we cannot avoid seeing our own faces and living with ourselves. Because if we cannot do right by ourselves, by our souls, we cannot do justice to others.

We will miss him. As has been said, “When a great tree falls, we are surprised to see how meagre the landscape seems without it. So when a great man falls.” And yet the enemies of his ideals cannot rejoice. For Diokno, like the true lawyer, provided well for the contingency of his death. He has left a a growing movement to fight on for the ideals of our nation and the principles of our democracy. He has left us his family, whom he has carefully prepared to carry on his struggle. No one can carry the entire burden of his mission, but his wife and each of his children, and each of us who loved him, are here to carry the portion we can bear.

On the personal side, I owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to Nena Diokno. She was the pillar of strength and courage on which I leaned in the dark days of our husbands imprisonment. Her brave insistence on our right to dignity and access to our husbands showed me that the end of fear was the beginning of freedom. My gratitude to her and her children must be shared by all who were inspired by the brave work and example of Pepe Diokno, for no man could have borne his sufferings and endured the sacrifices he imposed on himself without his family to support him.

This humble tribute we pay to this noble man and great Filipino must be shared by his wife and children.

To you Nena, and you, Mench, Popoy, Pat, Maris, Maitet, Cookie, Mike, Chel, Maya, and Martin — Pepe’s private army for civil liberties, justice and nationalism, my deepest thanks for all the support and inspiration you gave me. For as long as we remain true to his ideals, for as long as we are Filipinos, he will never die.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].