Tawi-Tawi February 26, 1988

A JOURNEY TO PEACE

As the first Philippine President to visit Tawi-Tawi, President Aquino discusses what the government is doing to address the needs of the province. A service and action program, launched in January 1988, will give the people of Tawi-Tawi greater access to basic services such as water, electricity, health, education, agrarian reform, irrigation and infrastructure. The President urges the people to join the government in working out a genuine autonomy law for Mindanao. The country needs their ideas, their revolutionary zeal and energy so that Mindanao and the entire Philippines can be transformed into a land of peace and prosperity.

Peace be upon you.

It was not very easy to persuade the people responsible for my safety to permit me to come to Tawi-Tawi. But I am glad that I had this opportunity to visit your lovely island.

I have listened carefully to the concerns expressed by your local officials and sectoral representatives.

Let me say, first of all, that although this is my first trip to Tawi-Tawi, I have kept myself informed about the urgent needs of your province.

You are, perhaps, aware that I have been talking, over the last month, to community leaders from all over Regions 9 and 12. These were the candidates proposed for appointment to the Regional Consultative Commission, the body which shall help Congress formulate the organic act for autonomy in Mindanao. I must have met, by this time, with over 110 such community leaders.

At these meetings, I always tried to probe perceptions of community needs. I learned, for instance, about the pitiful lack of safe, drinking water in many places in Mindanao.

As a result of these meetings, we launched on January 15 a service and action program designed to give the people greater access to basic services.

I know that here in Tawi-Tawi the water district of Bongao can service the nearly 5000 households within its coverage for only one to two hours a day. I have directed the local water utilities administration to undertake the rehabilitation of Bongao’s water system.

Since this project will take some time to complete, I have also directed the Department of Public Works and Highways to begin the construction of artesian wells.

I also asked for a report on the status of power service in Bongao. It might interest you to know that within a month of the launching of the service and action program, the National Electrification Administration was able to reach an additional 500 households. But right now you can get power for only four hours a day.

By the end of April, an additional 1000 households will benefit from electric service. And by this time, electricity will be available for 12 hours, from four to nine o’clock in the morning and from five o’clock in the evening to midnight.

Expanded water and power services provide only two examples of the projects currently underway in Tawi-Tawi today. The Department of Health is constructing main health centers in Sitangkai and Tandubas, repairing the Cagayan de Tawi-Tawi hospital and expanding the Languyan municipal hospital. It is also completing the construction of a kumpit clinic. By next month, this kumpit clinic will be sailing to the coastal communities of the province to provide basic health care services.

The Department of Agriculture will start construction work this month on a water impounding system for irrigation in Magsaggaw and Bato-Bato, Balimbing.

The Department of Education, Culture and Sports has enrolled in selected private high schools over 150 students who could not be accommodated in the public school system. As part of its outreach program, it will start next week the first of ten literacy classes it will conduct this year for 250 participants.

The Department of Environment and Natural Resources has prepared over 250 land patents for distribution in Bongao alone. It is also working on a coastal reforestation project covering 1200 hectares in Nipa-Bacauan.

The Department of Transportation and Communications has just completed work on the water system at the Sanga-Sanga airport. Arrangements are being made for the asphalting of the runway at this airport, a project which will make air travel to the province less dependent on weather conditions.

I have mentioned here only those projects which have been completed, which are underway, or which will start within the next four weeks. Other projects are scheduled for start-up or completion within the current fiscal year.

All the frontline agencies of the government are involved in the service and action program. In addition, the Department of Budget and Management, the Commission on Audit, and the Department of National Defense have been instructed to give full support to the implementing agencies.

I trust that the projects we have started meet your needs. They are small projects, many of them, but they have been chosen because they can have an immediate impact on the life of the community. I offer them to you as concrete proof that Cory Aquino cares.

I understand that no Philippine President has ever visited Tawi-Tawi until today. I hope my presence here today sends a clear and unmistakeable message. Tawi-Tawi is part and parcel of the Philippines. Cory Aquino is as much the President of Tawi-Tawi as she is of Tarlac. And Cory Aquino will abide by her sworn duty to protect the territorial integrity, national sovereignty and democratic constitution of the Philippines.

But Cory Aquino and the government need your help. The line agencies have made many promises to implement projects in Tawi-Tawi. I intend to hold them to their promises. You must help me keep them on track.

We will let you know what projects have been planned and what funds have been budgeted for Tawi-Tawi. We expect you to let us know when performance falls short of promises.

But tell us also of the successes. The bureaucracy deserves your support and encouragement. And if we can pull together, we shall make a difference and help bring peace and prosperity to the Philippines, from Aparri to Tawi-Tawi.

Before I conclude my speech, I would like to address this message, in the name of God the most merciful, the most kind, to our brothers, especially those who are abroad working at cross-purposes with us. Come and join us at the drafting table. Let us work out a genuine autonomy law for Mindanao — one that steams from the wellsprings of our people and one that is not imposed upon them. We need your ideas, your revolutionary zeal and energy not only for Mindanao, but for our entire country as well, to transform the Philippines into a land of peace and prosperity where equality and justice can reign supreme.

And to the rest of our countrymen, I would like to reecho the words of the late Desdemona Tan Abubakar, wife of Chairman Nur Misuari before she passed away last year. She asked us to look beyond 1521 and rediscover our roots. There is so much we can learn from the rich heritage bequeathed to us by our Mindanao brothers including our other cultural communities who never gave in to Islam nor succumbed to western colonization. They have to this day remained true to their traditions – traditions that we as a nation should respect and be proud of. By so doing, we can discover that we are truly brothers and sisters sharing only one homeland: the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library