Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Luncheon with World Bank Officials

[Delivered on February 15, 1989]

OPTIONS FOR GROWTH

The President welcomes President Conable and his party to the Philippines and expresses her gratitude to him and the World Bank group for the assistance extended to the government to support the country’s economic recovery, as well as for services through consultations, project missions and studies.

We are pleased to welcome President Conable and his party to the Philippines at a time of promise and continuing challenge.

In the autumn of eighty-six, I had the privilege of meeting with you, Mr. Conable (and Mr. Larossiere, your former counterpart at the International Monetary Fund), in Washington, D.C. We discussed the broad objectives of my government and the policies taken to reverse the debilitating decline in income and production bequeathed to us by the previous administration. You welcomed our restoration of democracy and endorsed our efforts to rebuild the Philippine economy. Shortly thereafter, your bank extended financial assistance to support our economic recovery.

By the end of 1988, the World Bank had approved 9 loans to this government for a total commitment of US$998 million. During this period, the international Finance Corporation of your World Bank group had also extended direct support to 10 private enterprises in the Philippines, through equity, loans, and guarantee operations, amounting to cumulative commitments of US$109.89 million. Your staff had rendered a wide-range of services through consultations, project missions, and studies that had contributed to our deliberation of policy options and formulation of projects. We are therefore grateful to you and the World Bank group for this rich range of assistance extended to my government.

From the nadir of three years ago, our economy has bounced back. Output is up for the third year with unemployment declining. Private enterprise has been reinvigorated by major political and economic reforms. Investments have recovered with business confidence restored. Exports have accelerated as inflation is kept within bounds. While this performance may stand out among heavily indebted countries, more needs to be done.

A majority of our people still live in poverty. We have to improve their condition and ensure that growth is broadly based to better their life. More jobs need to be created to absorb the unemployed and the 700,000 new additions to our labor force each year. Agrarian reform has to be accelerated with ownership broadened to millions of landless farmers. They in turn must be supported and transformed into self-reliant producers.

The thrust is to open up opportunities for harnessing their productive energies and channelling these to income generating activities. This would provide the foundation for enduring improvement in the well-being of all our citizens. The majority in poverty must have a stake in the creation of wealth of the nation. Their alienation from this process was the seed for insurgency that tears at national cohesion and drains limited resources from productive enterprise. Growth therefore has to be sustained with equity.

This task is fundamentally ours and best served by promulgating efficiency and productivity in the economy. However, our resources are severely constrained, with up to 30% of our foreign exchange receipts used to pay our external debt and 43% of our budget diverted to service both our external and domestic debts. For us to succeed, continuing assistance from the international community is essential.

To obtain the necessary inflows required for sustaining growth, we shall continue to work closely with the international community and the World Bank. With them, we will develop projects and programs deserving of support. Given our large overhang of inherited debt, it is imperative for us to maximize recourse to highly concessional assistance. We shall also continue to explore options with our creditors for debt reduction schemes to alleviate debt constraints on our growth. We look forward to initiatives from the World Bank in addressing and resolving this problem of debt.

President Conable, I have been informed of your heavy schedule and that of Mrs. Conable for the brief duration of your visit. Before your departure you would have met with government officials, members of the legislature and the business community, non-governmental organizations, and our lively press. You would have visited some project sites and acquired direct knowledge of poverty and environmental problems in the Philippines. In your dialogues and visits, you will gain insight into issues, problems, and how these are resolved in our democratic setting. With your long and distinguished service in the U.S. Congress, I am confident that you will appreciate the political process involved in arriving at national decisions on policy choices and look forward to your trip as a meaningful one that will be reflected in greater world bank support for projects and programs sensitive to our political environment.

Ladies and gentlemen,

May I invite you to a toast in honor of his Excellency, Mr. Barber Conable, President of the World Bank, and Mrs. Charlotte Conable, for their continued good health, happiness and success.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].