Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On a Toast in Honor of Premier Vander Zalm of Canada

[Delivered on November 4, 1989]

VANCOUVER AND MANILA: A SPECIAL ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP

President Aquino’s trip to Canada is both a business and a symbolic trip. It is symbolic, because it is a commitment to Canada’s ideals: human decency, peace, and freedom. President Aquino imparts a message from the Catholic Bishops Conference denouncing the human rights violations of extremists, a deep concern for both Canada and the Philippines. The visit is also a business trip: President Aquino thanks Canada for all their support, invites them to visit the Philippines and proposes a special economic relationship between Vancouver and Manila.

Premier William Vander Zalm, Mrs. Vander Zalm, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

We are linked by a mighty ocean and tied, if we are up to the challenge, to the same bright future. The Pacific makes us neighbors. And so you might say, despite the enormous distance, that this visit is a neighborly visit.

The beauty of Vancouver alone was enough to delight us, but the added warmth of your hospitality has made me feel right at home here in Canada.

But this trip is mostly business. Its purpose is to deepen the acquaintance of Canadians with the country they have helped so much. It is also symbolic.

Because of its singular dedication to the world causes of human decency, peace, and freedom, any official call on Canada is a commitment to the ideals it pursues. Before I left the Philippines, the Catholic Bishops Conference issued a very strong message on an issue that is of deep concern to both our countries. That issue is the use that extremists on both sides make of the human rights violations of the other. In every violation of human rights, at least one side wins by accusing the other. The only consistent losers are the innocent victims of extremism.

It is a strange logic that seeks to establish the rightness of one side only by showing the wrongs committed by the other.

This has to stop. Both sides must stop rejoicing over each other’s crimes and realize that they stand, in the eyes of all good men and true, as nothing more than criminals. This is the call issued by the Catholic Bishops Conference.

I thought it appropriate to start my visit to North America with their message.

We have many other things to talk about. Trade relations between our two countries can be much improved. But it is in keeping with the Canadian moral tradition to take up first those transnational issues that make Canada and the new democratic Philippines respected moral voices in the world.

But I came to Canada also to express our thanks for the support it has given the Philippines. That support, you may be pleased to know, has paid off handsomely. Not only is the democracy to which you gave your support and well-wishes firmly entrenched, but the Philippine economy that had been in shambles has been rebuilt and is well on the way to full recovery.

I would like to invite more Canadians to visit the Philippines, for as the beauty of Vancouver indeed defies description, may I say with pride that the beauty of my country invites comparison with yours. Canadians are known to be indefatigable travellers, especially to Thailand and Japan. Well, between Thailand and Japan lies another country – blessed with a sun that sets more splendidly than anywhere else, and with millions of other stars that shine as warmly in the smiles of its people. I would like to invite Canadians to get to know my country better. Perhaps the best way to start this is for you, Premier Vander Zalm, to accept my invitation to visit the Philippines with your family. I understand that this is how foreign investments were first attracted to other Asian countries – by the favorable reports of travellers about the friendliness and industriousness of the people and the ideal conditions for enterprise.

There is an important place for Canadian enterprise and capital in the Philippine economy. An ideal partnership beckons between two countries that have a common language, a similar political heritage, and which share the same lake of opportunities in the Pacific.

We must strengthen our ties and expand the network of our relations. Any such expansion must naturally pass through Vancouver – Canada’s window to the Pacific. I propose therefore that a special economic relationship be established between Vancouver and Manila by our respective trade and industry ministries and by those in education and culture. Surely the cultural life of our countries have as much to offer as our manufactures.

Ladies and gentlemen, I would like you all to join me in a toast to the continued good health and happiness of Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II of Canada.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].