Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the ASEAN Accountants

[Delivered at the PICC, November 29, 1988]

TO TELL THE TRUTH

The President exhorts her audience of ASEAN accountants to contribute their analytical skills in realizing the ASEAN dream. She says that they are the best placed of all sectors to advise the leaderships of the ASEAN states on the steps that should be taken to bring ASEAN nations faster and more safely to their dreams.

She advises them not to bend to tremendous pressure from their inflexible standards of truth. For theirs is the higher calling, to tell the truth.

It has been almost a year since the six leaders of ASEAN met here to forge a more meaningful role for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. In my own remarks at that summit, I expressed the view that “the key to ASEAN’s strength, to its increased recognition as a respected force in international affairs, is the economic progress of each and every one of its members.”

I was speaking as the new leader of a country that had been less fortunate than all the others in its leadership. A country that fell behind the region it was leading. But it is also, now, a country whose recovery and continuing progress bespeak the effectiveness of its secret of success.

That secret is the truth, the truth that sets all men free; the willingness to face the facts, and tackle them fearlessly and without hesitation.

I am pleased and honored to be addressing a profession whose first and last duty is the discovery and fearless presentation of the truth: the accounting profession throughout ASEAN.

It is your function as accountants to track fearlessly and impose coherence on the myriad facts generated by the economic activities of your respective countries and of the region as a whole. As you know, it is ASEAN’s dream to have a regional complementary economy. That dream has eluded us up to now.

The reason is that we know, without grasping the details, the obvious fact that our countries have developed unevenly. As a result, if we were to push the complementation of our economies, all we would achieve is the subordination of some of them to the others. Rather than knit ASEAN more tightly together, this unequal relationship will be the force that will finally split ASEAN permanently apart

Worse, we do not even understand sufficiently each other’s economies. As a result, our plans are at best vague aspirations that are too risky to implement as they are. As a further result, we begin to lose faith in the ASEAN dream.

What is needed therefore is a clearer and more detailed grasp of the ASEAN economies. With that certain grasp, we can then make, as a regional organization, the right decisions that will finally realize the ASEAN dream.

This is what you can help us achieve. You command the information about our economies, down to the last detail. You command the analytical skills to make sense of this information. You are the best placed of all sectors to advise the leaderships of the ASEAN states on the steps that should be taken to bring us faster and more safely to our dreams.

The mass of information generated by the vigorous growth of the ASEAN economies, a vigor now shared by the Philippines, increases geometrically and makes correspondingly greater demands on your information gathering and analytical capabilities.

Under this tremendous pressure, you must not bend, even an inch, from your inflexible standards of truth. Only the unvarnished and even painful truth can help ASEAN achieve its aims.

Potential investors in the regional economies turn to the accounting profession for advice. This adds to the pressure of each national profession to downgrade the economies of the other countries, and play up its own economy. Such one-sided judgments detract from the honor and dignity of the profession. Yours is a higher calling: to tell the truth, in the unwavering confidence that the people who listen to you will act right accordingly.

This is what I ask, more particularly, of the Philippine accounting profession: be accurate, so we can know how far we have gone as a nation and what our mistakes have been to avoid repeating them. Above all, help us, as businessmen, to know what our obligations are to ourselves, to our posterity, and to the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

I wish this conference every success. Good day and God bless you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].