Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 52nd Anniversary of the Philippine Air Force

[Released on May 2, 1988]

COURAGE AND LOYALTY

On the 52nd anniversary of the Philippine Air Force, the President recalls how in February 1986, the air force did the extraordinary by heeding the call of the country and people against the insistent orders of a corrupt and illegitimate government to destroy them. She orders the decentralization of the armed forces by abolishing the Regional Unified Commands. She intones that adequate resources should be available whenever the need for them is most pressing. She lauds the PAF’s eagerness to fight for honor, duty and country.

Today marks the 52nd anniversary of Lt. William L. Lee’s test flight on the first aircraft to bear the insignia of the air arm of the Philippine Armed Forces. This was the birth of the Philippine Air Force. The plane was a basic trainer, a rudimentary aircraft. The event was symbolic because, in its subsequent history, the Philippine Air Force would always be short on equipment, but long on courage and loyalty.

When the Japanese Air Force struck in 1941, the first thing the PAF pilots and cadets reached for were – not planes but rifles. Kulangnanamansamakina, ngunitsobrasakatapangan. Nevertheless, the PAF got six planes off the ground and went into hot pursuit of the enemy that outnumbered them 3 to 1. In this hopeless dogfight, one of our pilots, Lt. Gozar, got his machinegun jammed. As usual, defective equipment. In that situation, the ordinary fighter pilot just heads back for home. Not the Filipino. Instead Lt. Gozar tried to ram a Japanese fighter with his plane. The Japanese, who belonged to the bravest breed of warrior in thehistory, fled from the scene of combat. Probably not out of fear, but surprise.

Two days later, another Philippine hero, Lt. Cesar Basa, although low on fuel, joined a dogfight on the way back from a reconnaissance mission. He had no duty to be there, but then the Filipino airman has often performed over and above the call of duty and the adequacy of logistics.

In February, 1986, the air force did the extraordinary again by heeding the call of country and people against the insistent orders of a corrupt and illegitimate government to destroy them. In the succeeding two years, the Air Force, resisted the call of a misguided camaraderie and stood by its historic decision to stand by the people and democracy. In that time of deep uncertainty and confusion of loyalties, I was at least certain that our forces on the ground would always be safe from any threats from above.

This brief history of the Philippine Air Force shows its basic belief that what a soldier needs and must always have to get his job done, are courage and loyalty. Superior equipment has sometimes decided the outcome of a battle, but only the courage and loyalty to commit will decide whether the battle will take place at all.

“Making do” has always distinguished the PAF, coming into a fight on a wing and a prayer has often been its lot, but the country can always depend on the Air Force to give everything it’s got in the wars the country calls them out to fight

It is time to arm that courage and skill with equipment and firepower that will do them justice. In last year’s State of the Nation Message I asked the Congress whether it is fair to expect men to fight without giving them the means to do it well I underlined the essential unfairness of sending our boys to battle without providing the Medevac to get the wounded out to safety. The budget that was submitted by the Department of Defense, I was assured, incorporated these concerns. In reviewing the Defense Budget for the next year, I shall look very closely to see how well the higher defense budget has been utilized to improve the condition andfighting capability of our soldiers, and shall take into serious consideration what else may be needed.

With regard to the utilization of resources, I ordered the decentralization of the Armed Forces by abolishing the Regional Unified Commands. It is my hope that adequate resources will always be available wherever the need for them is most pressing. I want the generals to make their presence felt among the troops who are fighting. I don’t want any bottlenecks in the bureaucracy. The age of pencil pushing and paper filing in the AFP is over. The premium now is on combat. Recognition and rewards will be given strictly on that basis.

The new spirit of the AFP expressed by me at the PMA and on AFP day has already achieved notable successes. The capture of the top leadership of the Communist insurgency is one. The complete neutralization of the rebels in the military is another.

That spirit should be familiar to the Philippine Air Force because it is the unbroken thread that runs along its entire history: the eagerness to fight for honor, duty and country.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].