Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the 50th Anniversary of the Philippine Air Force

[Delivered on May 2, 1986]

GIVING PEACE A CHANCE

The Philippine Air Force on its 50th anniversary should be honored for the things it did in December 1941 against the superior forces of Japan and for defying the orders to attack the rebel camps in February 1986. Because of their sense of high duty and honor, they were instrumental in tapping the balance in favor of democracy.

The Republic honored the Philippine Air Force by calling this base “Villamor” for what the air force did on December 10, 1941. Captain Jesus Villamor and 5 other Filipino pilots took off in their P-26’s from the flaming wreckage of their base and engaged the overwhelmingly superior forces of the Empire of Japan.

Today we honor the Philippine Air Force for what it did not do during those fateful days in February when the life of this nation hung in the balance and the air force tipped the scale in its favor. Ordered to attack the rebel camps on EDSA and the people who had massed to protect it, the helicopter gunships under the command of Colonel Sotelo swooped down on the camps and landed. And declared for the rebellion and democracy. The rest of the Air Force followed suit.

In both instances, in December 1941 and in February 1986, the Air Force took the initiative to protect our people and their freedom. In both instances, it refused to accept the situation. In December 1941, the situation called for resignation to defeat. In February 1986, the situation called for obedience to orders. In both cases, the Air Force refused to accept the situation and acted on the promptings of its sense of higher duty and honor.

It seems that lately in our history the Filipino people have looked up at their skies for deliverance.

Ninoy came down from the bright noon sky in a China Airline flight with a message of reconciliation and peaceful transition to democracy. He arrived at martyrdom and thereby galvanized the nation to fight for freedom upon his unique terms of peace and reconciliation.

In the angry months that followed, the people marching in the streets to protest the latest shameless act of the dictatorship looked up at the tall buildings for those signs of solidarity, the yellow confetti.

And in February, the people massing around the rebel camps in EDSA watched anxiously as helicopter gunships made straight for them and then landed to join them. The Air Force had denied the sky to tyranny, just as the people had denied it the earth. The circle had closed. All the forces of Philippine society had joined in the cause of democracy.

Isolated, with nowhere to turn, the dictator and his wife, and their armed retainers and flunkeys, took to the skies for exile.

Now democracy is covered on every side, and above, by the forces of peace. Now our people can devote themselves single-mindedly to the long delayed task of making this country as prosperous, just and progressive as it richly deserves to be.

The task requires that this nation has peace, as much as our pride as Filipinos demands that it shall always be democratic. Our new democracy has been criticized because it is tolerant of agitation. This is regarded by certain ignorant quarters as weakness. It is not. It is the clearest sign of our concrete, confidence in our strength. The pinpricks of bought and benighted loyalists will not provoke us to violate the basic principles for which we struggled and make us no better than the tyrant we deposed. The attacks of obstinate fanatics will not deflect us from our course to lasting peace. The Armed Forces know how to defend our people. And they will, but without jeopardizing the peace initiative we have made. No one loves peace more than the soldier who is the first and last to taste its horrors.

We shall give peace a chance. One more chance and we will give it our best effort. This nation cannot continue in its agony. I am glad to deliver this message that we shall persevere in our efforts to find a lasting peace before a branch of the Armed Forces that we honor specially today. It is among the men in uniform that we expect to find the steadfastness and courage to move inexorably toward a difficult, and at times, seemingly distant goal. The positive response of the Armed Forces to this repeated message of peace assures our people of the durability of the new democracy that they have established, the certainty of their security, and the imminence of peace.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].