Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Golden Anniversary of the Budget Ministry

[Released on February 28, 1987]

BUREAUCRACY AS PUBLIC SERVICE

Without the members of democracy, the people behind the scene who translate into action the plans and programs of government, Cabinet decisions and policies remain but a design for the fulfillment of the people’s aspirations. It is largely due to these people’s dedication and professionalism — the staff of the Department of Budget and Management in this case — that a successful and peaceful transition from dictatorship to democratic government was achieved.

President Aquino reminds the Department of Budget and Management staff that bureaucracy is meant to help, to provide public service. She advices them to take pride in every task, no matter how humble, and to bring a high sense of purpose to every endeavor because behind each one is a human being and his dream.

It is a pleasure to meet the people who make things work in government. The Cabinet and I have been making important policies and decisions, but it is the men and women of the Department of Budget and Management, as you should now be called, who translate them into action. Your work decides what part of policy remains aspiration, and what part becomes programs that make a difference in the lives of our people. And while we get most of the praise, and if I may add, most of the blame, you have remained behind the scenes, attending to the crucial and difficult details of implementation and justification.

This dependability must be your greatest asset and contribution. It is to the credit of the Department of Budget and Management that the transition from dictatorship to democratic government took place effortlessly, at least on the administrative level. It is largely to your credit, that the new government team, which of course came from out of government, managed to make a go of the bureaucracy. We have learned much from you, even as you have graciously accommodated and adjusted to our new leadership and management style.

I hope that, as our government continues to evolve in the pattern set forth in the new Constitution, you will continue to show the same dedication and professionalism. Budget and Management remains largely intact today because you chose to work for the general good throughout the transition. That is why you are able to look back today over 50 years of service and feel a sense of pride. I and my team of officials and advisers will one day leave Malacañang, but you will remain to serve. And it will be your decency, dependability, and efficiency in this administration that will determine the success of the next.

Meanwhile, let us be reminded that the bureaucracy is meant to help and not to hinder the work of cutting down red tape, of eliminating outmoded systems that waste our precious time and energy. You must bring a sense of high purpose, even to the most mundane tasks of your office. “Keep interested in your own career, however humble. It is a real possession in the changing fortunes of time.” Remember that behind every seemingly minor case or insignificant document that demands our attention, there are real people, with real cares and hopes, whose peace of mind and effort we give to their requests. The bundy clock does not tick too slowly for the public servant who is deeply aware of the people he serves.

Remember also that much of the credibility and acceptance by the public of our new government depends on you. A poster circulated by the Philippine Information Agency puts it this way: “The people are not an interruption of our work. They ARE our work.” Another poster, tacked on the walls of the Administrative Building in Malacañang, shows Christ washing the feet of his apostles. The message is that those who serve honestly and humbly and willingly will be judged first and greatest of all. In this light, I hope that all of you here will strive to be the first and greatest in government in this your 51st year, and every year thereafter.

Finally, let me say that I will sorely miss the services of your boss, Secretary, and soon-to-be Senator Bert Romulo. My daughter Kris unwittingly gave Bert his first campaign endorsement when she called him her favorite cabinet member. Although we will all miss Bert, especially his wise and temperate counsel in many fields in addition to his own, he leaves us with a sense of confidence that his Department will continue to serve us well. He has, with the consideration and prudence of a good servant of the people, prepared well for his departure. I thank him for his great and good service, on behalf of our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].