Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the University of the Philippines Graduation Rites

[Delivered on April 20, 1986]

TOWARDS A CEASEFIRE

Standing before 1986 graduates of the University of the Philippines, President Aquino takes the opportunity to sound a call to insurgents for peace and reconciliation. She reveals the government’s willingness to negotiate with leaders of the insurgents for peace and their reassimilation in a democratic society.

We are free at last. The tyrant sent his armored cavalry to the two rebel camps. The sea of people parted, and then closed over them. The forces of tyranny were overwhelmed in an outpouring of reconciliation. The Lord had thrown the horse and his rider into the sea. And we were delivered from the house of bondage. Now we stand on the edge of a new country, the frontier of tyranny behind us. A long and arduous journey lies ahead to the peace, progress and justice for which we longed and sacrificed.

I ran for the Presidency on the platform of the people’s long denied desire for freedom, peace and progress. We have freedom. Now I aim to have peace. Peace for a nation worn out from oppression and war. Tranquility in which our people can heal the deep wounds inflicted by tyranny. A tranquil peace so our people can renew their strength for what should be a single-minded endeavor to recover from the devastation wrought by Marcos.

But it seems there are among us those who regret leaving Egypt. They are few, but vocal and violent. The alarm they are spreading is the price of freedom, and it is one we must pay, but it will not be at the cost of the democratic gains we fought so hard to attain.

The consolation of slavery is that one is spared the anxiety of being responsible for yourself and your country.

The reality of slavery is that you are always grateful for what you get. A little food with shame, if the tyrant so wishes. Or a respite from his scourging: You are always grateful for what you get or the whipping you are spared.

Freedom is different. The shackles are struck from your wrist and your hands are full of responsibilities. You have been freed to carry all the better the burden of citizenship and nation-building. And you have yourself chiefly to blame if you falter or fail.

This nation mobilized to be free and to march toward freedom, peace and progress under my leadership. Even as I pledged to lead you to that goal, so you pledged then not to fail yourselves in reaching for it. There will be no turning back.

Let the handful murmur, they are within their rights under your covenant of freedom. But let them not stand in the way of our passage to lasting peace. This government of peace is not unarmed.

When our people called on God to deliver them from bondage, they pledge implicitly to be always free and proud and worthy of deliverance. The Lord delivered; so must we on our promise. To the handful who would turn their backs on the pride and responsibilities of freedom, all I can say is that the cause for which they clamor is now halfway across the Pacific, fighting harder than they, but to enjoy the wealth he took from their country. I will respect their private grief, but my government will not tolerate its violent outpouring.

In the long struggle against tyranny, some or our brothers and sisters took to the hills in rebellion. Many of them were killed or captured. I mourn for those who died, as I mourn for those who fought fighting them. What a waste of virtue and strength on both sides. I have released those who were captured. And I have called on both sides in the war – the army and the rebels – to enlist their stern virtues of self-discipline, sacrifice and courage in the task of national recovery.

The army had already responded when I made the call– by an act of rebellion against those who had long misused their selfless qualities for selfish ends, and by an act of allegiance to the President-elect of the people. The Armed Forces had rededicated themselves to the Republic, the Constitution, and the Commander-in-Chief, and to the freedom they protect. Surely it will not be long before we have wiped off every stain from the sword of the nation.

Now I am sending out a message of peace and reconciliation to the Communist-led insurgents. Our people are weary of war. They want to explore the opportunities of freedom and savor the fruits of peace. Too many have been orphaned or widowed in the struggle to be free. The time for peace has come.

Some have already responded. I pray that more will, and that we shall see an end to the insurgency problem without further loss and suffering. But I have no illusions that peace will come easily.

For the Communist true believer, the road to victory bristles with arms and resounds with combat. Conflict hardens resolve, purifies intentions, and abolishes any alternative to the violent road to victory. It is a philosophy and a strategy created by the exigency of contending with dictatorships. But it is also a way of thinking that prides itself on its hard realism. The Communist ventures into frontal confrontation only when the balance of forces is clearly tilted in favor of its success. That is clearly not the case at present.

Under the Marcos regime, the balance was in the Communists’ favor. The people had distanced themselves from a government they feared and despised. They gave it neither cooperation in its spurious programs nor intelligence about the movements of the insurgents. There was a tacit understanding: every blow struck at the dictatorship was a blow for freedom. Never mind whose hand delivered it. It went on like this for 14 years and it might, given time, have succeeded in replacing the dictatorship of private plunder with the dictatorship of the party. But it was not to be that way.

The people took another route to freedom. And they arrived-without bloodshed and without tears, except for those shed in joy when the army laid aside its weapons to return the people’s embrace of reconciliation.

My government is willing to negotiate with the top leadership of the Communist Party to work out the mechanics” for the reassimilation of the insurgents in civil society and their participation in the democratic process. But I would also encourage the communities directly affected by the insurgency to take the initiative and reach out to their brothers and sisters who were not as patient for peaceful change as they were.

Tragic experience has made the Communist cautious. He has used front organizations to test his proposals because it gives him the option to disown them in the event of betrayal. I can understand – although that was not my way when I grappled with the dictatorship. I believe that openness is not weakness, if it is backed up by unshakeable resolve. I see no reason, in the circumstances, for the Communists to continue this way. Negotiations will be with the top leadership of the Communist Party or there will be none.

Whether negotiations will take place, or result in a lasting peace, I do not know. I know only that it is my duty as leader, of the country to explore every peaceful avenue to a resolution of the problem. I am hopeful there will be positive response. The balance of forces in our society today, at any rate, argue strongly against persisting in a military solution. The people have found a new hope as they taste their new freedom. I appeal to the compassion of the insurgent leadership, and to its reason, to join the people in giving democracy another chance.

When I was campaigning for the Presidency, I said that my victory would be celebrated with a ceasefire. It is to the credit of the Armed Forces that they honored that pledge. During this critical period, it is important that a climate of truth and sobriety should prevail. Although I understand the exuberance of a newly liberated media, I hope they will hew as closely as they can to the truth.

Meanwhile, the insurgents continue to strike, hoping to recreate conditions conducive to successful armed struggle. I shall interpret this kindly to mean that the message of peace has not filtered down to all combatants. But I will not allow this state of affairs to continue for long. The soldiers of the Republic are under my wing. I have obligations to the security of the people, the stability of their new democracy, and the honor of the army. I will not renege on any.

I shall soon call formally for a ceasefire. It will be for a definite and inextendible period. Negotiations should take place during that period and, it is to be hoped, a just resolu­tion found of the issues that divide the insurgents from the government. The Armed Forces will maintain their defensive posture. Outbreak of lawlessness will be dealt with by the constabulary and police forces. They should not expect me to leave my people and my soldiers defenseless against elements they cannot, or chose not, to control.

I am sure the Communist leadership can read my mind as well as I believe, I can read theirs. They will use the ceasefire to consolidate their positions, recruit, and recoup the losses they suffered as a result of the preemptive February Revolution. I suppose, to some extent, they could succeed. It will be some time before there is perceptible improvement in the economic conditions of the people. But I am willing to take the gamble to avoid any further waste of lives.

Even as I extend the hand of peace, the rebels know that I shall prepare for the eventuality that my offer will be rebuffed. If the peace initiative fails through no fault of the government, it will not be the old dispirited army of Marcos that the insurgents will face. It will be a new army, and as it is a new government that the insurgency must deal with now.

As Commander-in-Chief, I will not be satisfied with the Armed Forces as they were under Marcos. I know the conditions in which the Filipino soldier had to fight on orders of that callous regime. The inadequacy of his field rations made him forage among the civilian population. The almost complete lack of medicine accounted for the abnormally high ratio of killed-to-wounded among the troops. The lack of appropriate clothing for the environment in which he had to fight accounted for the high AFP casualties – from pneumonia and malaria. None of these conditions will obtain in the new army when it goes forth if it must.

There will be a radical change in military strategy, away from the reckless expenditure of force to a more discriminating and effective application of it – by better trained, better equipped, and more mobile units. The New AFP in the field will be as concerned about shielding the civilian population from the worst aspects of combat, as with meet­ing the armed threat to the security of the Republic.

Every offense against human dignity will be strictly prescribed under my government. I do not believe that the immediate advantage gained by torture can, in any way, offset the indelible disgrace it brings to our country, and the insidious effects it has on the morals of our people and, especially, on the morals of those whom we arm to protect them. A sympathetic people will be the eyes and cars of the armed forces.

I am offering the insurgents an honorable peace. One that will not ignore their just demands, but one also that will not detract in any way from the security of the people, the stability of the government, and the honor of the New Armed Forces, I know that the roots of insurgency are in the economic conditions of the people and the social structures that oppress them. We must address ourselves to these conditions vigorously if we are to hope reasonably for a lasting peace. But we can do this successfully only if we have peace in the first instance. And so I am calling for it.

I am not asking the Communists to give up their stern vision of a just society. I am asking them only to give our people a chance to work out their own version of a just and progressive society in peace. The Communists anyway claim that the triumph of their vision is inevitable. In that case time will surely vindicate them, as the attempts at peaceful reform unravel and end in failure. Then they will have their day.

But I have my own faith, the faith I share with the people today: that peace in our ways and fortitude in our hearts will work miracles, that there will be a deliverance from want, as surely as we have had a deliverance from slavery. Let us give peace a chance.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].