Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Philippine Air Lines

[Delivered on August 24, 1989]

PROMOTER OF FRIENDSHIP AND TRADE

Noting the improved performance and quality of service of PAL and its financial turnaround toward profit, President Aquino reminds PAL personnel of their primary obligation of safety and integrity in their transactions and services, and of patriotism, where overall public interest should be above everything. She stressed the urgency of privatizing PAL to enable our people to travel safely, reliably, and efficiently. As the flag carrier, PAL should continue to be an instrument for political unity, promoter of friendship and trade with other countries, and socio-economic development.

Less than a year ago, in September 1988, I was present at the formal presentation of the Fokker 50 turboprop aircraft. Tonight, it is my pleasure anew to be here for the presentation of the Boeing 737-300 jet. Both are milestones in the development of Philippine Airline’s domestic services since 1986. The Fokker 50 eventually completed the replacement of old turboprop aircraft that have been in service for 22 years. Now we have the B737 jet, which will be replacing the veteran BAC One Elevens which have been in its fleet since 1971.

When I assumed the Presidency, I directed Philippine Airlines to improve its services to customers and overcome the serious problems of flight delays and cancellations. The past many years of losses had eroded the morale of PAL personnel and led to the deterioration in the quality of their service. I further directed that priority be given to the domestic services in the modernization of the fleet, considering that since 1971 no new airplane has been acquired for the fleet.

Now, I am happy that the expansion and modernization of the domestic fleet will be completed by September 1990 when all 10 leased B737s have been delivered.

Not only have new aircraft been added to the fleet but PAL’s on-time performance has, I was informed, improved and the quality of service to customers also enhanced. I note with pleasure that this had also resulted in a financial turnaround for PAL, with profits being realized in two of the past three years of my administration. I was told that the trend in the current fiscal year is towards another profit.

I congratulate everyone in PAL for these achievements. I would also like to acknowledge the support given PAL’s reflecting program by the Guinness Peat Aviation Group, with the provision of the Shorts SD360, the B737 and also aircraft for the international fleet. Our thanks, too, to Boeing Commercial Airplanes Company for their help in the provision of the B737s.

There are, however, areas to which I must call attention. The first is safety. It is the primary obligation of any public carrier, especially one engaged in commercial air transportation, to assure the highest possible level of safety for its customers. A recent event underscores this obligation. I hereby direct PAL management to address this matter with full vigor.

The next is integrity. The members of the Board and management staff have a mandate from me to assure transparency in all transactions, especially where millions of dollars are involved as in the acquisition of aircraft and purchase of vital equipment and supplies. Also, we still hear about irregularities in the booking of passengers. Planes that are supposed to be fully booked yield seats, as if by magic, if the passenger, even if he is not on the waiting list, knows how to go about it. Worse, the grateful passenger, when he boards the plane, sometimes finds that it is not really fully booked. Then there are reports that some PAL personnel are still engaged in extra-curricular activities like bringing in highly dutiable goods, if not contraband, or acting as couriers for smugglers. PAL employees are public officials. As such, they must serve with utmost integrity and act with patriotism. As I have publicly declared several times, PAL is to be privatized and the sooner the better. But it should not result in PAL becoming dedicated to profit to the exclusion of the strategic interests of the country and overall public interest.

Ownership of PAL begets the responsibility to our people to provide safe, reliable and efficient air transportation. The presence of domestic competition should not again be an alibi for the haphazard operation of schedules, the willful suspension of services and the indifferent treatment of customers.

Finally, PAL should continue to strive to be an instrument for political unity in our country and, as the flag carrier, to be an effective promoter of friendship and trade with other countries. Everyone in PAL should keep in mind that this airline has a vital role in the economic and social development of our country by transporting people, goods and mail within our archipelago and to our friends throughout the world.

This event offers me some welcome respite from the tremendous problems that confront us all. But none of these is insurmountable if all of us will address them with the same spirit that the new airplanes of PAL exemplify. We shall succeed and we shall prevail long after our enemies have fired their last futile shot and our critics have been exhausted by their carping.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].