Return of Wealth to the Farms

The choice of the theme: “Balikyaman sa Sakahan” is very timely. The threat to the country’s natural resources is ever growing and it is more discernible in agriculture. In addressing the poverty of our farm, we must also address the long-term viability of our finite resources. The President advocates a full partnership with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources.

I am pleased to greet the leadership and personnel of the Department of Agriculture on your seventy-first anniversary. I am also delighted to congratulate the outstanding awardees. Above all, I congratulate our fellow countrymen, the farmers and fishermen, who are with us this morning at our gathering.

It has been two years now since the Filipino people gave me the mandate to lead this country. Over these two years, I have endeavored to govern with this basic parameter: The well-being of the majority especially the disadvantaged.

The Department of Agriculture has capsulized this parameter explicitly in your primary objective: that of increasing incomes for farmers and fishermen and improving the quality of their lives. You have set to achieve this by encouraging the initiative of and enabling the agricultural worker to produce profitably.

Your objective has led you, unavoidably, to the issue of our diminishing resources. And so it encourages me that you have chosen for your theme this year, “Balik-Yaman Sa Sakahan”. Your choice is very timely.

For the threat to our Natural Resources is ever growing, it is also marked and conspicuous in Agriculture. We can easily cite our denuded forests, erosion and loss of fertility of our soils, the continuing destruction of our coral reefs and mangroves.

Therefore, in addressing the poverty of our farm and fishing communities, we must also address the long-term viability of our finite resources. In improving the productivity of our farmers and fishermen, we must do so in a way that will not unduly tax the production base. In this way, and only thus, can we ensure renewability of our resources, guarantee sustainability of agricultural yields and realize increased farm incomes.

As you work to achieve these objectives, I urge you to be full partners with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources. DENR supplements and complements your Department, and we expect you to work together in close coordination; where one leads in protecting the production base, and the other in cultivating it.

I also urge you to intensify your work in communities. Resource renewal and sustainability is not exclusively our concern. It is theirs as well, and very much so. Let us learn from the people and work most closely with them. I think you know very well, how, for instance, in fishing communities, it is the poor fisherfolk who really understand the need for environmental protection. More than anybody else, they know too well how greed has caused the wanton destruction of our fishery resources. Community involvement, I believe, will spell the difference between the success and failure of our initiatives.

Our thrust in rationalizing the management of our Agri-Ecosystem entails determining appropriate methods suited to the local climate, culture, and economy. Your emphasis on locality – specific technologies applies very well. I am pleased to know how seriously you are re-learning from our time-tested, locally-suited indigenous practices.

It is therefore commendable that you have included in your plan of action the resource base as one of your major sectoral concerns. I wish to encourage you as you strive toward regenerative, rather than exploitative agriculture – agriculture that ensures productivity and income not only for the present but also for the future.

To concretize this commitment, we are launching today the livelihood enhancement for Agricultural Development Program or LEAD.

LEAD is an assistance program for organized rural communities to engage in Agro and Fishery based enterprises. As such, it shall generate rural employment and develop the entrepreneurial skills of our farmers and fishermen. Through LEAD, we shall be able to move agricultural workers from their present subsistence production to a level where they can run business enterprises on their own.

I am happy to inform you that we have initial funding in the amount of 256 million pesos. This grant, courtesy of the RP-Japan food production program, will provide start-up capital for water-impounding projects, the construction of artificial reefs, the establishment of nurseries, the provision of post-harvest facilities like solar dryers which can even alternate as a recreation facility, and the like.

The local Councils, the Municipal, Provincial and Regional Agricultural and Fishery Councils, mostly made up of farmers, have identified and will continue to identify specific projects that address their needs.

To complement the extended capitalization, the farmers will put in equity, such as land and labor.

An interesting feature of the program is that payments are not required to be given back to the source. Instead, these will go to the next-in-line beneficiary who will use these in another project. Such roll-over scheme is really an ingenious way of ensuring that limited funds can be extended to as many beneficiaries as possible.

In the packaging of projects, the Department of Agriculture and the non-government organizations involved in the respective project areas will provide assistance.

Marketing linkages have been established involving the Department of Agriculture, Department of Trade and Industry, the members of the Management Association of the Philippines Foundation, the non-government organizations, as well as private companies.

Financing, besides what we now have, will come from other banks with guarantees from the comprehensive Agricultural Loan Fund supporting guarantee organizations.

In a capsule, the LEAD program exhibits how the principal actors in the agricultural sector can work together in profitable enterprises that strictly take into account the needs of the beneficiaries who determine these themselves; locally-developed ov developing technology; and certainly, the critical environmental factors.

Moreover, I wish to reiterate that we have in the LEAD a program whose avowed commitment to the farmer we can trust. This is because it aims to develop the farmer from a mere producer to a full-fledged entrepreneur by training him to identify a project, to package it, to source funds for it, and to manage it well. All these in consideration of the need, on the other hand to provide an immediate and reliable source of livelihood for the farm family and community; and on the other, to enhance the life support systems of the surrounding environment.

When we speak of the farmer, surely we also mean the farm youth — a farmer in his own right. We deem him eligible, therefore, to participate in the LEAD program, provided he is between 15 to 25 years old, belongs to a family whose basic occupation is farming and fishing, and is a member of the 4-H club as validated by the local Councils. Under the provision of our technicians, model farm youths will be trained to prepare and manage their own projects which will serve as models to inspire their peers.

To sum up, let me point out that what you will be fulfilling in all of these efforts do not merely spring from an economic imperative. The call for farming profitability hand in hand with agricultural sustainability is a moral obligation.

We in government, with the distinct task to lead, cannot shirk from this responsibility. The Department of Agriculture can do no less. I assure you that you have the full support of the Office of the President.

For when man and woman were created, God commanded them to rule and subdue the earth. We have inherited that task. We are to bring order, to control, to cultivate. Created in the creator’s image, we are to maintain the creation process, to re-create, not to destroy.

For it is the earth that nourishes us. Let us nourish it in turn, that it shall ensure life for us, for our children’s children.

As you have said in your slogan, “The land cares for you; you should care for it too.”

I greet you all! Long live the Department of Agriculture! Long live our farmers!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].