Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Senator Manglapus’ acceptance of the Cabinet post

[Released on October 9, 1987]

FROM THE SENATE TO THE CABINET

The President announces Senator Raul S. Manglapus’ acceptance of the position of Secretary of Foreign Affairs. She describes this move to resign from the Senate to join the Aquino Cabinet as an “extraordinary, although not unprecedented, step.”

I am pleased to announce that Senator Raul S. Manglapus has accepted the position of Secretary of Foreign Affairs. I have submitted his nomination to the Commission on Appointments.

I asked Senator Manglapus to take the extraordinary, although not unprecedented, step of resigning from the Senate and joining my Cabinet because, in this our critical period of transition, the nation needs a man of exceptional ability, dedication, intelligence and experience to guide our foreign relations and he is the Filipino who today most eminently possesses those qualities.

Senator Manglapus has long been an outstanding articulator of our national issues, including that of foreign affairs. He was, of course, already Undersecretary and then Secretary of Foreign Affairs under Presidents Magsaysay and Garcia. He was Professor of Constitutional Law at the Ateneo Law School, author of the original agrarian reform law in his first term in the Senate, and leader of the Progressives in the Constitutional Convention of 1971-72.

In his exile, he wrote books on international relations at Harvard University, Cornell University and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and taught at the School of International Service at American University.

He was President of the Movement for a Free Philippines which fought peacefully for the return of democracy. His efforts for world democracy received international recognition when he was elected President of the International Center for Development Policy in Washington, D.C., and two other positions which he still holds, that of Vice President of the Christian Democratic International, based in Rome and Brussels, and President of the Democracy International, based in Washington, D.C.

Senator Manglapus, in the first two months of our new Senate, again displayed remarkable legislative leadership as Chairman of the Committee on National Defense and Security and of the Committee on Science and Technology.

I know that our people who voted him to the Senate will not begrudge him this shift in the character of his public service, for like others before him, such as Ramon Magsaysay who once resigned from the House of Representatives when the country needed him more as Secretary of National Defense, Senator Manglapus has agreed to resign from the Senate because we have persuaded him that the nation, at this moment of our history, needs him even more as Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

Senator Manglapus will bring to the Cabinet his talent, patriotism, and Christian-Muslim Democratic vision and I am sure the whole nation is grateful that he has accepted this extraordinary call to public service.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].