Cordillera Regional Assembly Malacañang July 11, 1988

Oath-taking: Cordillera Regional Assembly

BE YOURSELF

The President clarifies the role expected of the Assembly members: to react to the professionally prepared plans and projects as ordinary private persons practicing their ordinary professions of lawyer or teacher or farmer. In essence, they are ordinary people speaking directly to a government which is now making a special effort to listen.

Now that you have been sworn into office, I am sure the first question you will be asking yourselves is:

As members of the Cordillera Regional Assembly, what are we expected to do?

We cannot be expected to get involved in the administration of our region, because that is the job of the mayors and governors.

We cannot be expected to draw up and evaluate development projects and programs for the region, because that is the job of the line agencies and the Cordillera executive board.

We cannot be expected to pass laws for the region because that is the job of our six congressmen; and furthermore, we are not elected representatives of the people, as they are.

Finally, we are only given five days to do our work! What can we do in five days except act as a ceremonial rubber stamp on the work done by others? If that is all, why are we wasting the government’s money?

II

My dear members of the Cordillera Regional Assembly, I would like to assure you that no one is more conscious than I am of the need to conserve our scarce resources. If we use some of these to support you, it is because you have a very important role in the political development of your region and your country; and you have a central place in my personal political philosophy.

Perhaps the most important thing our recent history teaches us is that politics has become a very specialized profession – so specialized that it is difficult for ordinary people to get into or sometimes even to understand. So specialized that those who have made it their life’s work, if they are unscrupulous as well as clever, can use it to manipulate the people rather than to express the people’s will.

But our recent history also teaches a more hopeful lesson. The unscrupulous and clever specialists do not always prevail. The people can act together to express their will outside the professional political process, and can defeat the unscrupulous few, no matter how well entrenched.

I have never forgotten that I owe my position to the direct expression of the people’s will; and I have constantly sought to incorporate it into our political decision-making process. The basic principle of my administration is that the people have a right to express their will directly to those in power; and they should be able to do this easily and regularly without having to endure hardship and face frightful risk as they once did.

That is why we have regular regional consultations, where all sectors may come forward and face the president directly – and incidentally, I intend to have one in your region as soon as you are organized well enough to make the consultation productive.

That is why we have strengthened the system of regional development councils to give a greater voice to the non-government representatives. In your region’s counterpart of these councils, namely the Cordillera Executive Board, you will note that only six out of the twenty-nine members are elected public officials.

That is why we have many other initiatives, such as the people’s economic councils and the four pilot provinces where we are trying out more autonomy, all with the objective of decentralizing decision making and going more directly to the people at the grass roots.

III

In this thrust of decentralization, the two autonomous regions are in the forefront; and within the autonomous regions there is a very special role for the Cordillera Regional Assembly.

This role arises precisely because you are not mayors or governors or congressmen or any sort of professional politician.

As I have said, politics is now a very specialized profession, and one who has made it his career has somehow separated himself from the ranks of ordinary people. So much so that on important issues he usually needs to consult the ordinary people and who are his constituents.

The Cordillera Regional Assembly is very different. You represent the people not because they have elected you, but in a simpler and more direct way, because you are the people. Your role is to be not representatives of the people. You do not consult; you are the one who are consulted.

So you can now answer the question, what are you expected to do? The answer is very simple: be yourself.

You are not expected to make laws, because you are not congressmen, and the people have not authorized you to make laws for them.

You are not expected to formulate plans and projects because you are not civil servants or professional public executives.

And when the professional public executives present their plans and projects for your evaluation, you are not expected to return home and consult your constituents because you are not mayors or governors and you have no constituents.

You are expected to be yourself.

This means that you should react to the professionally-prepared plans and projects as ordinary private persons practicing your ordinary professions of lawyer or teacher or farmer or whatever your occupation is. And because there are so many of you in relation to the population of your region, we can be reasonably sure that your reactions will be truly representative.

You should now also be able to understand why the time allotted for your work is so short: five days, or less than one and one-half percent of the year.

This is to better enable you to be yourself. You should regard your service in the Cordillera Regional Assembly as a brief interlude in your ordinary life, which will still take up ninety-eight and a half percent of your time.

That is your special value and your special role: you are ordinary people speaking directly to your government, which is now making a special effort to listen.

In doing this, you will not only be serving your region but also providing a model for the rest of the country. And together we will be showing the world that in our country people power continues to prevail.

Thank you and good morning.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library