Crossing Over from the Establishment

The Aquino administration pledges to listen and respond to both condemnation and constructive criticism from academe, traditional nemesis of Establishment.

While gearing to speak before you today, I conditioned myself to face and accept a simple fact. I am now the President of the Philippines. I am no longer leading a ragtag revolution against the powers that be. Mine is no longer that small insistent voice of the opposition that was drowned out by the drumbeating of the tyrant’s propaganda machine, until that voice grew into the roar of millions. I am no longer the underdog. I am, by a miracle that still amazes me as the work of Providence never fails to, at the top of the power structure.

On my way here, I felt saddened somewhat by these I facts. Now I will no longer enjoy the same audience I used to at the University of the Philippines. I hope against hope, but somehow I know the rapport will not be the same. For I have done what no one who wishes to remain popular with the U.P. ever does – cross over to the establishment. But that, I suppose is the hazard faced by anyone who presumes to lead a popular revolution. There is possibility you might win. Then you become the status quo and fair game for the activists of the U.P.

That is the venerable tradition, the life force, the saving grace that is our irrepressible University of the Philippines. The U.P. has always been the problem no past President of our land has managed to solve. Not even its illustrious sons have escaped vilification.

In this, I guess, the U.P. simply remains true to its character, to the mission imparted to it at its birth. The U.P. was founded 79 years ago to demolish the intellectual underpinnings of one social order and establish another. It’s first graduates were trained to occupy influential positions in government and society. They were to sweep the landascape clean of counterproductive colonial values and influences. Spanish elitism and traditionalism were the very first targets of the very first activists of the campus.

Finally, a new government and social philosophy based on American republicanisms successfully replaced the old order. This was no sooner accomplished than the U.P. began to see and denounce the flaws in the new dispensation. Down through the years of the young Republic, the criticism and the prescriptions took on an increasingly radical direction, reaching a peak in the Marcos years. Protracted struggle and violent overthrow were offered as the only effective remedy to an exploitative and self-serving regime.

But, in the latter years, I thought I detected in the U.P. a no less powerful alternative to tyranny and silent suffering quietly sweeping the campus, a breath of the fresh wind of non-violent change that blew into the sails of our Yellow Revolution. Students saw a viable alternative to lives of quiet desperation or violent outpouring in the quiet determination of our yellow revolutionaries.

Quite a few clichés of this University were overturned by that revolution. Clerico-fascists turned out to be clerico-revolutionaries. The military-business complex turned out to be a conspirary for democracy. The passive, hopelessly a political Silent Majority turned out in the millions to protect the ballot and then to protect the rebellion. And that simple housewife “who used to serve us coffee,” as some of Ninoy’s friends who are now serving my government used to say (and they are going to be sorry), turned out to be the leader and wielder of the power of the people. These unexpected turns of events should diminish in some measure the arrogance of academe.

And now, what lies ahead for the U.P.? What judgments will it make, what pressures will it exert on our fledgling government that you now view as the establishment? I cannot presume that my administration, unlike past administrations, will escape the harshest scrutiny in your classrooms. But just as I had convinced myself to accept that I am now on the establishment side (at least it is one that endeavors to be just), I have also prepared myself to listen and be responsive to criticism. For as history has shown, the shove and pull of ideas emanating from U.P. has served not to upset but to balance government.

And so now I must return to the halls of power. There, where we plan and strategize a new era of progress for the Philippines, we are far from the unheavals of the U.P. campus; but we are not insulated. Our windows are open to catch each fresh wind that carries both condemnation and constructive suggestion from the corridors of the U.P.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].