Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the members of the Japanese Diet in a private reception

[Delivered on November 11, 1986]

SEEKING PARTNERSHIP THROUGH AID

On a state visit to Japan, the President informs the members of the Diet (Parliament) that, following the return of democracy, the Philippines is ensuring political stability. Congress will be convened in 1987; in its absence, she is directly consulting the people on solutions to their problems. She appeals to friends of the Filipino people to extend a helping hand, by becoming economic partners.

I am honored by this reception tendered for me by the heads of the two houses of your illustrious parliament.

I hope that after the Philippine Congress is convened next year, there will be occasion to return this warm gesture of hospitality.

The Filipinos look eagerly to the day when the power to make laws returns to a duly elected parliament; a parliament of men and women chosen by the people and accountable to them; a parliament that will make the policies that people want. This is the secret of stability, the strength of democracies. Right or wrong, only the laws that people themselves make through their duly elected representatives will have their acceptance and support. As I said, no one can know better than the people what they want, and what they are prepared to sacrifice for it.

Leadership in a democracy means leading the people only in the direction they have pointed. And that is what I have been doing. Because we still do not have a parliament, I consult directly with the people about their problems and what they think the solutions should be. This makes things a little untidy, but keeps them always on course towards the ends the people desire.

It is in the pursuit of those ends that I am here today.

Our people wanted democracy back. The past eight months have been an effort to restore it as fully as possible. We have completed a draft constitution which will be submitted to a referendum in February. We shall have local and Congressional elections a few months after that. But even while these political efforts must be made, we are working to rebuild the economy that was ruined by the previous government. Because the ruin of the economy was made possible by the state’s control of the economy, and because we are committed in principle to free enterprise, the effort to rebuild our economy must mainly be carried out by the private sector, both Filipino and foreign.

I have made the appeal to the friends of the Filipino people and of Philippine democracy to lend a helping hand. I have directed that appeal especially to those, like Japan, who have always stood by the Filipino people, sharing a portion of the fruits of their progress. But the main assistance we hope to get is that extended in partnership, in a cooperative and mutually advantageous effort to bring out the great potential of Filipino skill and enterprise.

We need outright aid, that is true at this point in time, but more importantly we need Japan’s expression of faith in the promise of Philippine progress. I ask the Japanese to join us in rebuilding our economy. This will prove as much to their advantage as to ours. It will deepen our understanding of each other. It will strengthen our necessary friendship. My visit reaffirms that old friendship. I hope it will also mark a new chapter of even closer cooperation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].