NEW HOPE FOR STREET CHILDREN

Ang mga batang lansangan ay madalas na nakakaranas ng matinding kahirapan, pang-aabuso, at kawalan ng access sa mga pangunahing pangangailangan tulad ng pagkain, tirahan, edukasyon, at kalusugan. Ito ay nagreresulta sa isang cycle of poverty na mahirap basagin.  Maraming non-government organizations (NGOs) at government agencies ang nagsusumikap na tugunan ang mga isyung ito, ngunit kailangan pa ng mas malawak at coordinated na pagsisikap. 

Recently, the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) launched a new program aimed at providing comprehensive support to street children. The program, called “Kalinga sa Kalye,” will offer a range of services including temporary shelter, educational assistance, psychosocial support, and skills training.  Layunin ng programang ito na bigyan ang mga bata ng pagkakataong makapag-aral, makahanap ng disenteng trabaho, at magkaroon ng mas magandang kinabukasan. 

“We believe that every child deserves a chance to reach their full potential,” said DSWD Secretary Rex Gatchalian. “Through Kalinga sa Kalye, we are committed to providing these vulnerable children with the support they need to break free from the cycle of poverty and build a brighter future.”  Ang tagumpay ng programang ito ay nakasalalay sa pakikipagtulungan ng lahat ng stakeholders, including local government units (LGUs), NGOs, and the community.  We are optimistic that with a collective effort, we can make a real difference in the lives of these children.

The President thanks the organizers of this conference for holding this first conference in the Philippines and for raising public awareness on the plight of children who work and live on the streets. She announces the creation of the Fund for Street Children to be used solely for the welfare of the street children.

I am glad to be with you today for this first Regional Conference on Street Children in Asia. Both as President, and as a mother, I share your view that there is an urgent need to help the most underprivileged of children in the world – the street children.

I would like to thank the organizers of this conference – UNICEF, CHILDHOPE, the National Council of Social Development Foundation of the Philippines, Inc., and all other organizations of participating Asian countries, for the decision to hold this first conference in the Philippines. This must be in recognition of our country’s having pioneered in a nation-wide program in 16 cities to respond to the needs of street children.

As I welcome all foreign participants of this conference to the Philippines, so do I give the assurance that we stand ready to share with them the country’s experience and frustrations in implementing the various programs to help the street children of the Philippines.

I laud CHILDHOPE and its collaborating agencies for raising public awareness internationally on the plight of children who work and live on the streets. Also, for providing an international network of technical and material linkages for projects on street children.

It cannot be denied that the world’s future is in our children. Indeed, “The Child is Father to the Man.” So, what kind of world will the future hold if the child of today who will become the man of tomorrow, is an abused, uncared for child?

No single age group requires more of our attention than the children’s group. And there is no single children’s group that now deserves our collective concern more than these children under 15 years of age who are threatened by exploitation, abuse, neglect and abandonment – the street children.

The term “street children” may be newly-coined, but the problem itself is as old as poverty, and as menacing as death itself. The street children of today are the same children that Dickens and Dostoyevsky wrote about centuries ago. Our street children are the Oliver Twists of the Twentieth Century.

They are an offshoot of burgeoning cities that breed growing slums, the ultimate product of an upsurge of rural-to-urban migration that has sent millions of families to the metropolis in search of hope and a share of the city’s prosperity. Nowhere is this phenomenon more bitterly felt than in Third World countries which many of us in this hall represent.

A recent study on Philippine street children shows this profile. More than 85%of them have parents of low education levels who are jobless, or self-employed as laborers, street vendors and scavengers. They usually come from large families. Many are from broken homes, where either or both parents live with other men or women. This heart-breaking portrait shows a breakdown in the moral fiber of their origins – their homes – such that they finally choose to separate from the harsh realities in their dwellings only to find harsher realities in the streets.

Most abandoned children earn a living vending cigarettes, flowers or candies, while many survive by scavenging, begging, and indulging in criminal activities as prostitution or pickpocketing. In their early age, they learn that survival is the ultimate name of the game. Thus, they grow up battered physically and psychologically, hardened by their constant brushes with rejection and exploitation. Theirs is the grim picture of a future of unceasing ignorance, poverty and hopelessness.

Having recognized this growing problem in the Philippines many years ago, our Department of Social Welfare and Development started a pilot project in 1983 to identify and assist street children in major cities throughout the country. Since then, the concern for street children has been shared by other Departments of our government such as the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Department of Justice, the military, particularly our National Police and the Philippine Constabulary and our Department of Tourism. From several non-government agencies such as civic and the religious groups, sprang the National Council of Social Development Foundation of the Philippines, and umbrella organization of government agencies and NGOs and a member of CHILDHOPE.

Our government’s commitment to the goals of child survival and development is but in response to our state policy enunciated in the Constitution that “The State recognizes the vital role of the youth in nation-building and shall promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual and social well-being.” Implementing this mandate are our Family Code, the Child and Youth Welfare Code and several other statutes and administrative rules and regulations.

In keeping with the government’s commitment to improve the lot of our street children, I would like to announce the creation of the Fund for Street Children under the President’s Social Fund. We are allocating P20 million for this fund, to be managed by the Presidential Management Staff. The fund shall be used solely for the purpose of expanding the capabilities of existing programs of member organizations of the Council for the Welfare of Children, the National Council of Social Development and other independent NGOs.

Street children are a perennial presence in growing cities. Experts say that if the trend of rural-to-urban migration continues, by the year 2000, more children will be growing up in urban areas than in rural villages.

Now we are the first to recognize that the program we have launched for our street children is mainly for rehabilitation; for cure rather than prevention. But if we must totally eradicate this blight in our national lives, we must address our efforts to the roots of the problem – the structures of poverty dependency and underdevelopment. This is particularly true for us in Asia. Unless we can stamp out these causes, we shall only live along the fringes of development, continuously suffering from the vicious cycle of poverty that breeds ignorance and injustice.

I know you share my vision for a better tomorrow for this country and for the world. That is why you are here today. So let us all join hands in moving the rest of the world into acknowledging the problems of the street children, and finally doing something about it – all in the spirit of the Lord and Master when He enjoined one and all to “Suffer the little children and forbid them not to come unto me for of such is the Kingdom of God.”

I wish you all a fruitful conference and a good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].