The faith grows stronger.

President Aquino shares with the Baptists an intense devotion to certain ideals. Like the Baptists, she believes that the wife should be totally supportive of her husband, that children should be given fair amounts of love and discipline, and that a nation is defined by its people, and a people is judged by the kind of society it builds. Transformations of nations and societies take place first in the hearts of people and this is what happened during the Yellow Revolution.

It is not often that I address a Baptist Vesper Worship Service. I am not a Baptist but I have friends who are, and I know that we share not only the same faith but also the same intense devotion to certain ideals.

The Baptists are considered among the most conservative of the Christian sects. By the standards of the world today I, too, might be called a conservative. I adhere to certain time-worn truths, in the area, for instance, of family living. The Baptist wife, I understand, must strive to be the Biblical wife – totally supportive of her husband, mindful of his needs, respectful of his role as leader of the home in the way that Christ is head of His Church. I must say that as Ninoy’s spouse, I was, in much of my behavior and attitudes, scriptural. My life revolved around him and our children. And that served to keep the balance of our marriage throughout the turbulent years of his meteoric rise in politics and the dark despairing years of his imprisonment and exile.

In the rearing of children too, I am rather old-fashioned in dispensing fair amounts of love and discipline. That is a fact that my youngest daughter Kris will attest to, with some chagrin, I am sure. She once complained to Diane Sawyer, the host of the TV show, 60 Minutes , that nothing had really changed. When I became President, Kris had projected that my responsibilities would keep me from checking up on her with the same frequency and closeness. She was wrong. It remains as Ninoy wanted it, but most of all, as Christ expects it. Our children are not only ours, but God’s own. “Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these,” Christ said.

The Baptist faith is also known as one of the more fundamentalist of faiths. Your philosophy of life, and the life hereafter, is distilled to its essence in God’s Word. Your view of society is focused on its nucleus, the family; and the epicenter of the family which is Christ.

I would agree with your view that a nation is defined by its people, and a people rightly judged by the kind of society it has built. Even so is a society judged by the families that compose it, and families by the individuals that make it up. Transformations of nations and societies take place first in the hearts of their people. That is how it happened here, with our Yellow Revolution. That improbable event might be easier to understand when you consider the years when the hearts of our people slowly turned from despair to heroism, like a piece of steel turning in the fire. So it was with Ninoy also. At the lowest point of his seven-year imprisonment, Ninoy wrote his friend Soc Rodrigo of that experience, and I quote:

“In the loneliness of my solitary confinement in Laur, in the depths of my solitude and desolation, during those long hours of meditation, I found my inner peace. Christ stood me face to face with myself and forced me to look at my emptiness and nothingness, and then helped me to discover Him who has never really left my side.” Ninoy then quoted Paul: “For the sake of Christ, I am content with weaknesses, insults, hardships, persecutions and calamities, for when I am weak, then I am strong.”

Many Filipinos experienced the same light in those years of darkness. Now that that light has been kindled, it continues to spread and grow, even in the noonday brightness of our freedom. And as more and more Filipinos bask in that light, my faith in the future grows stronger. As it is written in Proverbs: “Trust in the Lord with all your heart and lean not on your own understanding. In all your ways, acknowledge Him, and He will make your paths straight.” That is an old, conservative and fundamentalist notion, but it is as true and revolutionary today as it was two thousand years ago. And we Filipinos can attest to it.

I thank our Baptist friends for having been, and continuing to be, part of our inner revolution. Thank you for your prayers for the success of our recent elections. Please continue praying, this time, for the transformations in Government that will soon take place with the convening of Congress. May Christ once again hold the floor and steer its members to straight paths as they work to serve our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].