THE FAMILY: OUR SOURCE OF STRENGTH

President Aquino shares her thoughts as head of two families: her own and the nation. If every family can be strong, she says, so too will the country be. She, therefore encourages Filipino families to internalize the case values of Faith, Truth and Justice, to lead simple lives, to commit themselves to peace, and to get involved in political life.

May I congratulate the seven family organizations for having formed this cause-oriented alliance, Families for Justice and Peace . May I also commend you for the successful effort to include family rights in the draft of our fundamental law.

Next to our faith in Christ, our family-oriented culture may be our greatest strength as a nation. But it is a strength that can also be a weakness. Family-centeredness can also mean clannishness, or an almost exclusive preoccupation with one’s own family, selected relatives and friends. This is why the aim of your alliance offers a challenging breakthrough. For you see through to the deeper and broader meaning of family – and that is our country which shelters the family. As the unity and strength of the family strengthens the nation, so does the progress of the nation strengthen the family. And beyond the nation there is the family of nations, and the vision of the brotherhood of man which is the family’s greatest fulfillment.

The family holds the secret of national power. Its unity prefigures the national strength that will meet any threat, overcome any obstacle, and achieve the worthiest goals. As Ecclesiastes wisely put it: Two are better than one . . . For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow . . . And if a man prevail against him that is alone, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.

I will always cherish those moments of family togetherness that my late husband, our children and I enjoyed in Boston, our last home away from home. But somehow, I knew even then that it could not last. Ninoy, and then later I, had to come home to fulfill our obligations to a bigger family, the family of all Filipinos seeking freedom. And now I know and have come to accept what it means to be a “couple-for-others” in loving and serving our people.

Though Ninoy is no longer by my side, the urgency and necessity of the mission we embarked on together has given me the courage to embrace the responsibilities of the Presidency. And here, I believe, the Aquinos are not alone. This is God’s mission too, for every Filipino couple and family.

I must confess that there are times when I long to just stay at home and be with my children and grandson. But I have to remind myself that I must divide my attention among a much larger brood. And, as it should be in any household, the head of the home must have the help and cooperation of the other members.

I therefore call upon all Filipino families to join in the formidable, but greatly rewarding task of nation-building.

The first phase of this task is the reformation of our values as a people. And where else must this begin but in the heart of the nation, the families that are its constitutive elements.

Our children are the future of our country. We must patiently and persistently instill and nurture the right core values in their hearts and minds, for, as I have said, the nation can only be as strong as the families that make it up.

What are these core values that are so crucial to the nation and that must first be found in our homes?

First and foremost is Faith. The family that does not center its life on God becomes a self-centered and self-serving family. But the family that turns inwards to God will find itself in the wider solidarity of God’s family. It is this faith that gave us the courage to work the miracle of our liberation. This faith that enabled us to overcome the greatest crisis in our nation’s history will help us overcome the other obstacles that are set in our path.

What we now need to do is ensure that this faith is real, that it translates into action, so that we can close the gap between the profession and the practice of our faith.

The second core value that should flow from our Faith is an uncompromising commitment to Truth. Personal honesty and integrity are essential elements of reconstruction. Without these values, we build our fortunes, as did the previous regime, on sand. Most specifically, let us not make the security and future of the members of our families the motive and justification for corruption and greed. For our legacy to our children should not be measured by the size of our bank accounts and the height of the position we have attained in society, but the size of the space we make for them in our hearts, and the loftiness of the values and ideals we espouse.

A third core value that we must instill in our children is a deep yearning for and a keen sense of justice. And we can do this best by taking it upon ourselves to right the wrongs before us. I speak of the social injustice in the world, the gross and shameful inequalities between the minority who are rich and powerful, and the majority who are poor and powerless. This condition cannot continue. We are merely stewards, however talented or enterprising we or our parents were. We are answerable to the Creator for the resources that have fallen into our hands, that all may share in their bounty.

Related to this issue is the need for simplicity in our family lifestyles. Self-indulgence and extravagance are the hallmarks of tyranny, not of the republican state we are. Luxury distracts us from the civic virtues we must cultivate to assure the survival of democracy.

A fourth core value upon which we must build our homes is a commitment to the ways of peace as the first, and if possible, last means of resolving conflict. Only as a last resort, and only to defend the ways and values of peace and democracy, should we resort to force to protect them. God showed the way at EDSA. Even the most irreconcilable differences one could imagine between tyranny and freedom could be bridged by compassion and fraternity.

The last, but not the least core value that I urge all Filipino families to commit themselves to is an active involvement in our political life. Again the way was showed in the Election and Revolution of February. It was families that guarded the polls, that took to the streets to protest the theft of the elections, that formed a human barricade to protect a military revolt and our new-born democracy.

It was the Holy Family, whose Feast we celebrate today, who lived up most beautifully to the core values whereof we speak. Their whole lives were centered on loving and obeying the commands of God, their Father. They lived justly and simply, preferring to accumulate a spiritual wealth in heaven to laying up treasures on earth. It was the only Child of that family that laid down his life, for the family of man and the cause of peace.

Let us therefore strive to be worthy members of this larger family for which the Lord laid down His Life. As He tells us in Matthew: “Whoever does the will of my heavenly Father is brother and sister and mother to me.”

May Christ bless your Family Alliance so that it may succeed in all its endeavors.

I greet you all with a patriotic new year!

Source: Presidential Museum and Library