Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the Catholic Asian Bishops

[Delivered at Club Filipino, November 3, 1988]

FAITH ANCHORED ON A FIRM FOUNDATION

Asia is the cradle of the great religions of the world. President Aquino welcomes the participants of the Asian Bishop’s Institute on the Theology of Dialogue. She acknowledges the importance of dialogue among the different religious leaders in order to generate joy, foster liberation, spawn dignity and peace, and bring about equality and hope among the people.

Allow me to extend to you a very warm and cordial welcome.

I understand that you are here to attend the Seventh Asian Bishop’s Institute on the Theology of Dialogue under the sponsorship of the Federation of Asian Bishops’ Conferences. And I am told that the theme you chose for your recently-concluded workshop was “Living and Working Together with Neighbors of Other Religions.”

It makes me very happy that you chose this theme, for I see the wisdom in it. There is wisdom because it recognizes that the greatest service that Asian religious leaders can give Asia is dialogue. I say this because I know that dialogue can generate joy, foster liberation, spawn dignity and peace, and bring about equality and hope. Above all, it can create the sense of community which is still sorely lacking among the peoples in this part of our world.

This is sad, for Asia is the cradle of the great religions of the world. And all these religions have a vision of community. Of peoples coming together in peace and harmony despite their disparate cultures.

In my case I have opened avenues of communication with church leaders and organizations. A few months ago I had a dialog with representatives of the Association of Major Religious Superiors of the Philippines. Acting promptly on their recommendation, I appointed Atty. Narciso Monteiro as Commissioner of the Commission on Human Rights. I have directed Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos and Chief Staff Gen. Renato de Villa to hold continuing dialogs with such Church leaders as Archbishop Leonardo Legaspi and Bishop Bacani.

Aware that the church leaders have direct access to the people in the countryside, I have tapped some of them to help in our economic development efforts. Monsignor Pastor Cotiangco, whom I have appointed Chairman of the Regional Development Council in Region VIII, has earned the respect and high regard of his lay colleagues for his many insightful contributions.

In my unceasing quest for pipelines to both church leaders and the laity, I have agreed to meet next week with the members of the Public Affairs Committee of the Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines (CBCP).

I have not, however, confined my relationship with the Catholic Church alone. To ensure inputs from all religious denominations, I have set up the National Ecumenical Consultative Committee (NECCOM).

Under the leadership of Bishop Deogracias S. Iniguez who is here with us, officials from the Protestant, Muslim, and other minority sects keep me attuned to the feelings and aspirations of people of different faiths all over the country.

All these religions, as you very well know, have gifted us, not with just great leaders, but with thoughts and attitudes of surpassing wisdom and beauty. We can benefit from all these. From the leaders whose sterling example and exemplary way of life are an inspiration to all of us. From their teachings which, if followed conscientiously, can provide the answer to all the conflicts and dissensions that plague the world. These spiritual leaders and their wisdom can provide the right answer, in a prayerful way, to the questions that unsettle us and disturb our serenity.

The mystery of all religions flows through the mystery of faith. Then, through the mystery of a person who lives the religion into the mystery of man.

Each individual chooses his own path. We who are Christians chose the path of Jesus Christ. As we strive to walk in His footsteps, we become more and more sure that we have anchored our faith on a firm foundation. A foundation based on love which impels us to stretch our arms towards our brothers in peace and reconciliation.

Once again, I extend to you my sincere welcome. Thank you for listening and may the good Lord bless us all!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].