CONFRONTING THE CHALLENGES OVERSEAS

President Aquino states that a great part of what the government has achieved it owes to the unsung heroes of the Revolution and to the overseas Filipinos, whose dedication and earnings have supported the economy for the past three years. She urges Filipinos abroad to unite and use their skills and talents to the best of their ability to confront the challenges made on our race, and to prove once and for all that we deserve to be in the league of great powers.

We have come a long way since those heady days when we celebrated here the victory of democracy. We had shown the world what Filipinos can do when they are united.

The period that followed our very successful visit to the United States was followed by one of great uncertainty and terrible tragedies. There were repeated attempts by military renegades to destroy our young democracy and return us again to the shame of military rule. Again it was Filipino unity that saved the day. With the country behind me, I faced off with the military rebels and defeated them.

After that came the peace that our country so desperately needed. The peace in which to rebuild its economy and political institutions.

We have been very successful in our efforts. From a negative growth of minus 4 percent in the last year of the dictatorship, the economy surged to a GNP of 6.7 percent, without reneging in the smallest particular from any of its international financial obligations. The employment rate increased from 88.2% in 1986 to 90.4% in 1988. More importantly, the government was able to generate 2.3 million jobs since 1986.

I have always said that a great part of what we have achieved we owe to the unsung heroes of the Philippine Revolution, to the hundreds of thousands of overseas Filipinos, whose dedication spreads the good word about the Philippines, and whose earnings have supported our economy and brought in more financial resources into our country than almost any other sector of the economy. In the past three years, remittances were so substantial as to dwarf all foreign aid to the country.

In recognition of your services, I issued Presidential Proclamation No. 276 on June 21, 1988, declaring December of every year as the month for Filipinos overseas. This is a modest expression of our gratitude for your help.

I am deeply pleased to be with you tonight. I know that you all share in the aspirations and ideals of the Filipino people. Although you are far from your homeland, many of you care and continue to desire to help our country. I want to strengthen this patriotic desire through an invitation. Our government still has much to do to improve and change the lives of our citizens. In this great endeavor, your help is greatly needed. Return to the provinces or villages where you came from. Perhaps you have relatives or friends who need help with capital for their livelihoods or in finding patrons for our native products. This is a good start.

While you are here, participate in the growth of our established “Philippine Fund” as an investment method that can help our economy. Please also invite foreigners to share their capital in it to further strengthen our national economy and create many jobs. With your help, our less fortunate countrymen will be given hope for a better life.

Through a program which we aptly call the “Lingkod sa Kapwa Pilipino”, we seek to establish a network of support between Filipinos overseas and Filipinos at home.

I have tasked the Manila-based Commission on Filipinos Overseas, an agency under the Office of the President, to serve as the primary conduit between interested Filipino Associations here and local beneficiaries in the Philippines.

We Filipinos are known for our diligence and intelligence. But many notice our disagreements or lack of unity in our endeavors here. Many also question our ability as a race. Let us correct the negative perception of Filipinos. Let us unite. Let us use our diligence and intelligence so that we have a single purpose and a single voice here in America to become a strong force in the field of politics and economics.

I sincerely hope that all our efforts will bring meaningful value to our future. The prosperity we desire we will also achieve. On that day, it may no longer be necessary for us to be far from our country and our loved ones to seek a good life. That is the essence of my current journey. For our country… let us unite and help each other. Long live us all!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].