Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the canonization of San Lorenzo Ruiz

[Released on October 7, 1987]

AT LAST, A FILIPINO SAINT

Lorenzo Ruiz of Manila was “a most ordinary” Filipino who was tortured to death in Japan in 1637, thus achieving greatness for his martyrdom to the Faith. In his canonization, President Aquino declares, we meet the challenge to rise, with God’s help, to the demands of the present.

On October 18, Blessed Lorenzo Ruiz of Manila will be raised to the altars for the veneration of the entire Catholic world, by Pope John Paul II, at the piazza of St. Peter’s basilica. After four hundred years of Christianity in the Philippines, we will have our own first Filipino saint.

What strikes those who read of this man’s life is its ordinariness and obscurity. Born in Binondo of a Chinese father and a Filipina-Tagalog mother, married, with three children, he made his living as an escribano for the Dominican Fathers. His name would never have made the pages of any history book, were it not for a series of improbable events which led him, reluctantly at first, and then with heroic fidelity, to arrest and trial, torture and martyrdom for his faith, in Nagasaki in Japan in 1637.

In the canonization of “a most ordinary” Filipino, a layman, we meet the challenge to rise, with God’s help, to the demands which the present makes of all of us and each of us. Lorenzo Ruiz would perhaps never have arrived at the full measure of his greatness had not the unsought-for demand of martyrdom been made of him. But when it was made, he found the courage, in the power of God’s grace, “to hold his own self in his own hands” and to “stand fast” in his faith to the end. In that steadfastness he now stands forever before us. He tells us that we too can try to respond as he did to the demands we face now in our own lives, in our own moment of history. He inspires us to do all that lies in us, relying finally on God’s strength and power in the struggle to have justice and love prevail in our society today.

In Lorenzo Ruiz we realize with a certain freshness the truth of Ninoy’s words, “The Filipino is worth dying for.” As the bells ring in jubilation throughout our land, and Lorenzo Ruiz de Manila is declared a saint, let us thank God for this singular gift. He gives us and our race, and generations of Filipinos after us. Let us renew in our hearts our faith in God as a people, our resolve to seek and be faithful to His will and His law, for without this we know our nation cannot hold as one. And let us ask our new saint to intercede for us, that the “many thousands of lives” he was willing to give for God, we may find the courage to give, under God, for the healing and making whole of our sadly divided land. Let us pray that something of Lorenzo Ruiz’s dedication, self-giving and courage may enter into our own lives, and that we may become, each in our small measure, the saints and heroes the challenge of our time calls us to be.

San Lorenzo Ruiz de Manila, pray for us.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].