Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Military in Jolo

[Delivered in Jolo, September 5, 1986]

PEACE: THE SOLDIER’S DREAM

Mindanao belongs to all, whether Muslim or Christian, who have shed blood and tears to make it a home for Filipinos. Speaking before soldiers of the First Brigade and constables of the Territorial Command, President Aquino tells them that their sacrifices have not been in vain. She urges the soldiers to keep the faith, and to pursue the elusive dream of peace.

I have come here to renew myself in the spirit of your great courage and unfaltering devotion to our country. Sitting at my desk in the Palace and listening to people complain about others or make requests, of course, all for the sake of the country, I begin to feel a little despondent. That is when I seize the first opportunity to be back among my soldiers, especially those in the farthest and most dangerous frontiers of the Republic. Here, among men who live only by honor, duty, and country, I am able to renew my strength, my resolve, and my faith.

Sentinels of the southern frontiers, I want you to know that your sacrifices are seen and acknowledged. The great distance from here to the capital cannot dim the lustre of your honor and valor. Nor will your sacrifices be in vain. No portion of the Republic can ever be alienated where her soldiers have spilled their blood. Nothing can supersede a claim based on sacrifice. Mindanao belongs to all, be they Muslim or Christian, who have expended sweat, tears and blood to make it a home for Filipinos. It belongs to the Republic as the legacy of her heroes who fought and died for the vision of a Philippines that is free and strong and united from Batanes to Jolo. That vision is still a reality thanks to you, soldiers of the Republic, who stood fast by it even when the communities around you lost sight of it because of faction and misunderstanding. Keep the faith, my soldiers, for I am here with you true to my word that I shall ask for no sacrifice greater than I myself am prepared to make, nor send you to any perils that I myself am not prepared to embrace. I am here also to fulfill my pledge to try to bring an honorable peace to our country, a peace that will meet the just demands of the contending forces without detracting from the honor of the Armed Forces. Peace is the soldier’s dream, for he has known it so little, just as honor is his life. You and I will make an earnest effort to achieve the first, but we shall never lose the second. Ninoy’s favorite words were those of the soldier who said, “All is lost but honor.”

Long live the New Armed Forces of the Philippines!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].