Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Philippine-American Foundation

[Delivered on November 10, 1989]

NGOs: BEST PROTECTORS OF THE ENVIRONMENT

Nongovernmental organizations or NGOs embody the solidarity of ordinary men in the pursuit of common goals that is fast becoming a necessity for the development and protection of the earth. NGOs do the work that governments cannot and make the commitments that governments will not. Although people in government may not match the NGO’s commitment, they can match the NGO’s usefulness to the people.

NGOs have suggested populist solutions to the problem of poverty, but the Philippines is taking the free market, capitalist road to progress.

NGOs have important roles in the development of the country. The Philippine Assistance Program, for instance, relies on NGOs for the implementation of its projects. Environmental protection would also be best given in the hands of NGOs.

The President sincerely expresses her gratitude to American NGOs.

It is a great privilege to address the American nongovernmental organizations that have assisted us through the years in the areas of education, nutrition, and very often, in disaster relief. I am also happy to note that a delegation of Philippine NGOs who came to the US for a conference on the environment could join us today.

With the world fast becoming, indeed, one global village there is need and singular opportunity for men to act in concert, in the pursuit of common goals, and for the safety of their one and only home — the planet whose ultimate fate they must all share.

I see the solidarity of common men, working through NGOs, to do the work that governments cannot, and to make the commitments that governments refuse — and that is to make the people strong.

I have seen your efforts to empower the poor to retake the direction of their lives by education, skills training, and access to credit through cooperatives and credit unions. By teaching them modern agricultural techniques, you have given them the best hope of a better life working the soil.

The basic postulate of your work is the search for human dignity. In your work you have been sensitive to unique cultural values and ways, while pushing for the universal advantages that practical education gives. I have marvelled at the depth of your commitment to serve the people, even in the remotest areas.

We, in government, cannot hope to match your commitment. But we can in our way approximate your usefulness to the people. We have at least more resources, although, at times, not the resourcefulness to use them well. The 49% of the population that scratches out an existence below the poverty line is a perennial rebuke to our performance.

The shortcomings of government in improving the lot of the poor has convinced many NGOs that a “people—powered” economic policy would be preferably a market driven one. For it seems that the tremendous progress the Philippines has made in the past three years has served principally to fatten the bank accounts of the rich. They have called for more nationalism in economic policy, such as excluding foreign investments. They have called for the equal redistribution of present wealth rather than the generation of more wealth. If economies would work on the principle of justice alone, I wouldn’t have any objection. But in fact economies work by forces that would simply expire from the populist solutions proposed.

The strong economies of the Asian tigers show the one sure road to success. It would be folly to strike out on a new path at this late date. We are taking the free market, capitalist road to progress and the Christian path to social justice.

I understand there would be more involvement in the work of NGOs but for the peace and order situation in the Philippines. I share your concern for the safety of field workers, but the dangers have been exaggerated. On both sides of the tragic conflict that continues in my country, there is a deep respect for those who work for the poor.

The Philippine Assistance Program assumes an important role for NGOs in the implementation of its programs. Three of PAP special projects depend on NGO expertise in institution building, cooperative organization, and technical assistance.

It would be best to give the lead in environmental protection to the NGOs. As parts of the communities that are most affected by the degradation of their environments, only the NGOs will exercise the vigilance to prevent further destruction. For the common man, the issue of environmentalism is just one issue out of many, it affects directly the kind of life he will lead. Whether one of plenty in a balanced environment, or one of destitution on a dessicated land.

The protection of the earth must be placed in the first instance, and last, in the hands of those who really care: the ordinary people.

In conclusion, I would like to express again my gratitude to the American NGOs for all the good you have done for our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].