Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Science and Technology

[Delivered on July 13, 1988]

ENCOURAGING TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS

The President exhorts the scientists to recapture some measure of our former eminence in science and technology in Asia. In this respect, government’s role is to encourage technological innovations by the private sector through the provision of incentives.

Science and technology in our country is in the same state of neglect as in all developing countries, with this dubious distinction: the neglect is greater here than anywhere else. Yet, 20 years ago, we were second only to Japan in scientific and technological know-how in Asia. The challenge is clear: we must recapture some measure of our former eminence in these fields, if never our former ranking.

The key to progress is science and its technological applications. The history of the developed economies of the world prove this; and the lesson is underscored by the story of the emergence of the Newly Industrialized Countries.

In the highly developed countries, 50 to 70 percent of economic growth is attributable to Science and Technology, while in newly industrializing countries, it is 45 to 55 percent.

We have made it our goal to achieve the status of a newly industrialized country by the year 2000. This will require a consistent minimum 10 percent growth rate in GNP until that year. Only science and technology can help us achieve that.

The economist Robert Solow has shown that 70 percent of the U.S. economic growth from 1940 to 1950 was brought about by technological innovations in industry, encouraged of course by two wars. Certainly, a more modest growth through science and technology is open to us without war.

The role of the government is to encourage technological innovations in areas that the private sector finds too risky and to encourage such innovations by the private sector through the provision of incentives. The private sector today accounts for only 10 to 15 percent of total research and development. This is not enough. We must forge a closer bond between public research and private industry to make up for the slack. I have asked the Science Secretary to give me a report on the situation of Philippine R&D with his recommendations on how government can help.

Meanwhile, we commend the members of the science and technology community for their help in spreading awareness of their critical role in development. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library