A CALL TO FILIPINOS ABROAD

Among foreign governments, Canada has been in the forefront of assisting the Philippines. This assistance will be devoted to the challenge facing Philippine government today: raising the standard of living in the Philippines. Filipinos overseas also have a part in this endeavor. They can invest in the Philippines, give donations through the Commission on Filipinos Overseas, patronize Philippine products, and visit the country.

I would like to thank you for the very warm welcome you have given me and my party. During my meetings with our fellow-Filipinos in Vancouver and Toronto, I was overwhelmed by the support for our efforts and the appreciation for what we have done. We are encouraged to strive more.

Canada, your adopted country, has been in the forefront of aid donors to the Philippines. During the Pledging session for the Philippine Assistance Program in Tokyo last June, Canada announced a new five-year country program of increased levels of assistance.

We have assured the Canadian government, which is deeply concerned about poverty in our country, that the assistance they are giving will be principally addressing this problem. Poverty alleviation has always ranked first in our priorities. We know that only with the upliftment of the poor can we guarantee the long-term stability of the country and the survival of our liberties.

We know that the Filipino will give his life to be free, so that he will not trade off his freedom for a better life. But it would be unfair to force him to make that choice. It is the duty of government to save him from such choices and help him achieve a better standard of living.

I am fully confident in calling on every Filipino here in Canada to join us in seeking solutions to the problems hindering the development of our country. If we all have a single purpose and a single action, no problem will be an obstacle to the progress of the Philippines.

Perhaps you are wondering now what you can do for our country. Your being abroad is not a hindrance to fulfilling your patriotic duty to your homeland. Show your trust in our country by investing in our Filipino goods or companies. Registering traders and investors is now easier. An Investment One-Stop Action Center has been established to easily set up a business in our country. Even at the Bureau of Customs, the process of importing has been simplified through the Express Processing of the Release of Shipment program. These changes are proof of your government's desire for you to be involved in developing business in our country.

I have instructed the “Commission on Filipinos Overseas,” an agency under my office, to help all Filipinos abroad who wish to contribute to their country. The Commission has launched programs to address your needs, especially in promoting your welfare and assisting in the transfer of donations from you to your beneficiary in the Philippines. This program includes a way to inform donors about the status of their donations.

Our native products are something you can already be proud of around the world. Patronize them. Encourage foreign friends or acquaintances to buy our own.

Perhaps, it is also time to refresh your memories of the beautiful scenery in our country. I often ask myself: if the scenery of the Philippines attracts thousands of foreigners, why not Filipinos?

I hope that the time will come when I see you again not only as returning residents, but as fellow heroes in developing our country. That is why I am here to instill in your hearts and minds the value of being Filipino. And you can be assured that the fruits of our efforts are for all Filipinos.

Long live!

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].