OVERCOMING THE ECONOMIC CRISIS

Sa gitna ng mga hamon sa ekonomiya na kinakaharap ng bansa, mahalaga ang pagtutulungan ng iba't ibang sektor upang malampasan ito. Kailangan ang mabilis at epektibong pagtugon sa mga isyu tulad ng pagtaas ng presyo ng bilihin, kawalan ng trabaho, at pagbaba ng kita ng mga Pilipino. We must prioritize programs that provide immediate relief to vulnerable sectors while simultaneously implementing long-term strategies for sustainable economic growth.

Ang gobyerno ay nagsasagawa ng mga hakbangin upang mapabuti ang kalagayan ng ekonomiya. Kabilang dito ang pagpapalakas ng micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), paghikayat ng foreign investments, at pagpapalawak ng mga programang pang-impok at pangkabuhayan. These initiatives aim to create more job opportunities and stimulate economic activity.

Mahalaga rin ang papel ng bawat mamamayan sa pagbangon ng ekonomiya. Ang pagiging responsable sa paggastos, pagsuporta sa lokal na produkto, at pagiging produktibo sa trabaho ay ilan lamang sa mga paraan upang makatulong. Let us all work together to build a stronger and more resilient Philippine economy. Kailangan nating magkaisa upang makamit ang isang mas magandang kinabukasan para sa ating lahat.

Fresh from several state visits, the President outlines the many tasks before her and the Filipino people: We have to restructure our $26 billion debt under easier terms and conditions, generate jobs, improve the material welfare of the people, “pump-prime” the economy, win markets for our exports products, and strive for greater self-reliance on options other than more debt.

Here I am, just recovered from a long journey, and now having to plan for my next official visit. Were I a member of a frequent traveler program, I would have amassed by now enough mileage points to take me on a vacation in some islands, but I assure you, not Hawaii.

Many of you have counted the dozens of thousands of kilometers that I have logged these past six weeks. Many of you have commented that my first six months in office were a period of confinement to get our initial homework done. But the past six weeks have been a period of wide travels: First, for a call on our close neighbors within ASEAN; then, for a pilgrimage of peace to our very own estranged brothers and sisters in Jolo and in the Cordilleras; and lately, for a working, grueling, but also exhilarating visit to America.

I hope more than a few of you will agree that I cannot solve the problems that face our nation and discharge my duties as President by merely sitting in my office or presiding over Cabinet meetings in Malacañang. Now that we have laid the basis for a new Constitution, for a new economy, and for a new full-term Administration, I have to go out and bring to bear the full weight of the Presidency on the problems wherever they are, and behind prospects where they may arise. Next week I shall be going to Negros and Iloilo to continue the nationwide consultations I pledged to carry out, and which I started on in Region XI and then in Region X. Confinement to one’s desk can narrow one’s vision and deepen the disquiet one gets from the press of problems that come pouring in. You and I know how important it is to look real people in the eye and talk with them in person.

I have been given a tonic by President Suharto and Prime Minister Lee who freely shared their experiences with me. For as long as we have our priorities clear and our focus trained, we should not worry if in six months we have not been able to solve all the problems bequeathed by more than 20 years of official theft and incompetence. Nur Misuari and Conrado Balweg also gave me more hope for peace and for the non-violent approach to settlement of differences than the briefing papers and official documents had allowed me to entertain. I shall seek out meetings with other leaders out in the regions to explore with them paths to the peace and development we all desire.

President Reagan, the Congress of the United States, American business and financial institutions, and the American public at large were receptive and mostly sympathetic to our cause. After all, we Filipinos reflected in the Campaign, Election and Revolution the ideals that are their meaning and purpose. Poor as we are, we gave them the inestimable gift, as they told me, of seeing again the living reality of democratic commitment, thereby strengthening their own. They grasped our message: Yes, we are heirs to a mountain of debts and an earful of problems that can fill the pages of all our 26 newspapers and magazines that, to put it mildly, add flair and color to them every single day; but we are biting the bullet and have been doing our homework.

That homework has been detailed and specific. We have gone way past general policy pronouncements and broad statements about programs. International reserve targets are clear and time-bound. Commitments to reduce our budget deficits are firm. Our fiscal program is in place. All outstanding issues concerning the rehabilitation of the DBP and PNB have been cleared. Policy statements for the strengthening of our weakened financial system have been drafted and agreed upon. The program for public sector investment spending and for export promotion by industry have been finalized. We have covered the whole breadth and width of the agenda for economic reform. We have not been shy nor slow about doing what must be done. It is no surprise therefore that both President Conable of the World Bank and Managing Director De Larosiere of the IMF agreed with me that the green light could be flashed for the 508 million dollar stand-by loan from the IMF and the 300 million dollar economic recovery loan from the World Bank.

You already know that these are only the first steps. They can now be followed up by steps that will set the stage for our recovery. We now are in a position to formally negotiate with the consortium of our creditor banks. We have to restructure our 26 billion dollar debt under easier terms and conditions that will permit our economy to grow, jobs to multiply, and the material welfare of our people to improve. We have to reopen the channels of normal financial relationships between our economy and the economies of our trading partners. I have talked with the members of the Advisory Committee of our creditor banks: they gave me more than applause; they also assured me of their understanding and support.

Within this more favorable environment of trust and confidence in the new Philippine government, we are seeking to defer 3.25 billion dollars of principal payment for the next 5-6 years. Since interest rates have gone down, we are also consolidating the 1984-1986 rescheduling into the 1987-1991 rescheduling. In this way, our overall interest burden on some 3.25 billion dollars should be lightened. Another three billion dollars should be affected by rescheduling a portion of our trade facility and by extension of the trade facility beyond December 1986. The bottomline result we seek is the reduction of our annual debt-service payments to a level that will allow our economy to grow and enable us, among other priorities, to pay our debt. We will achieve this not by fiery rhetoric about unilateral interest caps, although the injustice of our debt legacy should entitle us to indulge it, nor by running away from the responsibilities of a sovereign government whose animating spirit is honor. Rather, we intend to get to this result by quietly doing our sums, patiently but firmly presenting our positions, and above all, by working effectively to make our economy grow out of our debt.

Our economic strategy however calls for much greater reliance on options other than more debt. While it is essential for us to normalize our relationship with international financial institutions, it is even more imperative that we work in other fronts.

We have to win markets for our export products. The prospect is good that our sugar quota in the U.S. market will be increased by about 30%. A whole range of trade questions with the United States is to be examined. GSP items are up for review. The United States has made a commitment to a “Buy Filipino Policy” for U.S. defense facilities in the Philippines and elsewhere in Asia. We are also setting up a business promotion council to continue to explore and exploit more opportunities for Philippine exports to the United States. Let me make this clear: We cannot achieve a real economic growth of 6 to 7% per year, unless we succeed in our export drive. We must be ready to do everything possible so we can effectively compete in many more markets to which we must gain access.

In the meanwhile, as we begin to get out of the depth of our economic crisis, we count as a welcome bonus any help we get from friends. We have to prime our economic pump. We have to spend on programs that create jobs and help us win peace. We have to get on with the task of industrial rehabilitation and especially of rapid agricultural development. All these require financing, and we have been very short of resources. The 100 million dollar Economic Support Fund signed by Secretary Baker and Minister Ongpin; the 50 million dollar military assistance grant; and the.20 million dollar donation of medicine to our military and civilian sectors: and the 200 million supplemental aid package, favorably voted by both houses of the U.S. Congress: all these are helpful, not because of the sums involved, but because of the goodwill and broad support they express. No proud and sovereign people, however great their need, would measure friendship and understanding by dollars and cents exchanged and given. Rather, it has to be in the warmth of their mutual respect and in the substance of their mutual dealings in matters of business and government where the true measure can be taken.

As Senator Lugar told me after the Senate vote on the aid package: “This is convincing testimony to the extraordinary success of your visit to the United States. Even more importantly, the vote is proof of the strong underlying faith Americans have in the endurance and resolve of Philippine democracy.”

Having said all this, must I depend on the words of a foreign friend to say: “And who says we haven’t done anything?”

But more remains to be done. And by you. We are building a new economy – one where the government provides the framework for growth but where the private sector must flesh out the full potential of this great country of ours. I stand here hoping that I do not end up merely telling you what transpired during my trips abroad but getting you to answer the call to take up your part in our thrust towards economic recovery. I said it when I arrived: Doleouts won’t bail out our economy; our own efforts alone will do that. And that is how it should be so that the credit and honor, and the major profit, of our recovery shall be singularly ours. My government can do only so much in loading up the bases. In the private enterprise economy that you demanded and fought for and won, it is you, private business, that must hit the homeruns and pile up the scores. It is now your turn at the bat.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].