Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At a dinner hosted by Boston City Mayor Ramon Flynn

[Delivered in Boston, Massachusetts, September 20, 1986]

A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY

To the Aquino family, Boston is a special city. It gave them the last home that they shared together. But beyond personal reasons, President Aquino is endeared to Boston because it is a cradle of freedom.

For me, this is a sentimental journey home.

Once I made up my mind to come, there was no question I would visit Boston, which gave us the last home that Ninoy and I and our children shared. And Boston, of course, gave him his first taste of freedom after almost eight years in a tiny, windowless cell. That was a God-sent gift to feel free at last in the mother city of American freedom. Boston gave us the happiest years of our lives together.

But Boston and the Great Commonwealth of Massachusetts has more than a personal meaning for one Filipino. As early as 1796, a vigorous trade was carried on between Salem and Boston, on the one hand, and the Philippines, on the other. No Salem boy thought the Philippines were canned goods! Indeed, it is recorded that “four and a quarter million pounds of sugar were landed at Boston in 1843.” What a change for the worse since then for Philippine sugar in the United States! But while direct trade in goods between Salem and Manila ceased in 1858, a nobler trade in ideas developed.

We recognized this even greater contribution. Ninoy was in love with this city, its history, and its institutions that are so congenial to reflection and learning. Not for nothing, he would say, is this city called the Athens of America. Boston was in his Athenian exile, the fount of liberty; the city on the hill that beckoned to him in his thirst to know more about freedom and the rights that protect it. For me, Boston was just the plain loveliest city I have known, and, of course, the home of the Celtics, in the State that gave birth to basketball.

If sugar and liberty were our historic links, basketball is what brings your fair state to vivid life for many Filipinos, who are even more fanatic about the game than you are. Indeed, some people might want nothing better than for us to pirate Larry Bird, a household name back home, to play in Manila. However, this might wipe out our foreign exchange reserves and imperil my talks with the New York bankers on Monday. And the last thing we can afford at the moment is a two-front war, against communist insurgents at home and Celtic fans over here.

Let me acknowledge the contributions of your learned statesmen, judges, writers, educators, businessmen, and politicians to the effort of everyone and every country in the world, mine especially, to achieve freedom through the liberating power of truth and progress through freedom. It was with the words of one of them, Ralph Waldo Emerson, that I consoled myself when Ninoy was killed. The shot, I prayed, would be “heard round the world” and rouse at least my people.

Despite some nitpicking as to the background of some guests at the Boston Tea Party, that great social event was the great inspiration of our passive resistance, even as your Thoreau was our teacher.

And today, as the leader of a people who yearn for peace so they can bind their wounds and rebuild their house, I take the counsel of your bold son whom Filipinos loved and admired as much as you did. “Let us never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear to negotiate.” And in my desire to have peace at last, I am as determined as he was to “pay any price, bear any burden, and meet any hardship.” With those words, I overcame the objections of my advisers and security officers and went to the site of our country’s most bitter conflict to talk peace with the chief of the secessionist movement.

Clearly some of the world’s broadest and most penetrating intellects were from here. It is a little ironic that it should be said that the streets of Boston are laid out along 17th century cow paths and that to drive around here you have to think like a cow. The fact is, no more forward-looking and broad-perspectived citizens, who see the world without blinders, are to be found than here.

I therefore stand extremely honored and awed in this cradle of freedom.

I think I have gushed enough over this city of happy memories for me. Let me just conclude by saying that I believe that the Boston Red Sox and Roger Clemens will continue to be on top of the American League: they will win the pennant, the playoffs and the World Series. And I wish you many splendid autumn memories this winter, and as happy as those my children and I will always have of Boston.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].