A POOL OF SKILLED WORKERS

Small enterprises compose the backbone of our economy. President Aquino endorses the creation of People’s Economic Councils which will help develop small businesses and enhance productivity and generate jobs for the unemployed. She considers this as one way of fulfilling her promise to provide incentives to the sectors that have powered our economic recovery, particularly the small and medium industries.

I am happiest when I can dialog with people and people-based organizations like yours. For as you all know, mine is an administration that was swept into power on the crest of a People’s Revolution. The second Revolution is now upon us. And you are helping provide the people component of the ongoing Economic Revolution.

This is why I heartily endorsed the plan of Secretary Jose Concepcion to form People’s Economic Councils (PECs) all over the country when he first suggested it. Through you, I have a chance to tap the private sector, not the elitist leaders, but those who rely on their home-grown resources and initiative to enhance productivity and generate jobs for the unemployed.

Government, with all its good intentions, organization and materials cannot accomplish everything to propel economic growth in the country. It needs the private sector-orientation and collective participation of the small entrepreneurs like you. And so I am immensely gratified to learn that in Abra, the PECs have developed the bamboocraft industry. In Alfonso, Cavite, they have established a Garments Center. In my own province in Tarlac, a financial assistance program that is the lifeblood of any business enterprise.

In General Santos, your timely intervention helped settle the problem at the port of Nakar.

In Cebu, I understand the PECs helped our government save some PI million with its suggestion that the city government purchase the more practical “Macho” jeeps instead of the more expensive Lancer cars.

In a very real sense, therefore, your small enterprises comprise the backbone of our economy. At a time when large businesses were hesitant about investing their capital in new ventures or were salting away their precious dollars, you were already providing livelihood to our people through cottage industries. Thereby you were helping create a pool of skilled workers for future industrial expansion as well as for the creation of forward and backward linkages, such as through subcontracting arrangements.

Now perhaps you could turn your efforts to assisting the government in meeting the challenge of insurgency. As you are aware, we have been implementing a National Reconciliation and Development Program to help our misguided citizens return to the fold of the law. Within their limited capabilities and resources, our Department of Social Welfare and Development and the Department of National Defense have exerted their best efforts to help the rebel returnees adjust to the challenges of a normal life.

This is where your 1300 organizations can contribute in a substantial way. By providing employment to these brothers and sisters of ours. Give them the opportunities to become productive citizens once again. As they rejoin their families, absorb them into the mainstream of the community’s social economic and political life.

I understand that you have passed in your First National Convention a resolution urging the decentralization of certain functions of government. I could not agree more with you that this measure will ensure the faster delivery of government services to the people. That it will, in turn, encourage private businesses to establish their bases of operations in regions where their raw material supply and manpower are abundant is evident.

Let me inform you that as early as April 25, 1988, I issued Administrative Order No. 71 creating a joint Legislative Executive Committee on Decentralization and Local Autonomy in compliance with the Constitutional mandate to decentralize administrative functions. Then I issued Memorandum Circular No. 63 on May 30, 1988 that launched four pilot decentralization projects, namely, Davao del Norte, Laguna, Negros Occidental and Tarlac. A Cabinet Action Committee on Decentralization (CACD) was created to formulate plans and guidelines to implement this policy.

Last Monday, I issued Memorandum Circular No. 82 calling attention to the general provisions of the Administrative Code of 1987 which shall take effect on November 24. These pertain to the strengthening of regional operations through the delegation of more authority on administrative and substantive functions by Department Heads to their regional offices – exactly as you suggest in your Resolution.

Let me add that the New Disbursement Scheme now in full operation is making it possible to make budgetary releases directly to the regional offices concerned. Thus many an irritant that has slowed down the swift delivery of funds where they are needed has been removed.

Your second resolution endorses the “Omnibus Code to Rationalize and Promote Small Enterprises, Establish a Credit and Insurance Corporation, Provide Funds Therefore and For Other Purposes.” In my State of the Nation address delivered on July 25, this year, I promised: “On the economic front, we must provide long delayed incentives to the sectors that have powered our recovery, particularly the small and medium enterprises.”

Now, two bills with the same thrust have been filed in Congress — Senator Leticia Shahani’s bill in the Senate and Congressman Oscar Orbos’ bill in the Lower House. Their provisions are now being harmonized so that I can certify the final product as an Administrative bill.

This is the fruit of my promise to you, small entrepreneurs. Though your businesses may be small, perhaps lacking in capital, you play an important role in our society.

Through you, we receive the grievances and desires of entrepreneurs from the provinces. While there are prominent Chambers of Commerce in the cities, there are also diligent and zealous People’s Economic Councils.

Therefore, increase your diligence so that the foundation of our economy becomes even stronger.

Thank you very much for your help and may you all prosper!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].