Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On education’s role in National Development

[ Delivered at the Far Eastern University, January 29, 1987 ]

EDUCATION: ENSURING A FREE FUTURE

President Aquino acknowledges the educator’s contribution to national development. Freedom and learning go hand in hand, she says as she stresses that the strength of a democracy lies in the intelligence and maturity of a people. In recognition of education’s role in national development, special provisions on education have been incorporated in the New Constitution.

I accept the honor you have conferred on me today with deep gratitude, and with a satisfaction only less than that which I feel over the investiture of Dr. Josephine Reyes as the 7th President of this distinguished university. FEU is her life, the almost singular object of her concern and the focus of nearly all her time, energies and talent. I do not say these things as one sister of another. But as one privileged to see close-up how a life is lived dedicated to imparting reason and learning to the youth of our country, which is like saying: preparing the groundwork for the future.

I say them also as one who experienced briefly, as a law student, the rigor and effectiveness of the instruction, and the wisdom of the faculty of this university.

What I have observed her doing, is a small version of what private institutions of higher learning, in general, do as their contribution to national progress.

Seventy-eight percent of college students are enrolled in private educational institutions, two-thirds of which are non-sectarian like the FEU. But such institutions, at their best, do more than just take up the slack created by the insufficient number of public institutions of higher education. You cultivate the diversity that makes up the wealth of our culture, and encourage the individualism and pluralism that mark a true democracy.

These important contributions that you have long been making have finally found their due recognition and support in the proposed Constitution’s provisions on education. This is one more reason why I can ask you confidently to help in the ratification of this charter. For the strength of a democracy grows with the maturity and intelligence of its citizens. Freedom and learning go hand in hand. They illuminate our lives and light the way to a happy future, just as the cultivation of ignorance was the instrument of the tyranny that darkened our land.

And so to you, the Far Eastern University, and to other private institutions of higher learning, may I express the gratitude of our nation and my faith in your continuing success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library