Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Capital Markets Development Conference

[Delivered on May 25, 1988]

TIME FOR BUSINESS TO DO ITS PART

The President reiterates call for the immediate privatization of government-owned or controlled private corporations and assets to preclude competition between government corporations and private enterprise.

The issue of economic growth being fueled by investments of Filipino capital becomes particularly urgent. There is a need to generate more capital to respond to the dramatic increase in demand.

The day before Labor Day I told an audience composed of capitalists and managers that the people and their leadership had fulfilled almost all the conditions of the full revival of the economy.

There is political stability and constitutional order.

All the political institutions critical to a healthy investment climate have been put in place. The democratic process was tested repeatedly – against corruption, fraud, terrorism, and, even against the bane of Western democracies, the indifference of electorates. Each test has proved the durability of the social and political order and the-strength of the popular commitment to this government and the principles of democracy.

All the enemies of freedom and progress have been put to flight. The rightwing is on the run, and the leftwing has been clipped – most recently by the capture of its top leadership.

There is, by and large, honest government. Such corruption as exists does not interfere with business transactions and relationships. There are no cronies forcing anyone to sell out or buy into a business. There is only the minimum of economic regulation. And I have, time and again, with increasing impatience, called for the immediate privatization of government-owned or controlled private corporations and assets, so there will be no competition between government corporations and private enterprise which supports these companies, one way or another, through taxes.

It is now the turn of business to do its part.

Business and I pledged to the people during the SNAP election that we would never again ask government to bankroll private enterprise and private fortunes. There would be no more of those public loans that lined private pockets, both here and abroad, which account for almost our entire foreign debt.

What this means, however, is that further economic growth must be fueled by investments of Filipino capital. This issue has become particularly urgent. The revival of the economy is consumer-led. The dramatic increase in demand is putting, however, a strain on existing productive capacity. To sustain the present growth, we must generate more capital.

I am painfully aware of the history of our domestic capital markets. Unscrupulous practices in the management of companies and in the trading of shares has made the public wary of investing in industry. And yet we have the infrastructure to improve our capital markets – the banks, the financial intermediaries, and the stock exchanges. But these institutions have not been fully or properly utilized. There has been, for instance, too great an emphasis on short term capital, which prevents long range business planning and creates instability in interest rates.

An analysis of commercial bank loans for the third quarter of 1987 shows that 73 percent of all loans were demand or short term loans, reinforcing the observation that commercial banks have not been a major source of long term capital.

Neither has there been a development of our equities market. We have two exchanges, one of them is the oldest in Southeast Asia, and yet our market capitalization is P61 Billion, which is the lowest in the region. Together, the exchanges have a combined listing of only 130 companies, of which only 20 are actually traded. Of the top 1,000 corporations, only 61 are listed.

We do not have active secondary markets for commercial papers, bonds, debentures or even government securities. And yet, it is the secondary markets that will allow our industries to confidently source their long term capital needs and, at the same time, provide the investor the mechanism for liquidity.

This situation should not continue. We must reorder our priorities in this field. We need long term capital. We need new instruments in the financial markets. We need liquidity for investors. We need stable interest rates. We must make the development of our domestic capital markets a national priority.

Thank you and Good Day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].