Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On her official visit in Hong Jian Village

[Released on April 13, 1988]

A NECESSARY STOP

President Aquino retraces her steps and goes back to the land of her ancestors. Though her ancestral beginnings come from this land, the President belongs to the Philippines where she is the leader.

I came to China for reasons of state and for reasons personal to me, for I am both head of state of my country and, in a way, a daughter of this village. My first stop on this official visit to China has been here, at Hong Jian, the village where my family came from. The first steps in my own family’s history, as well as in the histories of many Filipinos, were taken here in this village.

Da-thia too shuo, wo tse jee lu-xhing de moo-di, sherh fan-xiang she-te wo-way sherh wei-la wo-deh jia-ting, ye-sherh weila, shu-do wa huayi te Filiping-kung ming, teh huai-lien han, liao-jie ta-men-teh tse zien she tung yang yung chin-lao han chuang-shing de tching-zhen dao high-way kerh-kerh-di chu kai-chuang tah-men de shing sheng-huo.

The end of travelling, we are told, is to return. I have returned for my family, and for other Filipinos of Chinese descent, to retrace their steps and attain some understanding of the industry and creativity that lead them forth to new beginnings in other lands.

I am proud to discover that our ancient lines can still be traced, that certain valuable traditions and memorials of the family have lived on in the very place where they started from. But I am most happy that I am making these discoveries in a new country and a new village – a new China, and a new Hong Jian. Here are still the same kind of people, even the same families, with the same warmth and goodness, but free now of feudal injustices.

The end of my travelling is not here, of course, because, although my family came from this village many, many years ago, my home is the Philippines of which I am the leader. And I have so far still to take my countrymen to the “home” we wish to have — a country where peace and justice and progress reign.

Yet this has been a worthwhile and necessary stop in my travels. Being here, among the good people of Hong Jian, among my relatives has given me a deeper sense of my own history. More importantly, it has impressed upon me this truth: that, for all the many different countries that have sprung up in the world, all good people everywhere are the same. And wherever they establish themselves and make a community, there a visitor will feel as though returning to her home.

I wish to thank my “uncle” Mr. Xu Yuanxing for his warm welcome of his wandering relatives, and the people of Hong Jian for their hospitality. As is customary among Chinese and the Filipinos, a returning relative must bring presents. I have brought a few gifts to celebrate this homecoming.

Wo pen ren, wo de nu-er Pinky han Kris, hai yo wo deh tong shing manh, tsai ee tse, gan sye ni-manh, dway women leh liyeh deh chow tai, sherh women tsong shen Ian wang. Siye-siye!

My daughters, Pinky and Kris, and I, and our companions once more thank you deeply for this memorable occasion.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].