LAWASIA November 27, 1989

THE LAW AS THE CONSCIENCE OF THE PEOPLE

It is fitting that the Third Chief Justices of Asia and the Western Pacific Conference should be held in this country. Our greatest historical contribution — the People Power Revolution — teaches us that the law is not only what is written in the statute books, but also what is written in the conscience of the people. The resolution also teaches that no government could be effective or endure unless it is founded on justice. It is not surprising, therefore, that this government should be particularly concerned with improving its judicial system. We hope to learn more about improving the administration of justice in the Philippines through the results of this conference.

I am honored to welcome the delegates to the Third Chief Justices of Asia and the Western Pacific Conference to our country. You have picked a most appropriate venue to discuss important issues of law and justice. For our recent history has had a great deal to do with those issues.

The historical event with which the Philippines is most identified – the people power revolution of 1986 – arose from an unresolved question of law. Can a government that has its roots in an act of illegitimacy be legitimate?

In 1972, a duly elected government illegally extended its term by declaring martial law. It had the armed forces, foreign opinion, and a people’s natural fears going for it. Yet, in its 14-year existence, the dictatorship never acquired legitimacy in the public mind. Yet it had a constitution – albeit adopted in fraudulent polls, and it re-elected itself in repeated though spurious elections.

With all the trappings of legitimacy, it remained to the end vulnerable on that essential point – its legitimacy. A peaceful demonstration on EDSA was enough to bring down the regime.

Now take the democratic government that took its place. It came to power on the crest of a revolution, yet it quickly acquired an aura of legitimacy that has preserved it from repeated attempts to overturn it.

What does this tell us about the law? I think it says that the law is not just what we put in the statute books but what is written also in the conscience of the people. That is the wellspring of the law.

Fourteen years of force did not establish a government where alone it can endure — in the hearts and minds of the people. One instant of courage established what many firmly believe will be a long-lived and free system of government.

The events of 1986 have impressed their lessons deeply on all of us here. Such lessons as the unreliability of force to protect governments and the weakness of the most elaborate lies to the assaults of the simplest truths. But the deepest lesson of all is that there can be no enduring or effective government that is not founded on justice. To be more precise, on the people’s unerring judgment that the order in which they live is right, lawful, and just.

It is not surprising therefore that a government such as this, which came to power to correct an old violation of the law, should be particularly sensitive to its smooth functioning.

Not everything is right with the administration of justice in the Philippines. It suffers from all the defects attendant to lack of money and lack of other means to run courts, police, and a correctional system efficiently. But it certainly does not suffer from a lack of sincere efforts to improve itself.

The reorganization of the Judiciary purged many misfits from office to give way to a new corps of justices and other judicial officers of proven integrity, competence, and independence. A new constitution has hedged the judiciary’s independence with guarantees of tenure and fiscal autonomy.

Through a judicial reform agenda vigorously pursued by the Chief Justice, deep inroads have been made into the festering problem of judicial delay.

A new Code of Judicial Conduct is in force to complement the legal profession’s code of ethics so that the courts would be infused from both ends with the true spirit of justice and an unyielding rectitude.

Institutional reforms include the creation of a planning office to assist the Supreme Court in charting reforms; the adoption of continuous trials in more than half of all courts; and another attempt at re-establishing the barangay justice system or informal small claims courts that stress conciliation and arbitration in the settlement of issues.

Court facilities are being improved. There is an extensive court building program to give justice a house worthy of its importance in our lives. Information retrieval systems are also being introduced.

I have given some particulars to emphasize the depth of our commitment to accord justice – the first principle of institutions — its dominant place in the life of our society.

The great issue for a developing country is political stability. The history of this country shows that political stability is gravely undermined — not by material want — as by a widespread sense of injustice.

I think this is true everywhere. But it is most particularly true of the Filipinos. A deeply ingrained and dominating sense of justice in the Filipino has determined the direction of historical forces in the history of this country. Our revolts and revolutions all sprang, not from a feeling of want, as from a sense of wrong.

It is against the repetition of old wrongs that we have set our faces firmly. And we have started where we believe it matters most — in the administration of justice by the courts, in the fair application of just laws by the government as a whole. We hope to learn a great deal from this conference about improving the administration of justice in the Philippines. And therefore look forward eagerly to the results of your conference.

I wish you much success. Thank you and good morning.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library