Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Philippine Coconut Authority Week

[Released on August 24, 1987]

PROTECTING THE COCONUT INDUSTRY

Millions of Filipinos depend on the coconut industry for their livelihood, and this country accounts for 70 percent of the world’s coconut exports. In view of this, the Philippines must immediately counter the anti-coconut campaign of US soybean interests and check the abuses of some irresponsible coconut and copra exporters.

The following few facts about coconut should underscore the importance of this occasion.

Coconut represents 19 percent of the total value of agricultural production, or P12.5 billion out of the total of P63 billion. It contributes about 3-5 percent of the national income.

More importantly, for this people-powered and people-centered administration, by one count, over eight and a half million Filipinos directly depend on the coconut industry for their livelihood. If we include the others who are involved in the processing and trading of coconut products, this number could easily reach 10 million or 17 percent of the population of this country. This is one estimate. Another estimate has roughly 30 percent of our population engaged in this industry, one way or another. There are 2.8 million hectares of coconut planted land. At one family per hectare that would be 2.8 million families or, with an average of six persons per family, 16,800,000 people.

Either way, you are talking about a sizable portion of our population, a great chunk of our economy. These facts alone call us to give high priority and very serious concern to the industry. In the light of information we have received of direct threats to the coconut industry by adverse developments abroad and certain abuses at home, the problems of the industry should have the highest priority.

There is a concerted effort abroad to bring coconut products into disrepute and thereby deny coconut its traditional markets abroad. As you know, the Philippines accounts for 70 percent of the world exports of coconut products. Soybean interests in the United States are alleging that coconut products, like cooking oil, are hazardous to one’s health, contrary to the conclusions of the most reputable foreign researchers that coconut is good for the health, that it is indeed the tree of life as we say here. In the Western markets, the allegation that something is hazardous to health can be fatal to that product.

Meanwhile, at home, we are not above shooting ourselves in the feet. Irresponsible copra exporters are bypassing the regulatory measures of the Philippine Coconut Authority and inviting suspicion abroad, especially in Europe, that our coconut-related exports are not up to Western quality standards. As you know, there is already a wave of protectionism in the developed countries that are sweeping Third World products out of their markets. Let’s not help this effort directed against us by narrow self-interest.

The first development can be deadly. Unless the Western markets are disabused of the lies being spread by our competitors abroad, 16 million people stand to lose their livelihoods. In that event, land reform will truly be subdividing only misery, at least on coconut lands.

I am pleased to note that the Philippine Coconut Authority, the various associations of coconut producers, and the Coconut Planters Bank have taken the initiative to fight this anti-tropical oils lobby in the United States. I wish the delegation that is leaving for the United States all the luck. They will need it. Our only protection against the economic devastation threatened by that lobby is the truth about coconut. This is a threat against which our Mutual Defense Pact is helpless. What we need here is a Non-Aggression Pact with the Western economies, a pact that will be to our mutual interest. For if this industry goes under, so will the interests that we are pledged in common to defend here in the Pacific. Let me put this more clearly, we will not let the Western Alliance starve our people while they hold up the shield of the Alliance in the Pacific.

The second development is something we can address immediately. I have directed the Philippine Coconut Authority to exercise the most stringent regulation of our coconut and copra exports to assure their quality.

The fatal curse of our numerous export campaigns has been the failure of Filipino exporters to maintain high quality. We have been our own worst enemy. We can’t recover and grow with the usual “Take the money and run” attitude. That’s for bank robbers, not Filipinos. I would think that, having retrieved our country from the edge of disaster and from the hands of crooks, we would cherish it now for all the dangers we have braved to save it.

I have been apprised of the other problems of the industry, especially the decline in productivity despite the increase in hectarage devoted to coconut and the unauthorized operation for private interest of government-owned oil mills. This should be stopped immediately. I look forward to a comprehensive report from the Authority on these problems and their proposed solutions. The Authority’s inputs on land reform for the coconut areas will be very helpful to the Congress in arriving at a rational and pragmatic program for these areas, a program that will build on the present strength of the industry, rather than undermine it.

The Philippine Coconut Authority has been quietly doing its work. Now that it has honest and competent men on the Board, few hear of its important activities. I appreciate this silent industry and dedication on the part of the Authority. Your efforts have not escaped my grateful notice. Presidential Counsel Teodoro Locsin does not waste any opportunity to tell me of the current developments, and especially the problems, of the industry and the work you are doing. I have appointed to the Philippine Coconut Authority men of probity and dedication. It has now a very strong Board and Chairman. Each of them was carefully selected for his intelligence and dedication to the industry. That was important for so much depends on the performance of this body.

I have myself signed an Executive Order, No. 259, that mandates the progressive use of coconut products by foreign and locally owned manufacturers. As protectionism abroad restricts the market for this essential product, we must widen the market at home.

The Executive and, I am sure, the Congress stand ready to help the industry in every way. May I congratulate the Philippine Coconut Authority on the work it has done to protect the industry and advance its interests. You have my fullest support.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].