Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On RCC

[Delivered in Cotabato City, March 26, 1988]

A COMMITMENT TO SERVE

President Aquino is very much aware of the rigorous screening the Commissioners had to go through. Many people will surely envy those who were chosen but for as long as they remain true to their commitment, President Aquino assures them of giving her support the best she can.

It is graduation time. All over the country, colleges and universities are holding graduation ceremonies. This is perhaps the reason why I feel that I am in a graduation ceremony this morning. For in a sense this is a commencement exercise – a graduation of sorts from a rigorous process of selection and the start of a new kind of political involvement.

I followed very carefully the testing and trial of the RCC nominees all the way up to their appointment. No other group of public officials has had so rigorous a screening as these commissioners.

The first step was their endorsement by sectoral groups for appointment to the RCC. The five candidates thus chosen were individually interviewed by a committee composed of the Peace Commission and the Mindanao Consensus-Building Panel. This was the second step, which reduced the number of candidates from five to three for each district. Their names were then published in national and local newspapers. This gave the public at large a chance to give feedback on the candidates.

At the third step, I stepped in. I studied the files on the candidates and then interviewed them myself. I met and talked with all three candidates from each district. Only after I had done so did I make my selection.

The last step was Congress. The Commission on Appointments passed carefully upon the qualifications of all the nominees. I understand that the commissioners-designate acquitted themselves impressively before the Commission.

I have reviewed the search and selection process for the RCC members in some detail and would like to underscore two key points:

First, the process followed the guidelines laid down by the Constitution; and

Second, the process reflects our commitment to the principle of popular consultation.

Elections are indeed the sacred route to power in a democracy. Yet the present-day practices of democracy have not always guaranteed respect for all the values that democracy seeks to advance and preserve.

The first and highest value that democracy protects is the people’s free choice. Yet democracy in a poor land has sometimes failed to give the people the widest choice of the best who could be their leaders. Wisely, our Constitution has sought to remedy this temporary shortcoming by the process that I have outlined. Its products stand proudly here before us.

But the real value of the process is the way it engaged the energies of communities on issues that required them to divide, discuss, and finally converge upon a common choice – all in the spirit of mutual tolerance, respect for divergent opinion, and country above self.

People at the grass-roots had to come together to form a consensus on who should represent their interests They had to listen to different, sometimes disagreeable points of view, and resolve their differences. In brief, the process provoked the kind of active participation in decision-making without which elections are a sham and democracy an illusion.

I have made a great personal investment in this experiment. It is a source of pleasure and pride for me to be able to say that I have met and talked with each and everyone of the commissioners. Let me address my final remarks to them.

You face a difficult and thankless task. Nobody paid much attention to the RCC when it was being organized and needed attention and encouragement. Yet now, after the careful and time-consuming work we have done, those who ignored it now attack it as a threat to the old ways of power to which they have become accustomed and at which they are experts.

Let me reassure you. You stand upon the rock of the Constitution; your existence and important role are clearly mandated by it.

As with all honest public service, the material reward is small. If it isn’t, you are doing something wrong.

No one who joins government should expect to have it easy. Especially, when the country is one that has suffered so much as ours. Even now, the forces that nearly destroyed our country, continue to harass our efforts to rebuild the country and give it peace. You are joining me in that struggle.

It is expected that you have many different ideas among you. But it is also expected that in the end you shall come together in one united effort to achieve our common goal of progress and peace, much as your respective sectors and communities came together to select you.

I sense in all of you a common concern for the protection of human rights, a commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflict, and a common compassion for the disadvantaged among our people.

You will be the objects of close and critical scrutiny. You will find that you have indeed enemies among those you expect will be your enemies, but you, will find them also among those you help. That is part of public service.

Many will want you to fail, but if you are firmly grounded in high principle and remain deeply rooted in your communities, you will prevail.

This I promise you. For as long as you are true to the people, I shall be constantly beside you, giving you all the support I can.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].