Philippine Investment Conference November 12, 1987

NO FEARS, NO FAVORS

The President stresses our need for foreign investments to fuel our recovery and growth. To encourage foreign investors, we must set the climate for them. Our policy is one of fairness and within constitutional limitations, one of equality towards Filipinos and foreigners who wish to invest in the future of this country.

Two weeks ago, I had the pleasure of addressing Philippine businessmen and managers on matters ranging from my Administration’s economic platform to counter-insurgency, labor relations and presidential leadership. I reiterated in the clearest terms my policies in these areas. And I gave special emphasis to the topic of this conference: privatization of government-held assets.

I am grateful for this opportunity to stress again, before Philippine business’s foreign counterparts, the Government’s commitment to privatize its assets, to liquefy those investments which Gvoernment should never have made.

In that address, I said that I want Government to get out of business, and fast. I targetted specific companies for immediate disposition. I mentioned particularly this hotel, the Hyatt, the Philippine Plaza and the Philippine Airlines. None of these enterprises is of any strategic value to the nation and government. All have been a tragic drain of resources. I mentioned the Commercial Bank of Manila, whose sale should be concluded in a week; the Associated Bank; and controlling stock of PCIBank which will be bidded out on November 18. There will be no more postponements.

I laid down the procedures for disposition: open bidding, total transparency, and award to the bidder with the highest bid and the most cash upfront. Funds generated internally from the target company are unacceptable because illegal. We want fresh funds.

I said there would be no fears, and no favors. No fears that we will favor anyone, whatever his political credentials or history of suffering. We give no special premium for past political agony. We want cash on the barrelhead, because that is what we need to fuel our recovery and growth.

I said there would be no clever schemes, no dilatory tactics. Therefore, once the decision to sell is made, all government appointed directors must submit undated letters of resignation, so they will be in no position to thwart the transfer of control or to interfere in management once the sale is concluded.

I am considering turning over to the Asset Privatization Trust the bidding out of all government assets. The APT is doing a very fine and professional job. There have been no complaints. On the contrary, the APT has been justly praised for the fairness, transparency and speed of its procedure. This will prevent self-interested directors from delaying or distorting privatization.

Our policy, let me repeat, is one of fairness, and within constitutional limitations, one of equality towards Filipinos and foreigners who wish to invest in the future of this country.

The foreign investor is critical to our plans of recovery and growth, given the size of the foreign debt, its improvident investment and the present general reluctance of foreign banks to engage in new lending.

We need foreign investments. And we have set the climate for them. Behind the troubled headlines is the fact that our democracy has met every challenge, and emerged stronger from every confrontation with forces that seek to return this nation to corrupt, unaccountable and irresponsible government. Democracy is here to stay – along with the rule of law, and the equity and justice that mark it. All its institutions are firmly in place.

On structural and economic reforms, we have deregulated where regulation might obstruct progress, and responsibly regulated to promote the general welfare.

We have implemented reforms to improve tax collection and equitably distribute its burden. We have exacted greater financial discipline from government agencies and corporations. The progressive reduction of bank reserve requirements over the past 18 months indicates the expansionary stance that our monetary authorities have taken.

On the external front, we have reached agreement with the advisory group of commercial banks on a multi-year restructuring package. A restructuring agreement with the Paris Club is already effective for the period January 1, 1987 to June 30, 1988.

Along with our privatization policy, we have implemented a debt to equity conversion program to promote long-term equity investments in the country, as well as a moderate reduction in the foreign debt.

These reforms are already producing the desired results. The first half of 1987, shows an increase in gross domestic capital formation of 10.7 percent, after declining 73 percent in the last three years.

Foreign investment, based on balance of payments accounts, posted a significant increase in net flows in the 3rd Quarter: from $25 Million to $88 Million. Foreign investments increased by 53.1 percent – from $96 Million to $47 Million.

With a 5.1 percent growth in the first half of 1987, and an average inflation rate of 2.8 percent in the first nine months of this year, we can say, with some confidence, that an economic turnaround has occurred. But, unquestionable, the foundation for economic recovery has been laid.

But, like the recipe for dinosaur soap, the trick is to find dinosaur. In this case, it is private investments. For our whole programs of recovery and progress turns on a robust private sector committing its capital to the recovery and long-term growth of this nation. that is the key ingredient. I hope that this Conference will help us find it, in the magnitude and with the enduring commitment that the undertaking requires. I wish the Conference every success. Good day and thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library