Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Reception of J.C. Penney and Mr. Trammel Crow

[Delivered on November 10, 1989]

BREAKTHROUGH FOR FILIPINO PRODUCTS

At the reception given by J.C. Penney and Mr. Trammel Crow, President Aquino again takes the opportunity to promote Philippine-made products. Taking pride in the Filipino craftsmen and their work, she notes the rise in exports to the U.S. during the past three years. She urges help for these products to make a breakthrough in major international markets as every Filipino product sold will create jobs and reduce the poverty level back home.

I would like to thank J.C. Penney and Mr. Trammel Crow for this wonderful reception they are hosting for us.

It is customary to end one’s visit to a foreign land by purchasing a few things to take home as gifts. When I thought about this, I remembered that back home Filipino craftsmen produce things of fine workmanship and beauty. These things are now sold in fine stores in the major cities of the world, including Dallas. But more of them need to be known.

J.C. Penny has offered to help bring these products to the attention of wider publics. It is a fact of marketing life that the patronage of major foreign buyers does help make it possible for a greater number of our products to land in major outlets in the international market.

I am pleased to note that our exports to your country during the past three years have risen appreciably: from US$1,716 billion in 1986, to US$2,064 billion in 1987, and to US$2.516 billion in 1988. Overall, our exports have done very well, having increased from US$4.8 billion in 1986 to US$7.1 billion in 1988.

But this is just the start, for it is about the level of Taiwan, South Korea and Hongkong exports in 1976.

Every Filipino product sold in a foreign market carries a piece of the Filipino dream to hit a US$ 15 billion export target by the year 1992 in order to support an economic miracle — one that will create jobs and eventually reduce poverty from the present level of 50-55% to 10-15% in a decade.

I must admit that we are openly looking for opportunities to showcase our products. The Philippines is highly capable of supplying the U.S. market, in particular, 149 world-class products falling under the five major product groups of toys and dolls, gifts and houseware, fashion accessories, processed food, and furniture — all made with the craftsmanship that is distinctively Filipino.

We need your help in other areas, such as guiding our manufacturers in quality control and in widening the product range to match current and future trends in the market. The impact of your contributions can be strong particularly on products that have high value added, high local content, strong forward and backward linkages, and produced in the countryside.

All these can help in our balance of trade. The presence here of so many distinguished people from JC Penney and of Mr. Crow himself raises our hopes, indeed, of finally making that breakthrough that will finally make the label “Philippine-made” sought after throughout the world. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].