Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the 13th Anniversary of the Department of Natural Resources

[Delivered at the DNR Ninoy Aquino Park, May 15, 1987]

BENEFICIARIES OF OUR RESOURCES

Filipino citizens should be the true and primary beneficiaries of the country’s natural resources. These resources should be shared equitably by Filipinos through the prevention of monopolies, cooperatives and small-scale utilization by subsistence farmers and fishermen. Agrarian reform will determine the use and allocation of resources while national policies and programs will protect the rights of cultural minorities to their ancestral lands. Tougher laws against the illegal exploitation of resources will be a priority of Congress. Hand in hand with this development, the Department of Natural Resources must strive to project an image of integrity and credibility.

I remember that 11 months ago, I and some members of the Cabinet planted trees in this park to commemorate the launching of a national forestation program. Those trees, I presume, are alive and well and growing under the auspices of the DNR and the caretakers of this park. It is not true that if the tree dies, the Cabinet member will be fired. I presume also that the various projects initiated by the former Ministry, now the Department of Natural Resources have managed to take root and survive, despite a number of changes in your leadership and organization. You enter your 13th year as stewards of our nation’s natural wealth. That number should not prophesy ill-fortune, but rather, a new year marked by increased growth, productivity, efficiency, creativity, better morale and stricter adherence to your goals and principles.

These factors will sharpen your perspectives and direct your energies this coming year. For one, it will be your first year under the new Constitution. That Constitution poses, under Article 12, comprehensive guidelines for the exploration development, utilization and protection of natural resources in lands classified as public domain. In its various sections, Article 12 also provides:

That Filipino citizens will be the true and primary beneficiaries of the nation’s resources;

That these resources will be shared more equitably through the prevention of monopolies and the encouragement of cooperatives and small-scale utilization by subsistence farmers and fishermen;

That a sound agrarian reform program will also determine the use and allocation of resources;

And that national policies and programs should protect the rights of indigenous cultural communities to their ancestral lands.

A second factor, which will be to the benefit of the DNR and its role as guardian of the nation’s patrimony, is the imminent convening of Congress. It has been said that the illegal exploitation of resources, specially our national forests, is due largely to the lack of tougher laws against such exploitation, as well as tougher measures for the implementation of such laws. When Congress convenes, a priority issue will be to determine as soon as possible, by law, the specific boundaries of lands of the public domain and how they may be acquired, developed, held or leased. Another issue is the need to prohibit logging in endangered forests and watershed areas. I am certain that such issues, threshed out in the open by the majority of pro-Filipino members of Congress, shall insure the fairest and most stringent legislation. People power too, expressed through local government officials and their representatives in Congress, will encourage vigilance and adherence to the law on the grassroots level in the countryside.

Meanwhile, the Department of Natural Resources must strive to project an image of utmost integrity and credibility. The new political climate is now conducive to the maintenance of your independence and vigilance The recently concluded national elections, involving a staggering 90 percent of our voting population, have strengthened the fabric of democracy on the lowest socioeconomic levels and put the insurgency on the defensive. Citizens are now more aware of their rights and privileges, specially in the protection and conservation of their lands and resources. The limited number of forest guards of the DNR can now count on the help and support of an enlightened citizenry. Added to this, a free and inquisitive press can monitor the granting of licenses and concessions, insuring the protection of the rights of small settlers and the dispersal of resources from the privileged few to the many.

With such natural checks and balances, the DNR need not fall under the influence of foreign interests, big business, or terrorism from the Left and Right. You continue to face, I know, difficulties and daunting problems. Forest destruction continues at an estimated average of 100,000 hectares yearly. You must continue to strike the difficult balance between the full use of our resources for the purpose of economic recovery, while insuring that future generations can continue to avail of the abundance of the land. With other departments of Government, along with private business, you must help spearhead the thrust towards the processing of our own raw material rather than the simple exportation of such prime products as wood and ore. You also face the challenge that confronts all other countries of the world, and that is to maintain an ecological balance in an environment where populations continue to grow and industrialization is unavoidable.

Remember that while you are charged with the protection, conservation and development of our lands and waters and the abundance they hold, your ultimate duty is to the country’s greatest resource, and that is, its people. In this, all other branches of Government are on your side. May that encourage you, and guide your activities, projects and efforts in your 13th year.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].