FREEDOM AND EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY

Addressing the country’s powerful labor force, President Aquino points out that the unemployment problem is staggering; that labor-intensive techniques and an emergency employment program have barely made a dent on the problem. She directs DOLE to monitor the different agencies engaged in various employment programs.

She announces price rollbacks of petroleum products emphasizing that she is doing this to reduce the cost of living and not to create windfall profits for business.

There is a widespread notion that Labor Day is the one day of the year when Government pays attention to labor. It is regarded as the day of the laborers, as opposed to the 364 days of the capitalists and managers. That was true under the dictatorship; it is not true in this democracy. For me, every day is labor day, because it is the daily labor of the workman that sustains our economy and society, and brings us closer to the national strength and prosperity we seek.

On this day, the nation pays tribute to the power that daily propels our economy, the force without which we can never rebuild from the economic destruction of the past to the progressive economy and equitable society we have promised to all our people.

It is also the day when we reaffirm the overriding labor policy of our government, and for that matter of any real democracy. That policy seeks to achieve for the Filipino workingman the greatest freedom and equality of opportunity possible. It does not seek to cradle labor in a state of dependency on the state, but to encourage its development to the greatest independence, self-reliance and well-being. That policy explicitly recognizes that the workingman is not just the means of development. The improvement of his well-being is the end of development itself.

The means to this end is the generation of well-paid and sustainable employment. Those with the means to adequately support themselves and their families, have the means to assert their freedom and their dignity.

This aim requires the partnership of labor and management in sincere efforts to get the economy moving. It also requires time – time in which the basic needs of labor, that is to say, of the vast majority of our people, must be attended to. This is where the state comes in – to fill the gap between the prosperity we aim for, and the present condition of labor that only a vibrant economy can overcome.

In the meantime, Government must fill the gap between basic needs today and the hoped-for progress of our economy.

I see this gap being filled by well-thought out policies rather than by dramatic ad hoc pronouncements designed to catch headlines; by the provision of social services to meet labor’s essential requirements for health, housing and education; and by the building of infrastructure to make labor more productive and better paying.

The gap is wide; the needs to be met are many; the unemployment problem is staggering. Despite the sincere attempts to at least control the problem, such as the government’s preference for labor-intensive techniques and an emergency employment program, we have barely made a dent on the problem. The unemployment rate dropped from 11.8 percent to 11.3, and dropped further to 9.2 as of January 1988.

I again called the attention of the Department of Public Works and Highways and the other infrastructure agencies to the role they are expected to play in soaking up some of the unemployment by emphasizing labor-intensive methods in its infrastructure program.

I hereby direct the Department of Labor to monitor the various employment programs and, with DTI and NEDA render periodic reports to the Cabinet.

It seems also that our youth are not being given the right education for the jobs that are or will be available. There is an urgent need to trim the irrelevance from our elementary and high school curricula and to put all the emphasis on the core subjects – literacy, math, and science – that have been responsible for the remarkable productivity and inventiveness of Japanese, Korean and Taiwanese labor. I expect the Department of Education and Culture to come up with immediate proposals in this direction.

Likewise, the National Manpower and Youth Councils should have all three regional training centers in Cagayan de Oro, Tacloban and Zamboanga operational by the end of the year.

And of course we have to assure that our population growth does not outstrip our other resources and annul what gains we make every year.

The Population Commission assures me that its program will be ready in six months.

These and other measures look to the long term, but there are basic needs that must be met now.

Last year, I said that I don’t need Labor Day to remind me of the needs of the working people, that I would give a wage increase regardless of the time, if conditions permitted it. Last December, I signed into law Republic Act 6640 increasing the minimum wages for non-agricultural workers inside Metro Manila and outside Metro Manila by P10.00 and P11.00 a day.

Organized labor has asked for a further increase to mark this day. It is ill-advised at the moment. Wage increases are not the only means to improve workers’ incomes, which can also be achieved by reducing the prices of commodities, and increasing social services. I recommended to the Energy Regulatory Board the reduction of the prices of petroleum products, if possible and warranted to pre-August 1987 levels, to stimulate economic activity and, more importantly, reduce the cost of living.

The ERB has acted favorably on my recommendation and has ordered price rollbacks of petroleum products as follows:

A fifty centavo rollback for Premium gasoline to P7.00 per liter.

A fifty centavo rollback for Regular gasoline to P6.65 per liter.

A twenty-five centavo rollback for diesel to P5.00 per liter. And a thirty centavo rollback for kerosene to P5.00 per liter.

These will take effect on May 3.

These rollbacks, as I said, are intended to reduce the cost of living. Of course, they may not. Business establishments may not reduce their prices correspondingly. Still, we can hope and pray – and we can tax. I am not reducing petroleum prices to create windfall profits for business. I am doing it for the people, even at this time, in the midst of roller coasting, volatile crude oil prices. This week, members and non-members of OPEC are meeting to adjust crude prices upwards. Our Oil Price Stabilization Fund, which is meant to buffer the country against a sudden oil price increase, is still in the negative by P500 million as of March 31, 1988. But the people need some relief. I cannot promise it can last. But I have said that whenever an opportunity presents itself, I will seize it to make life better for all our people.

I have also directed the NPC and the NEA to impose a ceiling of P2.50 per kilowatt hour throughout the country.

And I have asked the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Finance to look into additional tax and other incentives to enterprises that adopt production gain-sharing schemes similar to that provided in the CARP Executive Order.

Government is providing technical and financial assistance, including training in self-employment and specific skills, to help augment incomes. I commend the worker’s organizations that have gone into such projects and appeal to others to do likewise.

Government has increased expenditures for public health and nutrition from P3.6 billion to P4.95 billion. Education and manpower development increased from P15 billion to P18 billion. Starting June this year, free secondary education will be available. This is an investment in the future.

Another example of which is the Centre we inaugurate today for the safety and protection of workers against the dangers posed by working conditions. Suffering is not a necessary cost of industrialization.

Housing is both one of our highest social concerns and one of the best means of stimulating further economic activity through the multiplier effect of construction.

To that end, we have increased total funding for economic housing to P4.4 billion in 1988 for 32,800 housing units. We are aiming for 40,600 units.

Effective May 1, the interest rate on new NHA mortgages will be 9 percent, down from the present 12 to 14 percent. This should reduce monthly amortizations by 25 percent for the new beneficiaries.

Starting May 16, the Home Development Mutual Fund will make P500 million available for appliance and furniture loans to its members.

I take this occasion to remind our social security institutions, the SSS and the GSIS, of the singularly social purpose of both bodies. The reasons for their existence first and last is to help the common people who are their members.

The SSS is particularly well-placed to help finance housing. We commend its long-standing policy of fiscal prudence but it must be satisfied with the minimum actuarial rate of return plus a fair margin of safety. Over and above that, its resources should be devoted to its social aim through liberal terms for housing, education, salary and other loans and benefits. The interest it charges must reflect this social purpose.

While I have expressed that the freedom, autonomy, and well-being of the worker in a progressive economy, is the aim of our labor policy, we have paid equal attention to strengthen the legal protection of labor.

I have resisted all proposals for a strike ban on a national or even area-specific basis. As I told the Hong Kong businessmen, we are not and never will be, while we are a democracy, a strike free country. A strike-free country is asking for a revolution.

I am heartened to note the response of my earlier appeals to both labor and management to cooperate with each other more, so we can get this economy back in shape faster. Relative industrial peace was achieved by the end of 1987.

In the area of government unionism, I directed the heads of all government agencies and corporations not to discourage their employees from organizing and to respect their rights to organize. In June last year, I issued Executive Order 180 to accelerate unionism in government.

A comprehensive review of labor legislation has been undertaken by the Tripartite Review Committee. I have certified to the Senate the draft bill amending portions of the Labor Code. I have asked the Committee to continue wages and incomes, and to report its conclusions to me as soon as possible.

I was here last year at the ground-breaking of this Centre, which is a gift of the people and government of Japan to Philippine labor. Japan has proved to be one of the most sympathetic and dependable friends of the Philippines in this critical stage of its economic recovery. I would like to thank the people of Japan on behalf of all Filipinos for their generous assistance.

It is good to have friends, especially friends like the Japanese. But the main burden of recovery will be borne by the Filipino people alone. We have a huge debt to service and pay; tremendous mistakes to rectify; and a long road still to be travelled to the security and well-being we desire.

I hope that all sectors of our society – investors and workers, government and citizens – will continue to work together and remain united as we have been since EDSA.

We still have so much to do, so we should not waste our time on various conflicting directions.

I firmly believe that our unity will become stronger if we realize that we can only consider one place as our home – whether investor or worker – and that is our beloved country.

As I said in my opening remarks, every day is Labor Day because the prosperity we desire can only be achieved through the tireless dedication and commitment of all workers.

Thank you very much and good morning to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].