Fulfillment of Dreams

The dream of the farmers in the town of Jalajala, Rizal has finally come true. Meralco has already distributed their approximately 390 lands in Jalajala to the farmers, along with various programs launched that can help the beneficiaries.

Land ownership has long been a dream prayed for and fought for by our farmer countrymen. For them, it will bring relief from the long-suffering they have endured. And it is also the key that will open the door to their progress.

This dream has come true for some of our fellow farmers from the small town of Jalajala in the province of Rizal. You are now receiving your respective emancipation patents, proof of ownership of the land you till.

While the bill regarding the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform program is being discussed by our legislators in Congress and the Senate, the Meralco Foundation and Meralco are undertaking their own land reform. They have already distributed their over 390 lots in Jalajala to farmers. And they didn’t stop at just giving land; they are now implementing various programs for their beneficiaries to further improve their situation and ensure they benefit from the land they received.

Our farmers deserve our help to improve their lives. Unity and helping small and impoverished people is not only the duty of your government. It is also the duty of people and citizens who can be said to have more than enough for their needs. It is our duty as people to be good citizens and responsible caregivers to our fellowmen. Many of our problems as a nation can be alleviated if everyone shares and works together.

The programs being implemented by Meralco Foundation and other companies and citizens to help farmers and other people suffering in our rural areas should serve as an example to others so that we can accelerate the progress of our country.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Ang ating magsasaka ay nararapat po nating tulungang umangat ang buhay. Ang pakikiisa at pagtulong sa maliliit at mahihirap na tao ay hindi lamang tungkulin para sa inyong pamahalaan. Ito ay tungkulin din ng mga tao at mamamayan na masasabing may labis na sa kanilang mga pangangailangan. Ito ay isang tungkulin nating mga tao bilang isang mabuting mamamayan at responsableng tagakalinga sa ating mga kapwa. Marami sa mga problema natin bilang isang bayan ang mabibigyang lunas kung ang lahat ay magbibigayan at magkakatulungan.

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].