Friends in Democracy

The restoration of democracy in the Philippines has made Philippine-American friendship more meaningful, for one country that is free cannot depend on another that is not for their common defense. And the United States applauded the translation of democracy into economic gains, for a nation that is rich cannot depend on another that is poor for their common defense. At the same time, the restoration of democracy has made Filipinos assertive and demanding, but hopefully, in spite of differences, the common goal of upholding democracy and peace will preserve Philippine-American friendship.

I am pleased to be honored again as the guest of the US Secretary of State. Of the earlier occasion, I said that it marked a fresh, new day in an old friendship. After 14 years of dictatorship, the Philippines had returned to the democracy the United States had imparted to it. Back again in the only political tradition that a nation can be proud of, the Philippines could stand proudly beside the United States.

The restoration of democracy in the Philippines gave meaning again to the alliance between our two countries – for one country that is free cannot depend on another that is not for their common defense. For in that case, the American nation would be the friend of one government, or perhaps, just one man; whereas now it is befriended by over 50 million people.

On that earlier occasion, I outlined the things we would do to translate the promises of democracy into a better life for all and therefore into an enduring guarantee of freedom. If we have not achieved most of those things, we have definitely shown that we have again the strength to do so. As I explained to the US Chamber of Commerce yesterday, the difficulties we have had to overcome – most particularly a debt service burden that eats up half our resources every year – should be regarded not with misgivings about its future but rather with the greatest confidence about its eventual success.

As the United States had applauded the democratic victory in the Philippines – well, perhaps I should not put it that way with this audience after yesterday’s elections. As the United States had applauded the republican restoration in the Philippines, so has it cheered the economic gains it has made in the past three years. For a nation that is rich cannot depend on another that is poor for their common defense.

Secretary Baker, a fine lunch and a toast is not the occasion for a long explanation of the need for American support for our economic recovery efforts. And, when you are the host, Secretary Baker, it becomes unnecessary to make that appeal. Suffice it to say that the voice of the United States in the economic and financial counsels of the world carries a great deal of weight by itself. But when it is also the voice of the first American official to publicly acknowledge the threatening implications of Third World debt, that voice becomes especially persuasive and compelling.

The democratic restoration has given rise to a fresh assertiveness on the part of the Philippines. We have become suddenly American in our assertions and the complaints we sometimes hear about how we Filipinos act must remind us of how the great powers felt about the young and driven American republic. “You offer an inch and they take a foot,” was not an uncommon remark in those days about the brashness of the new republic.

We are, at times, difficult to deal with. We are not always convinced that the approach taken by the United States in any particular issue is invariably right or the only one. Yet, in the most difficult cases, our strongest differences will only be about the best way to uphold the democratic way of life that we hold dear.

There will come a time when issues of vital importance must be squarely faced and clearly resolved between us. When that time comes, it is my hope that the things we solemnly affirm – such as an unwavering adherence to democracy, an ardent desire for peace, and abhorrence for conflict in the resolution of international problems, and a conviction of faith that civilization must not vanish in a nuclear war – will stand out against our differences and affirm yet again the enduring foundation of Philippine-American friendship.

May I ask everyone here to join me in a toast,

To the continued good health of Secretary Baker, a new friend for the Philippines, and to Philippine-American friendship. Mabuhay.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].