Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the National Defense College Graduation

[Delivered on July 3, 1986]

A STRATEGY FOR THE FUTURE: WAGING PEACE

As the first class to graduate under her government, the members of the 20th regular course of the National Defense College are congratulated for pledging support to the February 22 revolution. People rallying to the defense of the armed forces in the events of that month was a moving experience that should give the military in turn a sense of duty to protect them.

First, may I congratulate the members of the 20th Regular Course of the National Defense College of the Philippines. I understand that this year’s graduating class suffered is the greatest attrition in the history of the course. And I am relieved to learn that this is not for any other reason than because of the course of studies has been the toughest ever. At any rate, this class is distinguished for registering several “firsts”

It is the first class to graduate under my government. More importantly, it is the first NDCP class that pledged support for the February 22 Revolution that toppled the dictatorship. And it is the first NDCP class to have among its distinguished graduates a former member of Parliament (and an oppositionist at the time) and now Deputy Minister of National Defense. I refer to Deputy Minister Wilsom Gamboa, whose participation in the course signals an earnest effort on the part of government to appreciate the imperatives of national security. His participation also underscores the broader concept of national security that holds sway under this government.

For national security, in the traditional view, was synonymous with national defense, with public safety, with the preservation and re-imposition of order. The February Revolution has enriched that traditional view to include as the first order of priority the preservation of the rights and liberties that our people restored in such a distinctive and distinguished fashion. That revolution has imposed a double duty and an onerous burden on those charged with the defense of our republic. Not only must we now defend that republic by martial force but also with the same militant regard for the rights and liberties it now embodies and in the unique conciliatory spirit in which they were restored. In short, our New Armed Forces must now wage peace.

All of you who graduate from the National Defense College at this time are particularly well-trained to conduct this unique campaign. For you have had the opportunity to pursue and understand your course, not only within the walls of Fort Bonifacio, but right outside of it. In fact, the most valuable lessons in national security and defense were impressed upon you, not only within the classrooms of this College, but in the crash course held at EDSA last February.

There, at the height of our snap revolution, both civilians and our men in uniform learned the higher, more sophisticated techniques of keeping the peace, maintaining order, and securing, not only the interests of government, but the collective well-being of all Filipinos as well. National security, we all learned, was not a matter of keeping the people at arms — or armalites’ length — or of erecting higher walls or denser barbed wire fences between government and people; but of bringing the people in — to join us in a united effort to protect the liberties and institutions we all cherish. Effective national security is not a task that is adversarial in policy or practice, but rather, cooperative. Security forces do not protect operations or establishment from the people, but for and in behalf of the people. And better still with the people. It is a difference in military technique, but in attitude; an attitude grounded in the moral and common sense that effective defense, like successful politics, is addition. That superiority in numbers will carry the day anytime. That if the people are with us, nothing can prevail against us.

When an army of civilians surrounded the two military camps, it became evident to every soldier within, that there could be no better assurance of his personal survival and the effective discharge of his mission, than the combined force of army and people cemented by mutual trust and fired by a common patriotism and devotion to liberty and justice.

I know that I am telling you nothing new. As I said, the need for harmony between the civilian populace and the military is one that you have learned well in theory, and observed in dramatic application on the streets during the revolution. But as you take on new offices and responsibilities, ascend in rank, acquire commands and take to the field, the values and attitudes that you learned in this College and from recent political events may start to fade from memory. That would be a tragedy. Do not let it happen. Keep ever in mind that the armed forces must be deeply rooted in the trust and cooperation of the people. The mistake of your former Commander-in-Chief was to think that an army could be a wooden club in his hand. Cut off from the sources that sustain it, the armed forces would snap like a piece of dry wood under the pressure of adversity.

And finally, the events of February do not just teach a new and effective form of national defense. The rally of the people to the defense of the armed forces was a moving experience that should give you an indelible sense of duty to protect them in turn. To rephrase a military saying. Take care of the people and they will take care of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].