Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On New Perspectives in Land Reform

[Delivered at the Kalayaan Hall, March 3, 1987]

NEW PERSPECTIVES IN LAND REFORM

An effective land reform is the key to the country’s progress and stability. For this reason, land reform, which could become the Aquino Administration’s most important project, is being studied carefully before implementation. What is targetted is not just an equal distribution of land but also a distribution which is founded on justice for both the tenant and the landowner. Land reform seeks two things: more jobs to solve unemployment in the countryside and greater productivity to increase the standard of living and purchasing power of the rural sector.

An effective land reform program is critical to the future progress and stability for our country. I put the stress on the word effective. It must be effective given the state of the economy, the condition of public infrastructure which supports agricultural activities, the availability of adequate extension services to help productivity, and adequate post harvest facilities to enable farm produce to generate a decent income for the rural Philippine population.

My aim has not been just the equal division of land. In our present circumstances, this means the equal distribution of misery. This is why, although I regard Land Reform as a very important program, if not the most important of my government, I have proceeded with great caution. I will not discredit the idea of land reform by simply proclaiming it when we do not have the means to make it work. The ultimate aim of the land reform I envision is a country whose people are at peace with themselves, which means a land reform program with justice for all: farmer and landowner. No one must feel cheated of his rights or neglected in his legitimate aspirations. Land reform as I see it must also produce two things: more jobs to sop up the unemployment in the countryside and greater productivity to increase the standard of living and the purchasing power of the rural sector. It must accomplish these things because land reform, so far as I am concerned, is only a means to justice. And justice demands that our great people, who fought for freedom and stood up in its defense, must live lives commensurate in well-being and dignity to the nobility of their achievements. In addition to being a means of justice through improved living standards for the rural sector, the revival of agriculture is our surest hope of industrial growth. Until we create a wide and stable domestic market, we can never industrialize. The industrial sector of every country in the world depends for its survival on the domestic market. In our case, that market can only be the rural sector. We must therefore tap what I believe is its tremendous potential, so it can support the industrialization and therefore the economic sovereignty of our nation.

As with every program of government, the key is money. Talent counts as well, and especially integrity. Programs must be well conceived and there must be honesty in running them. But without money, they will always remain paper proposals or empty political slogans. There is nothing I detest more than to use so important a program as land reform as a political slogan. That is why I have been reluctant to speak of it, until I was sure of our program and the means to implement it. That program is being prepared. I will not, however, wait for its final refinement before announcing the funds we have found to finance it in part.

As you know, the past regime’s economic policy boiled down in real terms to plain stealing. This was done, primarily, through the practice of ordering government financial institutions to lend large sums of money for the industrial projects. Only a fraction of the loan went into the project itself. The bulk of it was deposited abroad. It is the problem of the PCGG to recover that part. The projects on the other hand are here, and we have foreclosed on most of them. All of them have failed and are inoperative. No company can sustain the burden of servicing debts for in excess of their value. These companies are called non-performing assets or NPAs. They have been transferred from the government financial institutions, like the PNB, the DBP, and Philippine Guarantee, to the Assets Privatization Fund for subsequent sale. The transfer value of the non-performing assets in the hands of the PNB and the DBP is P108 billion. The APT can hope to sell them for no more than around P24 billion.

We are tempted to throw up our hands in despair, but that will serve no purpose. We must make the best of the situation. Here we have bad money. We must put it to some good use. And I can think of none better than land reform.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].