Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Film Academy of the Philippines

[Delivered at Malacañang on July 14, 1988]

PROTECTING THE INDUSTRY’S PROPERTY RIGHTS

The President considers the film industry as industry and art. She points out that as art, there should be the most minimal influence exerted by the State. She affirms that the era of favoritism has vanished and no favors will be accorded to a favored group. The best option is for government to protect the industry’s property rights.

I am deeply honored to be here among you, to receive the Film Academy award. I know that this award has been given for the great improvement in the economic situation of the movie industry as a result of our determined efforts to root out film piracy. The instrument of that protective policy, Mr. Ed Carrascoso, the head of the Videogram Board, is here with us and I would like him to stand up and share the credit of the success of our anti-piracy campaign.

That policy has its roots in our basic philosophy of justice, that people are entitled to the full compensation for their labors, and that it is the duty of the State to make sure that they get it. The anti-film piracy campaign was started in the past administration, yet at no time has its success been so great as now. We should not be surprised, for at the root of the problem then was the favoritism of government for certain individuals and groups engaged in film piracy and sharing the loot with government officials. The new government has tried and succeeded in ending all that in line with my pledge that under my government there will be no fear of undue influence on government by a favored few, and no favors to a favored few either. I would like to regard this award as recognition of our success in keeping that pledge, at least in the film industry.

I am wary of suggesting what role the film industry can play in national development. While films are an industry, they are essentially an art. And in matters of art, there should be only the most minimal conscious influence exerted by the State. I would hesitate to outline how you can contribute to national development, and leave it entirely to you to decide what those contributions can be. I trust in your innate patriotism and know that the mass appeal of Filipino films would not be possible if the industry, especially its actors and actresses, were not motivated by the highest respect and the deepest care for their audience and following. Your fans know you care for them because you give them the best you can.

Except for the role of movie review and censorship which cannot be avoided because the community must insist upon certain moral standards being upheld, I feel that the best thing government can do for the film industry is to protect its property rights and leave it alone to develop its full potential.

I shall study with much sympathy the measures being proposed by Senator Estrada, Congressman Perez and others to help the movie industry. These measures have just been filed I am told. I would like the honorable gentlemen to furnish me with copies of them immediately so they can be studied by the relevant government agencies.

For the rest, as I said, I leave to the industry the configuration of its own future, trusting the good men and women of Filipino films to do what is best for their sector and for the country. I know that some coordination of the industry’s efforts are necessary in this regard, and that the Film Academy of the Philippines was established with that end in view. To fully operationalize the Academy, I hereby appoint Atty. Espiridion Laxa as Director-General of the Film Academy of the Philippines and wish you and the Academy, and the film industry in general even greater success. I had better, or I will hear it from Kris. Let me assure you all, you will never lack for an eloquent spokesperson in my government, and in my very home. Good day and God bless you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library