A SUPERHIGHWAY OF JUSTICE

Bilang tugon sa pangangailangan ng mas mabilis at mas episyenteng paglilitis, inilunsad ng Korte Suprema ang Strategic Plan for Judicial Reforms (SPJR) 2022-2027. Ito ay isang komprehensibong balangkas na naglalayong baguhin ang sistema ng hustisya sa bansa upang maging mas accessible, mabilis, at patas para sa lahat.

Ang SPJR 2022-2027 ay nakatuon sa apat na pangunahing pillars: (1) Efficiency, (2) Accessibility, (3) Transparency, at (4) Responsiveness. Sa ilalim ng Efficiency pillar, prayoridad ang pagpapabilis ng paglilitis sa pamamagitan ng paggamit ng teknolohiya, pagpapabuti ng case management systems, at pagpapalakas ng kapasidad ng mga hukom at personnel ng korte.  Layunin din nito na mabawasan ang backlog ng mga kaso at mapaikli ang oras ng paglilitis.

Sa Accessibility pillar, isinusulong ang pagpapalawak ng legal aid services, pagtatatag ng mga bagong korte sa mga liblib na lugar, at pagpapabuti ng access sa impormasyon tungkol sa mga kaso.  Mahalaga ito upang matiyak na ang lahat, lalo na ang mga mahihirap at marginalized, ay may access sa hustisya.  Kasama rin dito ang pagpapalakas ng Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanisms bilang isang mabisang paraan upang malutas ang mga hindi pagkakaunawaan nang hindi kinakailangang dumaan sa mahabang proseso ng paglilitis.

Ang Transparency pillar ay naglalayong palakasin ang accountability at integridad ng sistema ng hustisya.  Kabilang dito ang pagpapabuti ng mga proseso ng pagpili ng mga hukom, pagpapatupad ng mas mahigpit na ethical standards, at pagpapalakas ng mga mekanismo para sa pag-uulat ng korapsyon.  Ang layunin ay maibalik ang tiwala ng publiko sa sistema ng hustisya.

Sa huli, ang Responsiveness pillar ay nakatuon sa pagtugon sa mga nagbabagong pangangailangan ng publiko at pagpapabuti ng kalidad ng serbisyo ng mga korte.  Kabilang dito ang pagpapaunlad ng mga programa para sa pagpapalakas ng kapasidad ng mga hukom at personnel ng korte, pagpapabuti ng komunikasyon sa publiko, at pagtatatag ng mga mekanismo para sa feedback at pagpapabuti.  Ang SPJR 2022-2027 ay isang ambisyosong plano na nangangailangan ng kooperasyon at suporta ng lahat ng stakeholders, kabilang ang mga hukom, abogado, personnel ng korte, at ang publiko.  Sa pamamagitan ng sama-samang pagkilos, makakamit natin ang isang sistema ng hustisya na mabilis, patas, at accessible para sa lahat ng Pilipino.

There is a community of aspiration that unites all of humanity in one single-minded effort to lift up the quality of life everywhere. There is a link between the tragedy that struck down Martin Luther King, John F. Kennedy and Robert Kennedy, and the tragedy that took Jose Rizal and Ninoy Aquino in the Philippines. A tortuous road which has led from Montgomery to Manila to Massachusetts is a road over which millions of individuals have traveled to renew their sense of dignity. The Philippines and the United States can help widen that narrow road into what Martin Luther King referred to as a superhighway of justice.

In receiving me here today and giving me this very high honor, I know only too well that it is the people of the Philippines whom you really honor. And I know that in paying them this tribute you do so in recognition of the ideals we share despite distance between us.

Therefore I will respond in behalf of all my countrymen: we deeply appreciate this expression of your regard. We accept it in all humility, conscious that the fight for democracy and freedom is never won once and for all, least of all in the soil of ferment and change which is the Philippines today.

To be honored in this way by this distinguished University in this famous City of Boston has for us a very personal meaning and importance. For Boston for a time was the home in exile of my late husband, Senator Benigno Aquino, and our family. At a time when the prospects for change in our land still looked forlorn and distant, your city and its great institutions of learning provided us understanding and support, and enabled us to keep the flame of hope alive, the hope that we could go back home in freedom.

Standing again in your company, almost seven months after that hope was fulfilled, we are encouraged to believe that our present labor to rebuild a devastated nation will just as quickly find fulfillment.

The story is told of your Reverend John Winthrop, upon first sighting the land that would be Boston, said: “we must always consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill – the eyes of all people are upon us.”

Something close to that is the challenge we now face in the Philippines. The eyes of the entire world are upon us. Before us the way is daunting and perilous, and uncharted in some parts. But we do not intend to fail.

I long to be able to tell you that there will unfailingly rise on Philippine soil a community as strong, as stable and as progressive as you have here in Boston, in Massachusetts and in America. But this is, as you say here in your country, “a tall order.” But our present labors – resolute, unyielding and total – will fill out the rest of the story, a success story.

Remember if you will, that, not too long ago people were telling us that effecting a peaceful change of government in the Philippines was an impossible task. Yet we have done the impossible!

Who is to say that we cannot do it again? That we cannot carry the rebirth of freedom in our country to a new day of peace and progress in our land?

Boston University calls to mind Martin Luther King who received here his divinity training and degree. He too had a dream which in his lifetime looked impossible of realization. Yet we now see how he brought that vision before the conscience of America and gave it life, and how it lives on as a standard for millions to carry and live up to today. You did yourselves proud in erecting a monument to his memory.

This city and state call to mind another martyr, John F. Kennedy who raised before this nation and the world an image of government placed in the service of the highest purposes and ideals. Violence struck him down, but his legacy has never been lost. Camelot is not forgotten, and as Senator Edward Kennedy has said: “the work goes on, the cause endures and the dream shall never die.”

There is a community of aspiration, I believe, that unites all of humanity in one single-minded effort to lift up the quality of life everywhere. There is a link between the tragedy that struck down Martin Luther King, John F. Kennedy and Robert Kennedy and the tragedy that took our own Jose Rizal and Ninoy Aquino in the Philippines. And there is a link between the triumphs that these tragedies all brought to fulfillment.

We are “riders on the earth together,” as the poet Archibald Macleish memorably put it, “brothers in the unending night.” While the everyday world may bear to us tidings of conflicts and divisions from all corners of the globe, something else incessantly unites us in our common humanity, cutting through the boundaries that separate nations from one another.

No human institution better fosters this thread of union than our universities and places of learning. For it is here, I believe, where the kinship of people is sustained and enabled to grow.

Here at Boston University you have a center for democracy, whose work, let me say now, has been of the deepest relevance to what has happened and is happening in my country today. I take this opportunity to acknowledge publicly on behalf of my people and government the center’s and the university’s support for us. And let me say also that I have asked our own University of the Philippines to formally take part in the inauguration of the proposed “Democracy Hall” being put up by the center and the City of Boston, by providing an exhibit of our experiences, at once unique and universal, in bringing democracy back to the Philippines.

After nearly a century, relations between the United States and the Philippines have become the subject of many cliches. There is one, however, that seems to me to have survived time and abuse, and lives on in the experiences of our two peoples. It is that one which says that Americans and Filipinos drink from the common fount of democracy.

This is so because there will always be people like Martin Luther King and Ninoy Aquino who belong to their dreams. Our peoples will always respond to leaders who can agree with what Dr. King said: ”Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere,” or be inspired by what my own husband said of his oppressed people: “The Filipino is worth dying for.”

Dr. King’s principle of non-violence was often mentioned in the dying years of the dictatorship in my country, when we would go back to him, Rosa Parks, Gandhi, and Henry David Thoreau, all the way to Antigone, for models of peaceful protest. Thus we can paraphrase him and say that the tortuous road which has led from Montgomery to Manila to Massachusetts is a road over which millions of individuals have traveled, to renew their sense of dignity. And after this morning’s touching occasion where you honor my country, let us do what we can to help widen that narrow road into what Martin Luther King referred to as “a superhighway of justice.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].