A NEW VISION OF THE PHILIPPINES

The Philippines has risen from the ruins of a 14-year tyranny, stronger in faith, politically united and thus able to fashion a dynamic economy. To bring about economic growth, the country is cutting back on the role of government even as it is setting up the basic conditions for entrepreneurship and industry. The three main areas of concern are outright assistance for start-up costs, money to produce and markets to sell in, and more liberal terms for debt-servicing.

Investors will find in the country a raft of business opportunities: an English-speaking, educated, cost-efficient labor force, renewable natural resources, some $7 billion of idle and under-used assets to dispose of.

Filipino economists propose an idea that foreign investors should find worth considering: putting the country’s foreign debt to work by allowing investors to buy discounted Philippine paper and use it, at full value, for peso-equity in the Philippines.

Since I have come to America to talk to the private sector as well as to your government, it is not only a pleasure to be here tonight but a need as well.

I suspect there are two thoughts uppermost in your minds tonight: curiosity about the unlikely looking revolutionary you see before you, and concern how a people’s power revolution can be a good basis for business.

You may feel that, while what happened in our revolution was true to American ideals, we remain a political risk. One woman’s people power could be another man’s mob. You watched in suspense and sympathy the birth of a new Philippines, but you wonder now how it will grow up. So, though you share our hopes, yet, as experienced observers of risk, you know how unstable post-dictatorship governments can be.

So tonight, you are looking for reassurance from me. Your hearts are with us but your minds are still uncertain. Well, I think I can reassure you. But I want to do more than that. I want to describe a new vision of the Philippines rising like a phoenix from the dust and ruins of a 14-year tyranny.

It is a vision of a Philippines strong in faith, united behind its political leadership, and thus able to fashion a dynamic economy. Once the second wealthiest Asian country after Japan, we have since plummeted off the charts. We call our economic malaise “crony capitalism.” You would call it state capitalism. Neither phrase captures its essense. It was plain theft, plain but incredible. Only a tiny fraction of the $26 billion Mr. Marcos borrowed actually ended up in productive local investment. You have heard of capital flight, my predecessor broke the sound barrier – with a cargo plane.

When we went to the polls and then to the streets to oust a discredited regime we were fighting for many of the same economic goals that business America has embraced in recent years. The same objectives that have marked the Reagan revolution here – getting government off the backs of people and out of the pockets of business – are behind what we hope will prove to be a second or economic revolution.

Now, I don’t want to overdo the parallel. Our revolution was rooted in the religious, political and cultural context of the Philippines. Although religion is a strong force in your national life, I doubt you would call your revolution a miracle. We believe ours was. For there is no other explanation for unarmed people standing against tanks and guns.

Nor do I expect you to understand the depth of our nationalism. A lot of what is now happening in our country is about recovering our self-respect. It would be hard for a proud and independent nation like yours which has never suffered tyranny to imagine the sense of degradation we Filipinos have felt in recent years.

This faith in ourselves which was reborn along EDSA is essential to our economic recovery. Don’t let it make you nervous. You only have to look at Japan, Korea, Singapore and Indonesia to see that a strong nationalism was the inspiration to success.

What you now see in us is a nation experiencing a rebirth of pride and freedom. To a puzzled outside world, we may appear at times to be a trifle intoxicated with freedom; the changeover seems confused. But in fact, we enjoy more stability than we had when our country presented the monolithic facade of a dictatorship to the world. Behind that facade an armed insurgency grew from a mere 500 to over 16,000, and its 14 year-old dictatorship fell to a three months’ siege of peaceful people power. Now government in the Philippines has recovered legitimacy and can pursue a credible twin-track policy towards the Communists: the olive branch of negotiations and the insurance of military reform.

The Filipinos believe in their government and are committed irrevocably to democracy. Over the past 14 years, we learned a hard lesson. Nothing is worth trading off freedom. It is this underlying stability that should reassure you. Do not be misled by the froth and antics of a handful of malcontents in Manila. We are moving forward steadily and on course. We have restored integrity to the Supreme Court and honor to the Armed Forces. The draft of a new constitution is about to be completed. A plebiscite is next and national elections after that. All in the next six months.

Like you, we, too, are cutting back on the role of government. We, too, are putting faith in the private sector. But the costs of doing so are high. Two-thirds of our nation live beneath the poverty line. The remaining one-third requires government to set up the basic conditions for entrepreneurship and industry. For ours, unlike yours, is not a land of virgin promise, amber waves of grain and fruited plains – but a country emptied of hope and stripped of its riches.

But we still have our respect for one another. Our people is our greatest asset, and our new economic order will be built on basic human values and rights. There will be no trading off freedom for prosperity.

This common path we are treading as two proud and independent nations gives us a basis of friendship that we have rarely had before: mutual respect. And it is on this basis that my message to you is made tonight. Invest in the Philippines. Not because we need your money although we clearly do; not because our people are poor although they are. Invest in the Philippines because it is to our mutual advantage.

Ours is an English-speaking, educated, cost-efficient labor force. Others took away our price advantage, now we are getting it back. Our wealth rests on our renewable natural resources, our agricultural abundance, despite the past neglect of this sector, and on a high level of human skills that have shown a remarkable capacity to innovate, copy and move quickly into new markets and products.

The escape from the repressive labor laws of the dictator has resulted, quite naturally, in more strikes than in the previous seven months, but these were settled more quickly. Why? Because the political consensus that underlies good labor relations has been restored. Filipinos believe in their country again. So what we now have in the Philippines is a committed workforce and a free one. One which understands that it must deliver a competitive cost advantage over its international competitors.

The astounding victory during our February revolution where we stood against tanks with our children around us, tells us that the country can now politically afford a liberal decentralized economy. At every level, this confidence factor is telling in our favor: our international reserves have nearly doubled the past six months, the peso has stabilized against the dollar, the foreign exchange black market has virtually vanished, and there is a positive GNP growth rate. For the next year, the IMF expects “a substantial recovery of six to seven percent.” That will be a dramatic turnaround, but my economic ministers will tell you that that is just the beginning.

Another business opportunity is to be found in our idle or underutilized productive capacity. As the government gets out of business, there is some $7 billion of idle and underused assets to dispose of.

I invite you to join us. We have fair and clear guidelines about foreign investment. I am keen to encourage joint ventures because this seems to me the way to ensure the long-term acceptance of foreign investors. We have sectors like public utilities, where, like any independent country, we wish to preserve full Filipino control but there also remain pioneer and export-oriented sectors where we give an equally warm welcome to 100 percent foreign ownership.

In conclusion, allow me to restate briefly and clearly what are our three main areas of concern.

First, outright assistance. We badly need what you call in business start-up costs, and we badly need funds to modernize our agricultural industry and provide jobs that will in turn energize our own local markets. I realize only too well, in view of your new tax laws, how constrained your budget is. Can you, however, match our miracle with one of your own and help us get started?

Second, trade. All the economists tell us we must export. But export requires two things: money to produce and markets to sell in. Yet almost everywhere we look, the markets are closed to us.

Third, debt. As a sovereign nation, we will honor all our legitimate obligations. However, given the many national needs that we have to fill, it wrenches my soul to think of using 50 percent of our foreign trade income to service interest payments. The monkey remains on our back. That monkey is the only thing we ever saw from the $26 billion.

Our own economists and financiers have proposed an idea that is worth considering. We will put the debt to work by allowing investors to buy discounted Philippine paper and use it, at full value, for peso-equity in the Philippines.

Earlier, I used the image of the phoenix, the mythical bird that dies only to rise again, more brilliantly, from its own ashes. Out there on EDSA, when my people placed their bodies against the tanks, when a single curse, a single act of violence would have pushed us beyond recall and forgiveness into calamity, our nation experienced a kind of death and rebirth. We died to our fears and were reborn to courage, and thereby recovered our freedom. We face our future with confidence because we are moving towards it with courage. This quality is not unknown to American enterprise, nor is the attraction of a great challenge. With the surety of success that courage gives, I invite you to join us in meeting the challenge of Philippine recovery and progress.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].