Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the 20th Anniversary of AIM

[Released on February 28, 1989]

DEVELOPER OF MANAGERIAL TALENT

The President stresses the role played by the Asian Institute of Management (AIM) in the emerging economic dominance of Asia. She added that once upon a time, the AIM met the challenge of Asian growth. Now she gives it the challenge of Filipino progress. The AIM should continue its sharing of managerial expertise with the rest of Asia and must help our country, our government and our people scale the heights of progress to fulfill our dream of a peaceful, prosperous and progressive Philippines.

The Asian Institute of Management is called alma mater by some 13,000 managers from all over Asia, and the number is growing. That’s quite a constituency for me to be addressing. Moreover, it is a constituency that is notable not only for its size but for the role it played in the emerging economic dominance of Asia.

The start of the AIM twenty years ago coincided with the beginnings of the Asia that now commands the respect and careful regard of its competitors in the West. Let me say therefore how very pleased I am to be here with you to mark this milestone in the history of the Asian Institute of Management.

It was 20 years ago that AIM started to fill the need for the managerial competence to release and direct Asia’s tremendous productive forces, just then stirring into life. Far from being the exception in having this potential, the Philippines was ahead of her neighbors in concrete progress.

I will not repeat the sad story of missed opportunities, of poor foresight, of bad management, and of the outright deliberate twisting of economic priorities to suit private greed.

That is all water under the bridge. We have no time for regrets. The height of our fall from years of public mismanagement and public theft measures only half the height we must scale to catch up with the competition just here in Southeast Asia.

Our competitors were not standing still when we were falling back. Now, they have achieved such a high level of economic growth that they can well afford to match it with generous programs of social services.

We, on the contrary, must address two equally pressing priorities: economic progress and social amelioration. Both priorities press hard upon the same limited stock of resources.

Not the least of those resources is the managerial competence to put limited means to the most productive and honest use.

We have been getting, pre-eminently from schools like the AIM, the managerial skill to encourage and direct the growth of the private economy. As the distinguished record of this school shows, we have even supplied that talent to the competition. Give it to the Filipino, he can fall behind in anything, but not in the intellectual command of essential disciplines and in his generosity in sharing what he knows.

But an equal, if not greater need, urges itself on our managerial capacity: the need to prepare the ground for the great strides in industrialization and agricultural production, and in social services, that must be made. And they must be made quickly if we are to regain our former ranking in this region and to survive as a just, compassionate, and democratic society.

We need managers for development even more urgently than the managers we have so excellently trained to meet the bottomline of private profit. We need development managers not only on the level of the central government but, more importantly, on the levels of the local government units.

Somehow, political vision and practical programs founder on the reefs of managerial ignorance in the implementation stage. Somehow things get bogged down, and less gets done than we have a right to expect, given the time and resources devoted. We are frustrated because it seems that the best political will, like some rivers, will disappear in the sand before it gets to the sea. Too much is lost in the translation of programs into concrete works and real opportunities for our people.

We need development managers to carry through the programs to their only aim: a concrete improvement in the lives of the people, and in the prospects of our country for growth – and more growth.

Take the constitutional call for agrarian reform. This does not mean the mere subdivision of poverty on the land, but the increase of incomes and the general well-being of the vast majority of our people who live off the land. Passing out titles is easy. Making the land produce a decent life for the farmer, and a future for his children, that is the challenge. The aim was not the vindication of a certain idea of land justice, but the material improvement of rural life through infrastructure building and extension services that will increase productivity and incomes. So it is with every program, whether aimed at the farmer in the field or the worker on the shopfloor or in the office building. Words of the law and pronouncements of policy are not worth the paper they are printed on without the hands and minds that will make laws and policies work out in reality as they were intended to: To raise the people step by concrete step to a better life.

So it is with the Constitutional call to decentralize political authority and the expenditure of public resources. It is not the aim of the Constitution to merely spread the exercise of political power, or to decentralize opportunities for graft and waste. Decentralization has the same aim of improving the lives of our people by bringing public services closer to them.

In my talks with the provincial governors, I have come to appreciate how better attuned local officials are to the developmental and social needs of their people. I have also seen how badly competent managers are needed to meet those needs.

Competent development managers are needed to identify projects and see them through to completion. The need becomes particularly critical at this time as we compete for foreign development assistance. Our absorptive capacity for assistance in the public sector is being questioned. We have to show that we can use resources swiftly and productively. That nothing will go to waste or disappear into graft, and yet that something significant can be accomplished in record time. We have to show, not by mouth, but by action. We have to prove our capability to use further assistance by showing in completed projects what we can do with what we already have.

At present, the DAP offers short-term courses for development managers. DAP’s output, however, may not be able to satisfy all the requirements of the prospective Philippine Assistance Program for new managers. I am, therefore, suggesting that AIM, in coordination with the DAP undertake a similar program that will turn out new development managers at a faster rate.

We are trying to de-regulate our economy, and even the public service. We must not only loosen, we must release completely the stranglehold of regulation that is choking private initiative and turning off local and foreign investments, and discouraging development assistance. I have started to believe that there is no regulatory aim that is worth the cost in lost opportunities and in frustration as a result of government regulation of economic activities. Not a single aim has been worth the delay nor the missed opportunity for more growth.

One of the most important measures of economic deregulation – the Kalakalan 20 program – has met with some resistance. The measure will hopefully become law very soon. This and other measures designed to release the productive power of Philippine industry and agriculture, on every level – from the big to the grass-roots – need friends in Congress to make them law, and managers in the countryside and on the shopfloor to make them work.

Once upon a time, the AIM met the challenge of Asian growth. Now I give it the challenge of Filipino progress.

The AIM, as its name “Asian” demands, should continue its generous sharing of managerial expertise with the rest of Asia.

But the AIM as central developer of Filipino managerial talent, must rise to that challenge. It must help our country, our government, and our people scale the heights of progress –

So we can catch up with our neighbors in Asia;

With the competition in the rest of the world;

And with our dream of a peaceful, prosperous, and progressive Philippines.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].