Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To Chief Justice Claudio Teehankee

[Released on April 21, 1988]

A SELF MADE MAN

President Aquino pays tribute and offers a toast to Chief Justice Teehankee as one of the few justices who has managed to keep his integrity and dignity intact amidst these confusing moments.

I feel a certain political affinity with Justice Teehankee. For in a sense, both of us created our offices. He was there with me at the restoration of Philippine democracy, administering to me the President’s oath of office, in the glare of the kleig lights and bursting flashbulbs. Had things turned out differently, the occasion would have been the most photographed and documented act of rebellion in history.

Both the dictator and I took our oaths of office on the same day, yet mine stuck while the dictator’s just peeled off. The future was with me. Yet even at that moment, I and many others felt that my oath was the real one. The dictator’s was just a sham. We felt this because the man before me on that historic morning, robed in black, stood for all that was still honorable and true in the State.

In qualifying me to the power and authority of the Presidency, Justice Teehankee, of course, created the power and authority that would appoint him Chief Justice of the Philippines. He is what you call a self-made man.

By being there, at grave risk to his life, and certainly at the price of ending his judicial career, Justice Teehankee did one thing even more important. He demonstrated by historic fact, and not just by constitutional logic, that the Supreme Court should be an independent and co-equal branch of government. By this signal act of courage, by his indispensable role at the creation, the Supreme Court can truly say that its independence, honor and co-equality are not gifts but the hard-won triumph of its most illustrious son.

By a clever maneuver, Chief Justice Marshall established the principle of judicial review. By a greater act of courage, Chief Justice Teehankee reestablished the Supreme Court upon a footing of equality with the two other branches of government, and in the highest esteem of the Filipino people.

Ladies and gentlemen, fellow Filipinos, join me now in a toast: To Chief Justice Claudio Teehankee — for want of a greater word, a Filipino patriot.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].