Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 14th anniversary of the DENR

[Delivered at the EDSA Heroes Park, Quezon City, June 5, 1988]

A TIME TO MAKE AMENDS WITH NATURE

The President laments the way we have utilized and neglected our forest resources. For many years there was wanton destruction and today we reckon with reality – we have felled most of our trees. She exhorts the Filipinos to plant trees with the same vigor and interest they had when they cut them down.

As a nation, some twenty-eight months ago, we displayed a heroism with few parallels in history. In those glorious days of February, we regained the freedoms we cherished as a people. That singular display of heroism has come to be known as the EDSA Revolution. And we celebrate that experience each day that we enjoy our freedom.

Thus, we are here today to proclaim this site as EDSA Heroes Park. We shall here enshrine that unique achievement, and look to this Park as a symbol of our deep gratitude to all those who made our break from tyranny possible.

But even as we do this, there are developments that continue to threaten our freedom, and in fact, our very existence. This threat affects us more profoundly than any political, economic or social displacement thinkable. It can in fact spell the fall of our nation and the misery of future generations.

I speak of the continued destruction of the elements that make up our environment.

This is a concern that I would like to impress upon all as we mark, also today, World Environment Day. The United Nations has declared every 5th of June as such, to focus attention on the worsening condition of the environment around the world. And here in our country, we have for the same reason declared the month of June as environment month.

The threat to the environment must be faced conceitedly and no time must be lost in addressing it. Such urgency demands from each and every Filipino a new heroism not unlike the one shown at EDSA.

But unlike EDSA, we are not rallying against a single force, for environmental destruction is not something that only one person, or a small group of people, is responsible for. In one way or another, we have all caused this peril to fall on us. So, too, we must all get together to banish it.

Neglect of the environment is most apparent in the way we have utilized, and neglected our forest resources. For many years, we lived off our forests as if there were no tommorrow. We cut trees whenever we saw them, as if it were a natural, reflex action. It did not matter whether these trees were in one’s backyard, on the steepest of mountain slopes, or in the deepest of rainforests. All that mattered then was that every tree cut meant profit or gain. It did not bother us then to think that, without equivalent efforts at replanting, one tree cut was one tree forever gone.

And thus, today, we must reckon with reality. We have felled most of our trees. But along with our trees, we have also thrown away the environmental security they had afforded. In exchange for the millions of trees we have cut, we must now content with nature run amok. This means ravaging floods, drought, destruction of crops, and hunger. To compromise any further would mean surrendering our future.

Already we are experiencing the effects of a timber famine, and this nation, once a mighty producer of wood, is now a humbled importer of logs. Frankly, this is not a good way to begin an economic recovery and development program. We need our trees, not only for ecological reasons, but also because they can provide us with a stable, and renewable, source of income and livelihood.

So much has already been given up. Now is the time to make amends with nature. We must plant trees with the same vigor and interest we had when we cut them down. This will be a huge task, with considerable demands on all of us for a major shift in human values. We must learn to match human needs with nature’s elements. A new ethic in the use of material resources is required. For permanence is incompatible with predatory attitudes. A new heroism is therefore expected of us.

At this very moment, in various parts of the country, tree planting activities are simultaneously going on. I must say that there could be no more appropriate occasion than World Environment Day to give this national reforestation effort an auspicious beginning. It is my hope that reforestation will continue after today, and that this focus of interest will remain in the months and years to come, until we shall have accomplished our goal.

As we have painfully learned, heroism does not thrive amidst shortage of interest or will. Let us therefore put our minds and hearts to the cause of our most precious resources so that we will fully learn of their value, and restore them to the abundance and the majesty that they rightfully deserve.

Therefore, in the name of our new heroes, the rest of the Filipino people, and the memory of EDSA, I hereby dedicate this portion of the Ninoy Aquino Parks and Wildlife Nature Center as the EDSA Heroes Park. May this new park serve as a living reminder of our glorious past, and inspire us to even greater heroism, as we steer our nation through the present, and prepare it for the future.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].