Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Muslim-Christian Meeting

[Released on September 4, 1986]

SEEKING PEACE IN THE SOUTH

In a meeting with leaders of Mindanao before returning to the South on a mission of peace, President Aquino expresses her belief that peace and progress can be attained on conditions that are fair to all sectors of Mindanao. In the Philippines, being now a democratic nation, there is room for coexistence among different ideas, cultures, and societies. Ideas and cultures may be diverse, but there is no conflict in the basic desire for the peace and progress of the country.

I have invited you here, to break bread with me, because you are among the chief leaders of Mindanao. The peace and progress of Mindanao depend on your support. Tomorrow I fly South to meet with the other leaders who were not able to make it here. I shall also meet with Nur Misuari who has come in from Jeddah. This completes the circle of leadership upon which, as I said, the peace and progress of Mindanao depend.

It follows from this recognition of your roles that peace and progress is possible on terms that are fair to all the sectors of Mindanao, just to the Filipino nation as a whole, and faithful to the principles for which it stands. But there shall be no derogation of the integrity of the Republic. I have pledged to transform Mindanao from a land of broken promises, of warring communities, to one of fulfillment in unity.

The Filipino nation is democratic if it is anything. There is room within the broad conception of Philippine democracy for all manner of ideas, cultures and societies to co-exist and thrive. What is needed is our mutual respect and support for the wide spectrum of ideas and cultures that make up the rich diversity of this one nation under God.

There is a rich diversity of ideas and cultures but no conflict in the basic desire we all share for the peace and progress of our one country.

My visit to the South again is intended to start a round of consultations in the areas where Muslims and Christians co-exist in order to bring them together in a common effort to uplift their communities and establish the material foundation of their political and spiritual growth. I invite you to take part in these consultations that are specifically intended to reorient the policies and energies of government in your areas in the direction you think best. No one can presume to know this better than you. That is the character of this government, the nature of a true democracy. Our great people who snatched victory and freedom from the jaws of calamity, by signal acts of self-sacrifice and courage, will have it no other way.

The world envies us for our achievement. It was an achievement not only of oppositionists who stood firm for democracy in the spirit of non-violence but of loyalists who held back in the spirit of brotherhood and patriotism. If we were able to exercise self-restraint and show brotherhood in the heat of partisan conflict, surely we can work together in the common love of country for the peace and progress of all our people.

Long live the Republic!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].