Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To J. C. Penney and Trammel Crow

[Delivered on November 10, 1989]

YELLOW: PEOPLE POWER AND THE YELLOW ROSE OF TEXAS

Before great Texan businessmen and dedicated professionals, President Aquino relates how her administration turned the Philippine economy around and had it moving boldly forward. She invites them to join her in building a new country in the Philippines even as JC Penney has taken this challenge by opening its stores to Philippine-made products.

I have been to Texas many times before. And I know the warm, big-hearted hospitality of Texas. But I wasn’t prepared for the welcome that Mr. Trammel Crow and JC Penney gave me right after I set foot in this big, beautiful country. My schedule says that I will be back in the Philippines the day after tomorrow. The warmth, and love, and genuine good feeling I felt all around me this afternoon at the Texas Salute made me feel I was home already. Mr. Crow, JC Penney, thank you very much.

I guess it is might and size of Texas that makes it possible for her to open wide her arms and receive her visitors like she was welcoming her children home.

Texas, of course, is more than just a kind of second home for me and my family. It represents the new life we received several years back when I brought my husband here for a heart operation. It saved his life. It would have been ironic if he had lost his life to heart disease after a tyrannical government had tried to take it in prison.

It was, of course, unavoidable that we would go to Dallas for his treatment. This is the center of heart medicine, the leading edge of the field. But I like to think there was

more than plain coincidence that a Filipino freedom fighter would be given a life by the country that came to birth in one of the most stirring victories of freedom – the state of Texas.

Coming into Dallas once more, I never cease to marvel at the beauty of the skyline. All those glass towers look like Texans standing tall to welcome us. They show the might of this great state which comes directly from its hardworking, hard driving people, energetic people who have never lost their Southern charm and hospitality.

As you know, we are building a new country in the Philippines – a country that is now free and, we hope, one day soon will be prosperous. When we recovered the country from tyranny, its economy was flat on its back. In one year, we turned that economy around and had it moving boldly forward. I think we’ve accomplished a lot. We started with a negative growth rate and in one year posted a positive GNP which reached 6.5 percent in three years. To appreciate that properly, you have to consider that half our revenues go to pay a foreign debt that is one of the biggest in the world, and most of which was stolen or wasted by the past government. That’s like paying the mortgage on a house that was never turned over to you. That may seem unfair, but we’re paying anyway. We’re paying because we’d rather be known for keeping our word than keeping our money. I think that counts for something in the world; it certainly counts a lot in Texas.

We’re working hard to make up for the progress we lost and give a better life to our people. We’ve done quite a lot by ourselves, if you don’t mind my saying so, and I know you don’t. Because here in Texas people see nothing wrong in telling the truth, even if it’s some good you’ve done.

But we’re going to need some help. Looking at the might of Texas assembled here – great businessmen and dedicated professionals – I feel that I have come to the right place for that help. It isn’t charity we’re asking for. It’s to join us in building a new country in the Philippines. It is an effort that will pay off well for everyone who puts in money and hard work. It is a pioneer effort, and that is a challenge that people here appreciate.

JC Penney has risen to that challenge by opening its stores to Philippine-made products. Many of our finely crafted products are already sold in the best stores, like JC Penney, in the major cities of the world. It is a fact of marketing life that the patronage of major foreign buyers is the critical element in breaking in a big way into international market. I think JC Penney has given us this break.

This is one great effort and it is deeply appreciated. We hope to attract more such ventures between Texas and the Philippines.

There is already a growing trade between the US and the Philippines. It rose from US$1.7 billion in 1986, to US$2 billion in 1987, and to US$2.5 billion in 1988. That’s fine as far as it goes. Now I would like the country that I have come to love and admire to be the Philippines’ best trading partner.

Every Filipino product sold in a foreign market is a fragment of the Filipino dream to be strong again and prosperous. To live in the dignity that befits free men. I can’t think of any other people I’d rather have with us making that dream come true than the people of this great state.

We are so distant from each other, yet so much alike in many ways. A gallant Texan gave me the most fitting gift on my first official visit to the United States: the yellow rose of Texas. There are only two countries in the world where the color yellow is a symbol of courage — the Philippines where it stands for the people power revolution and Texas.

I want to thank you again for your warm reception.

God bless you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].