Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the International Reunion of the Movement for a Free Philippines

[Delivered on June 20, 1986]

WELCOME HOME, EXILES

The job cut out for the freedom fighters, and these include those who chose exile rather than live under the tyranny of Marcos, is to provide for a decent life, a better future for millions of Filipinos; to get the economy back in shape and rebuild a country left in moral and political ruins.

There are three things happening today that my husband Ninoy would not have thought possible:

First, that it is I, and not he, who is doing most of the talking.

Second, that we should actually be concerned about Marcos and Imelda fading from the public memory.

And third, that the Movement for a Free Philippines should be holding its international convention right here, in the midst of what was once the land of bondage, and only three years after he bid you goodbye in the United States.

Ninoy must share our astonishment. The Philippines is exhilaratingly and unquestionably free. The cause, the burning dream of your movement has finally been realized. And sooner and more painlessly than we all thought possible.

In the midst of our waiting and our struggle, I thought our children would have to carry the torch after us. Who would have imagined God would snap His fingers and we would be free. But looking back now, I can see how God prepared our snap liberation through many years, many people and groups, and out of a variety of circumstances. And one of His very special instruments, used quite skillfully and potently outside of Philippines, was the Movement for a Free Philippines.

Marcos liked to call your members “steak commandoes.” I know that not many of you could afford steaks in exile. What Marcos did not realize, or what he could never admit, is that there in the land of steak, it was he who was being turned slowly in a spit. Thanks to the MFP commandoes, world opinion was slowly turned against him and a new foreign policy towards the Philippines was taking shape.

I am more fortunate than most Filipinos in that I was able to watch your group at work. In the United States, I became well acquainted with the ideas, the campaigns, the organized and widespread network of the MFP. I saw how Filipinos in exile, my friend Raul Manglapus and other exiles, managed to find the time, the funds, and the energy (and that is never easy in the mad rush for a living in Europe and America), to lobby for the Philippine cause. I also saw native Americans, Canadians, Europeans, many of whom had never seen the Philippines, embrace the concerns of our land as wholeheartedly and intensely as if they were their own. I saw all these take place, and I can never forget what; it was like and how admirable you were to keep trying, in spite of the cynicism and the mockery. In behalf of Filipinos who were not privy to your efforts, but who now enjoy the benefits of what you worked so tirelessly for, I thank you. We shall always be grateful.

And now, what does an organization like the Movement for a Free Philippines do now that the Philippines is free? Time magazine, in one February issue, commented that the Philippines’ freedom fighters now face the hard part (obviously, the writers never experienced exile), the nitty-gritty phase of their cause. And that, as you all know, is to provide a decent life, a better future for millions of poor and hungry Filipinos. It is a struggle to get our economy back in shape, to rebuild from the moral and political ruins left by “that man” who forced many of you into exile.

I understand that the MFP has just launched the Philippine Reconstruction Corps; I also understand that your group will be lobbying or personally participating in a program to transfer technology, resources and investments from abroad to the Philippines. I have also been told that some of your members will uproot themselves from comfortable residences and careers abroad to settle here and pioneer in the work of reconstruction. The country is grateful.

The work of the Movement for a Free Philippines, if I may presume to interpret your agenda, has really just begun.

As in the years past, our country, though separated from your places of work by oceans, is greatly dependent on the continuance of your zeal and vision. And as before, the contributions you make are purely voluntary. You didn’t have to help, it was enough that you paid the price of exile, but you did, anyway. And the results, I know, will be the same. It didn’t look as though we could make it, but we did. The world hasn’t seen the last of the miracles made in the Philippines. And that, through the grace of God, and again with much help from the MFP.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].