Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Philippine Military Academy’s Class of ‘86

[Delivered at the Philippine Military Academy, Baguio City, March 22, 1987]

WAGING A DEMOCRATIC WAR

President Aquino called the Philippine Military Academy’s Class of ’86 as the proudest in history because, during the February Revolution, they were one with the nation in fighting for freedom. They passed the most difficult test of a soldier: the test of loyalty.

The Class of ’87 also has something to remember. During preparations for their graduation, the PMA was bombed, showing to them, even before they go to the field, the extent to which the enemies of the state will go to topple the government.

As she came to power peacefully, President Aquino vows to keep it, although her peace offerings have repeatedly been rejected by the Left and the Right. Still, she vows to lead a democratic war, a war fought with honor and humanity rather than violence.

She appeals to the rebels to lay down their arms and join the government’s work of reconstruction. To the soldiers, she asks for patience and courage.

One year ago, I stood here and called the graduating Class of ’86 the proudest in PMA history. That class had gone through a graduating exercise of far greater importance than any held in this field. For the Class of ’86 had passed the most difficult test of a soldier: the test of his loyalty, the discovery of his highest duty. In the final days of the Revolution, the Class of ’86, torn between literal duty and patriotism, had defected to the people and become the first graduating class of the people’s army.

In that class, a young man stood and heard my call to protect the government and the state from any threat, be it internal or external. He heard me explain the difficulty of waging war for a democracy, of fighting for its honor and integrity without violating its principles. Lt. Edgardo Dizon answered that difficult call with the unquestioning valor and directness of a soldier. He answered it with his life.

I went to the place where he was killed. I talked to his comrades-in-arms. I learned from them what a true officer he was. His troops had been pinned down by enemy fire. Against the warnings of his troops, he refused to take adequate cover so he could keep a commanding view of his soldiers. He was killed in a hail of enemy bullets. His act defined the first duty of an officer; the duty to care for the safety of his troops.

You, who will leave here to command troops of your own, take his stern example to heart. We, the Filipino people, for whose freedom and honor he gave his life, take his sacrifice equally to heart and mourn the loss of a brave Filipino.

I had hoped that peace would be the life of our new democracy, as it had been the moving spirit of its restoration.

As I came to power peacefully; so had I hoped to keep it. God knows, I have tried.

But my offers of peace and reconciliation have been met with the most bloody and insolent rejections by the left and the right. It is clear that the forces of the extremes will not leave us in peace — to achieve the recovery and progress we so badly need.

The latest rejection was made in this field last week. It came in the form of a terrorist bomb inflicting death and terrible suffering on innocent people in the midst of a most peaceful pursuit — while preparing for an occasion meant for joy and celebration. You, the graduating Class of ’87, now have your own distinction. During the preparations for your graduation, the PMA was struck by the greatest tragedy in its history. March 18, 1987 will live in our memory as the most treacherous act committed against it by the enemies of democracy.

It was a dastardly act of cowardice.

We will find the perpetrators.

And some of you of the Class of ’87 will have the privilege of bringing them to justice. And you are the men for it. I have heard how well you responded to the crisis, rushing quickly to aid the wounded. It is fitting also at this point to acknowledge and commend the care and concern that civilians showed in this tragic incident. Doctors and nurses, from Baguio General Hospital, St. Louis Hospital and from as far as Manila, responded with equal concern and timely assistance. Soldier and civilian worked together in the face of a common tragedy.

You have learned the most important lesson of your entire training. Here, even before your graduation, you had your first encounter with the enemy. Now you know his methods and the evil he can do. You have seen the fate he intends for us, for your President and your people, if he prevails.

Such evil passes understanding. I ask those who are responsible for this heinous deed:

Why is it necessary to go to such extremes? Why is it necessary to kill the innocent? Is nothing sacred anymore — not the lives of the innocent nor the sanctity of a school? The enemies of democracy, it is obvious, will not play by any rules. And yet we, who stand for the truth, can only fight with honor and humanity. That is the difficult challenge of fighting a democratic war. But I know that we are equal to it.

The irony of this tragic incident is that it took place here in the very shield of the Republic, meant to protect its government and people. I have gone to many parts of our country, and walked freely among our people, protected by little more than their affection. And yet it is here, in a military camp, that the greatest threat to my life has been made and the greatest casualties inflicted. Take this lesson also to heart. It is the lesson of EDSA. We are safe only in the affection and loyalty of our people.

This field, where tradition graduates the frontline defenders of Philippine democracy, was intended by its enemies to be the graveyard of democracy.

Let us pledge today to make it the graveyard of their dark ambitions instead. Let us pledge to defeat, the ambitions of the left and the right to enslave this nation again and bring down our new found pride.

To the enemy, let me say, give up your futile struggle if you have a drop of humanity and patriotism left in your veins. Democracy is here to stay. It is our people you are killing. We shall spare no effort to protect them.

Do not think you can use the rights and liberties, the promises of the Constitution, to destroy the lives and freedom of our people. No provision in the Constitution, let me say this now, will be allowed to prejudice their safety. For the first law of the Constitution is the protection of the people.

To our enemies, let me say that nothing will intimidate this President. Death holds no fear for us, neither for the Commander-in-Chief nor for the soldier in the line. One nation, one Armed Forces, acting with the energy and direction of a single hand will smite the foe, on the left and the right, and permanently end all threats to freedom before my term as President is over. This is my solemn oath.

Last year, I said, with the hope of peace in my heart, Welcome home, my soldiers.

Today I must say, with sadness in my heart: Patience and courage, noble soldiers of the Republic.

The harvest has not yet come. Our enemies have delayed the peace and progress for which we have worked so hard.

The battle has only begun. But the victory will certainly be ours. 90 years of AFP history is our guarantee of this. Congratulations to the AFP: Carry on.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].