Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade Consultative Meeting

[Delivered at the Philippine Plaza, May 10, 1988]

NGOs AS WILLING PARTNERS

The shortage of safe water sources has caused the spread of water-borne diseases. Further, only 69 per cent of total households are provided with sanitary toilet facilities. Given the primitive or non-existent state of toilet facilities, the President responds to the challenge and announces the launching of the nation’s first comprehensive Water Supply, Sewerage and Sanitation Master Plan. The Plan aims to eliminate the huge backlog in the delivery of basic water supply services by 1991 and would rely heavily on certain non-government organizations for help in shouldering the cost of implementing the Plan.

The Eighties have been declared by the United Nations as the International Drinking Water and Sanitation Decade. In 1981, the Philippines initially responded to this call to divert more attention and resources towards the provision of safe water and proper sanitation to larger segments of the population. In the next seven years, some eleven (11) billion pesos were funnelled into the effort.

Despite the inroads made, facilities remain primitive or are nonexistent for a large number of communities throughout the country. To date, only 63 percent of all Filipinos have access to safe water. Service coverage is broken down into 86 percent for Metro Manila and its adjoining areas, 55 percent for other urban centers and 62 percent for the rural areas. The shortage of safe water sources has caused the spread of water-borne diseases. Further, only 69 percent of total households in the nation are provided with sanitary toilet facilities; 15 percent are equipped with crude and unsanitary toilets and 16 percent have no facilities at all.

Because of the prohibitive cost of materials and installation, provisions for sewerage are even more scanty. Only limited areas of Manila, Baguio, Zamboanga and Cebu City are serviced by a sewerage system.

Through the past years, the Philippine effort for the Decade moved in fits and starts. But at last, this year, we have completed and are launching the nation’s first comprehensive Water Supply, Sewerage and Sanitation Master Plan. One of its general goals is to eliminate the huge backlog in the delivery of basic water supply services by 1991. It also includes the first long-term approach for provision of sewerage facilities. The specific policies and strategies involved in the Plan include a delineation of the responsibilities and contribution of pertinent government agencies like the Department of Public Works and Highways, the LWUA, the Metro Manila Waterworks and Sewerage System and the Department of Health. The plan also defines the methods for provision of cost-sharing and cost-recovery mechanisms and the extent of participation of beneficiary communities. For instance, one approach is to harness the support of rural womenfolk in fostering water conservation consciousness among their families and the community as a whole. The rationale is that it is the women who normally operate hand-pumps and fetch water for their washing and cooking chores, and who can be tapped as systems managers in Water Districts and Rural Waterworks and Sanitation Associations.

Though the Plan will be activated and operable, government concedes that its resources are scarce and thinly spread out among other pressing projects and programs for development. We will therefore be relying on certain non-government organizations for help in shouldering the effort and cost of implementing the Plan. Those who have already put in their time and resources are the Tulungan sa Tubigan Foundation, the Philippine Business for Social Progress and other civic organizations. The UNICEF deserves special mention for its efforts in this endeavour.

The type of services usually rendered by these groups are project identification, subsidy in construction cost, assistance in operations, and maintenance, and administration in training programs. An additional service we look forward to receiving from private groups is the documentation of success stories and the development of implementation models. This is to promote water sanitation awareness at all levels. Meanwhile, let me state that the efforts of nongovernment groups have been highly appreciated and we hope they will be sustained.

May I think all the individuals, organizations and agencies who have already contributed or who have pledged their support in helping Filipinos help themselves in improving the quality of their lives. Even as the decade nears to a close, we already see brighter prospects ahead in the next one.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].