Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Democracy

[ Released on January 24, 1987 ]

PEOPLE GUARDING DEMOCRACY

After an attempted coup d’etat and just before a plebiscite to ratify the new Constitution, President Aquino appeals to the people once more to protect their hard-earned freedom from those who seek to destabilize the government. As she invites them to a miting de avance for the new Constitution’s ratification, she asks them to exercise strength and resolve in preserving democracy. If need be, she enjoins them to reactivate People’s Power which proved crucial in determining the results of the February election.

The events of the past week prove two things:

The enemies of democracy agree with the friends of democracy that the ratification of the proposed Constitution is essential to the preservation of democracy in the Philippines. This explains the desperate efforts of the opponents of the Constitution to prevent the plebiscite on February 2.

The attempted coup is only their latest effort. I warned last week that efforts to destabilize the government and prevent a plebiscite will intensify as we near voting day. Equally, our responses to these threats to the life of our democracy demonstrate our unshakeable resolve to complete our democratic mission.

The events of the past week also prove that, in the end, democracy is safe only in the hands of the people, united, acting in consent, and sending a clear signal to all its enemies that they will defend it with their numbers and their lives.

And so I call on the people, on all the friends of democracy, to come out and join the January 31 Miting de Avance at Luneta.

I ask our people also to protect the integrity of the ballot during the February 2 plebiscite. The government and the Commission on Elections are exerting their best efforts to assure clean and orderly balloting, but the enemies of democracy can still corrupt the electoral process, given what they stole in the past and their present determination to destroy our freedoms.

I ask you therefore to reactivate the people’s organizations that produced the People’s Victory in the last election. If necessary, let us guard the ballot boxes again with our lives.

Let us begin by joining the Miting de Avance this Saturday, at 1:30 in the afternoon, at the Luneta.

Let us show the enemies of our freedom the strength and resolve which they must overcome before they can restore tyranny and abuse in our land.

Let us demonstrate once more the power of the people as the only dependable shield of our democracy. I ask you, my people, to join me on January 31 in demonstrating our unity and strength in defense of democracy.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library