Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Outstanding Farmers of the Year and policy directions in agriculture

[Released on May 30, 1986]

LOOSENING AND LIFTING THE YOKE

Agriculture and the farmer are at the center of the government’s recovery program.

Giving highest priority to the development of agriculture, President Aquino lists steps taken to implement a short-term recovery plan for the rural sector: land reform in tenanted rice and corn lands, rural infrastructure program, credit, extension support, and other forms of assistance to the small farmer, price support program for rice and corn, removal of P10-surcharge per bag of fertilizer and creation of a cabinet standing committee on rural development.

Let me congratulate our ten outstanding farmers whom we have just awarded in today’s ceremonies. In giving them recognition, we pay homage to the millions of farmers throughout the countryside who are the backbone of our nation and the focus of our program for economic recovery.

Today, we also honor an entire community of farmers for their achievements in working together as one group. Their collective endeavors for a common purpose exemplify the spirit of oneness that is required of all sectors of our society if we are to see our nation through this time of crisis.

Let me likewise commend the twelve outstanding extension workers of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food. They personify the standards of selfless dedication and professionalism that other extension workers and public servants in general should emulate. Indeed, “Kabalikat ng Magsasaka” is a phrase that captures the important role played by the government’s 15,000-strong extension force. In bringing the fruits of research and technology to the farm, extension workers are truly the partners of farmers in their quest for a better life.

Your new government places agriculture and the farmer at the center of its recovery program. This commitment was set forth in a statement I made even before the presidential election in February. I said then:

Although there remains much more to be done, today, I am happy to say that your government has acted to give substance to this commitment.

First of all, the Ministry of Agriculture and Food has completed its “Short-Term Recovery Plan for the Rural Sector.” This plan defines your government’s agenda for agricultural development over the next few years.

It is anchored on three major policy goals:

Your government and the Ministry of Agriculture and Food have already taken several steps to implement this short-term plan.

As a first step in the decentralization of the Ministry’s operations, we have appointed a Deputy Minister for Mindanao. Deputy Minister Rolando Marcial will be based in Davao. In this way, we are bringing the Ministry’s services closer to the farmers while providing the mechanism for real participation of farmers in decision-making. The new Deputy Minister’s main job is to serve as the link between farmers and the various local officials and private organizations serving the rural sector. For example, in deciding which farm-to-market roads should be repaired immediately, he would coordinate on behalf of farmers with the regional officers of the Ministry of Public Works and Highways as well as with barangay officials.

In the aspect of market liberalization, we have dismantled monopolies and restrictions which have dampened the farmer’s incentive to produce and impeded the growth of the rural economy.

We have taken steps to make sure that the sugar and coconut monopolies are not revived.

We have lifted the ban on copra exports.

We are calling for the election of a new set of officers in Cocofed to help ensure that this body truly represents the best interests of coconut farmers. As I stated in Davao City only a few days ago, we shall continue to protect coconut farmers from any scheme that stifles their enterprise or steals their rightful share of a major sector of our economy.

We have withdrawn government’s exclusive role in the importation of wheat and soybean meal.

We have disbanded the meat importation cartel.

We are in the process of liberalizing fertilizer importations.

In the credit aspect, the Central Bank has opened its rediscounting window to quedan loan papers under the National Food Autority’s grain quedan financing program. We have done this to make more credit funds available to private traders for purchasing the produce of rice and corn farmers. In this way, we hope to induce greater competition among trade which result, hopefully, in higher prices paid to farmers.

In addition to these steps already completed, we are in the process of implementing other policy reforms and measures as part of our short-term recovery plan. Among the most important of these are the following:

Before I close, let me re-affirm that our goal is to encourage an environment in which farmers can improve their quality of life.

Two principles guide us in our planning to achieve this goal. First, we shall de-emphasize production per se in favor of policies affecting income and wealth creation. And second, we will pursue this goal in an environment of free enterprise and individual initiative.

Thus, where before the emphasis of the past administration was on increasing the production of certain food and export crops, the over-riding concern of this administration is to help increase farm incomes and employment opportunities rather than just production per se.

Where before the Marcos government subscribed to the practice of authoritarianism and excessive intervention, this government will not presume to direct the farmer’s endeavors, nor will it interfere with the play of market forces. In short, we will merely clear the way for Filipino initiative and enterprise in farming to flourish.

Indeed, in the twenty years of the Marcos regime, the farmer was left out of the decision-making process. He had no voice as to what crops he should plant, what animals he should raise, or what farming systems he should adopt.

Your new government would like you to know that all that is a thing of the past.

I started out by saving that we are here to honor our farmers and farm workers — they who toil hardest to create new wealth for us all.

Our country stands at a crucial moment in its history. The future lies with agriculture, and it behooves us all to give farmers every help to bring it about. It is a long hard road before we settle the obligations we inherited from Marcos and achieve the progress we have longed for. For that journey, we shall need all the strength and self-reliance that a vibrant agriculture can give our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].