Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the Vancouver Business Community

[Delivered on November 4, 1989]

INVITING CANADIAN INVESTMENTS

Many Canadians know the Philippines as the scene of a historic drama – a victory that was achieved by Filipinos’ hanging on against the odds. Similarly, Canadians built their country by just hanging on.

The Philippines has achieved so much since then. Its GNP has grown steadily, it has met its debt obligations, and democracy has been reestablished. However, much remains to be done. In spite of the economic growth, many Filipinos still live in poverty. Insurgency continues. The solution lies in the expansion of Philippine economy, for which the country needs investments from Canada.

I would like to thank the World Trade Center and the Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada for this opportunity to meet the distinguished members of the Canadian business community.

This is the first time that a Philippine president visits Canada. It is therefore a privilege and a great pleasure for me to address the business leaders of Canada.

I am here to introduce the Philippines to you as an area of investment. Many of you are familiar with the country as the scene of a recent historic drama – the most successful non-violent revolution.

Those who watched from afar wondered at the odds against us; while those of us who were actually there wondered if we would come out of it alive. But in the aftermath, our victory explained itself.

The shorthand explanation was that we had lived a miracle. The realistic explanation was simply that we had held on longer than our opponent had. Hanging on, you see, is half the battle won. This is something, I think, that Canadians appreciate from their pioneer experience, for their possession of this vast continental mass had a lot to do with just hanging on – against the odds.

The spirit of my country in that perilous time had much in common with the Canadian pioneer spirit. We didn’t give up because we couldn’t. There was nowhere else to go. Had we given up the fight, we’d have thrown away our future.

It is remarkable how far you can go when there is nowhere else to go but up.

First, let me briefly describe how down we were. Before the Revolution, our economy had been continuously contracting – by over 10 percent in just two years. Per capita income was down to its lowest level in the past decade. The apparent good news was a low inflation rate in 1985. But that was because inflation had shot up to 50% the year before. This had left everyone too broke to meet their basic needs, much less to push up prices. Everything was flat – on the ground.

By the first year of the new government, the economy had been turned around. This was followed by three successive years of GNP growth that was quite remarkable given the conditions in which it was achieved. To describe one: 40% of the national budget went annually to debt service, along with a substantial share of our foreign exchange. That was on the economy side.

But our revolution was a political act for a political objective. Before we even thought about reviving our economy, we wanted first to be free again. It was for political liberty that my people put their lives on the line, and for nothing else. That at least was the simple message of my campaign. We never mentioned prosperity, nor did the people care. It was remarkable that the poorest of the poor in the countryside would shout the word “democracy” wherever I went in the campaign.

That says something about the Filipino’s sense of values.

And so, on the political side, we moved much faster and, I must say it clearly, with absolute success.

We transitioned from dictatorship to democracy in less than a year and half. All the methods we used were democratic. We never compromised in the morality of our means to achieve our democratic aims. We needed a democratic constitution, so we held democratic polls to ratify one. We needed a separate legislature and so we held, for the first time in 14 years, the cleanest and best attended elections not only in Philippine history but perhaps in the history of any modern democracy.

We held two more elections to establish representative government up and down the country so that the people would feel the dignity of self-rule again.

This was our unalloyed success story. The result of it is a measure of political legitimacy that few governments in the world enjoy, and therefore a measure of stability that assures the near absolute safety of any investment in the Philippines today.

Other things were not so successful. For instance, our of offer to negotiate a peace with the communist insurgents. That offer was rejected. It was with great reluctance that we embarked again upon the hostile course that seemed so inimical to the spirit of our new order. But there was no help for it.

With due regard for human rights, we launched a military campaign with a determination that had not been seen under the dictatorship. The blows came so strong that the insurgents yielded: first their strongholds and then their reason. For they proceeded to blame themselves for their reverses and instigated brutal purges that have decimated their ranks. We also arrested virtually the entire top leadership of the Communist Party.

The conflict, of course, is far from over. But the tide has turned, and time runs now against the rebels where once it ran against a corrupt, tyrannical, and incompetent regime.

Remnants of the old dictatorial order, even those who had helped launch the People Power revolution, tried to seize the power also. Five coup attempts were launched. The last was crushed completely. This last engagement finally convinced the world that democracy was there to stay in the Philippines and that the country had finally entered into a period of long-term normalcy and stability. We breathed a sigh of relief, for we could now work harder on our economic recovery without distraction. But the good name of our country with which we had started – a name that stood in the eyes of the world for compassion – had been sullied by the unavoidable blood that had to be shed.

Nothing comes free, it seems.

We continued working on the economy, guided by the free enterprise philosophy of our Medium-Term Plan. We dismantled monopolies and other privileges with which the past government would reward its friends. We proclaimed and strictly observed a policy of “no fears and no favors” in business. This had a remarkable effect on the economy, as the GNP figures show.

We are going further in our avowed aim to give to the private sector the principal role as engine of the economy. Out of 296 government-owned or controlled corporations, we have marked out 130 for privatization and 118 for abolition or merger with regular government departments.

We liberalized the importation of over a thousand items, and have scheduled more.

We are particularly proud of the way we have managed our growth so that inflation, while definitely increasing, has not run away with our gains. We have kept the peso stable.

Our successes have not, unfortunately, reached those whose lives we want most to improve. Although the poverty level dropped from 59% to 49%, that is still more poverty than we can in justice accept.

But the way out is still the economy. We have to progress farther. We have to expand our economy so as to draw in the poor who must feel like strangers in their own land. That is why I am here. To attract your investments to my country to make the economy grow. Thus, we have rationalized our system of incentives and planned for 16 regional industrial centers into which we intend to pour the bulk of our infrastructure projects. From these centers, we hope that progress and prosperity will fan out to encompass the lives of all our people.

The country I have briefly introduced to you is a pioneer country. And its people are only just staking out their future. They are carving out of the wilderness that the past government had made of their country a new one that will accommodate their hopes. But don’t get me wrong. We are not talking about a country where people, finally, are getting jobs but business, ultimately, is just getting by. Great fortunes are being made in the Philippines today.

The Japanese see this, so do the Taiwanese. And if there is a good profit to be made anywhere, they would know where. We are inviting Canada to look in the same place.

The US-Canada Free Trade Arrangement, it is said, has faced the Canadian economy permanently to the South. May I suggest a little loosening up and looking West, to the Pacific where the future is coming to birth.

It is also said that the US-Canada Trade Arrangement will open for Canada the gates to the international economy. I would like to think that Canada, given the high quality of its manufactures and the entrepreneurial genius of its people, can make it into the world economy without going through another country’s backdoor.

You don’t have to go South, to reach the East. Canada is joined to us by the Pacific. The same waters that wash our shores beat against the majestic coastline of British Columbia. The selfsame waters unite us to the future of the Pacific.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].