Ang karapatan sa kultura ay kinikilala bilang isang mahalagang bahagi ng karapatang pantao na nagbibigay-daan sa mga indibidwal at komunidad na mapanatili, paunlarin, at ipahayag ang kanilang natatanging pagkakakilanlan, tradisyon, at pamana. Ito ay sumasaklaw sa lahat ng aspeto ng buhay panlipunan, tulad ng sining, musika, panitikan, relihiyon, at mga kaugalian. Mahalaga ang karapatang ito upang mapanatili ang pagkakaiba-iba ng kultura sa buong mundo at upang matiyak na ang bawat tao ay may pagkakataong lumahok sa buhay pangkultura ng kanilang lipunan.  It is a fundamental right that allows individuals and communities to maintain, develop, and express their unique identity, traditions, and heritage.  This includes the right to access, enjoy, and contribute to cultural resources and expressions.  The State shall respect, protect, and promote the rights of all its citizens to participate in cultural life.

The President honors the Filipino Artist and its artistic expression in music and dance during the inauguration of the UN Decade for Cultural Development. She confers the National Artist Award to Col. Antonio R. Buenaventura and Ms. Lucresia Reyes-Urtula who are the finest embodiments of the Filipino soul.

We are here today to recognize and honor the Filipino spirit and its artistic expression in music and dance. The conferment of these honors is most appropriate at this time, for this year the Philippines, together with the United Nations, inaugurates the World Decade for Cultural Development. By a happy coincidence, we too are inaugurating the commemorative decade for the centennial of Filipino nationalism which culminates in 1998.

The World Decade for Cultural Development was proclaimed by the UN General Assembly, upon recommendation of the UNESCO, during its 100th plenary meeting on December 8, 1986. The objectives of the Decade are: (1) recognizing the cultural dimension of development; (2) affirming and enriching cultural identities; (3) broadening participation in culture; and (4) promoting international cultural cooperation.

In the rush of nations to achieve material progress, to create jobs for the multitude of unemployed, and to produce more to alleviate mass hunger in many parts of the world, culture has frequently been forgotten or given a low priority. The Decade seeks to correct this oversight, by emphasizing that development is not merely a matter of raising the GNP, but equally of promoting that for which GNPs are raised, the development of the total person through the improvement of the material and spiritual quality of life.

That quality is not a matter merely of better food and housing, better health, and adequate clothing for everybody. It means, also the opportunity to express the human condition in art, and support the talents that make that possible.

The UN recognizes the right of peoples to their culture; and a great part of colonial injustice lay in the Western attempt to eradicate native cultures. The affirmation of this right to one’s native culture, and the right to national self-determination, have been the vital principle of nationalism for a century in our country, since the first Philippine Revolution.

In that period of self-affirmation and self-definition, it was in the arts that the Filipino first began to speak with a distinctive voice. In 1885, Pedro Paterno wrote his novel Ninay , filled with local color. The implied message was that the Filipino need not apologize for his country. In 1887, Jose Rizal published his novel Noli Me Tangere . He was saying, not only that his country deserved respect, but it was an outrage not to give it that respect for we are all equal under our skins. In 1889, our patriots in Europe put out the La Solidaridad to spread that message abroad. To prove that equality – if proof was needed – there were the artists Juan Luna and Felix Resurreccion Hidalgo. Their artistic victories in Spain expressed the proposition best – we can all be equal in excellence.

Our own recent liberation from two decades of tyranny was aided by the commitment of some artists to the cause of liberation. In fiction, essay, and poetry some of our writers attacked the dictatorship. Our singers sang against the oppression. Our painters drew the faces of violence against the body and spirit of our people. And a handful of journalists went to jail, but remained steadfast in the cause of liberty.

In the spirit of the UN Decade for Cultural Development and the Decade of Filipino nationalism, we wish to publicly recognize and honor the Filipino Artist. And we honor them without exception. As a tangible expression of this recognition we confer and award the National Artist Award to two noble spirits whose art is as ancient as our country – Music and Dance. Four hundred years ago when the European first set foot in our country, they noted the dance and music traditions of our forefathers. These traditions still live. The honorees with us today Col. Antonio R. Buenaventura and Ms. Lucresia Reyes-Urtula stand in the proud line of Filipinos who are the finest embodiments of the Filipino soul. We congratulate them, and ask all our people to feel honored with them. For what they have achieved is not only theirs to glory in; it is also the glory of their country.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].