Rowers in the Same Boat

Freedom and economic growth are inseparable factors. One cannot flourish without the other. One of the reasons for President Aquino’s visit to the United States is to renegotiate with the Philippines’ creditors for more reasonable terms. From its end, the Philippines has based its development program on a labor-oriented and rural-based strategy that will in the long run enable it to pay all its legitimate debt. In the medium term, the nation should grow at an average rate of six to seven percent a year in real terms. Given this goal, it is hoped that the nation’s representatives and its foreign creditors can hammer out the appropriate debt-restructuring program to allow the Philippines to achieve its modest target.

I thank you for the welcome you have given me and the officials of my government. I come to you as the head of a nation whose rebirth you witnessed in splendid detail on your television screens almost seven months ago. Truly, it is with enormous pride that we recall those moments when a people threw caution and fear to the winds and staked their lives, for that was all they had, to restore democracy in their country.

Words cannot add to the vivid images you surely recall, nor will I try. It is not my purpose here to recall that triumph but to affirm my people’s determination to move forward from there.

Even before my government was established, I had made clear what its underlying philosophy would be. We would have, I promised during the campaign, an open government, conducting its affairs in the full glare of public scrutiny. Its policies, I pledged, would be as accurately reflective as possible of the people’s wisdom and preferences. I believed then, and still do, that no one can know better than the people what they want and what they are prepared to pay for it. Even more important than my believing it, the people are convinced of it after 20 years of unilateral direction by a leadership that claimed to know all and ended up stealing everything. We have an open, democratic government, proceeding to the extent possible, by wide, popular consultations. We have such a government as an expression of our faith in the wisdom of the people, a faith justified by their political achievement. We have it also because, as I said, the nation will have it no other way. The political marketplace has spoken. The Constitutional Commission that I appointed is completing a draft whose ratification by the people before the end of the year will give enduring form to the insistent democracy of Philippine politics. Within the first quarter of next year, a new Congress will be sitting to represent and fashion the laws of the Filipino people, thereby imparting a character of stability and predictability to the political system as a whole.

As with the structure of government, so with its policies. Unless these have taken into account the interest of the people as the people see it, unless the people can accept these policies as clearly contributing to their welfare, they will fail. You need not worry that my people will accept only policies that pamper them. My people offered to make the last sacrifice. With their families around them, they faced down the entire array of tyranny: guns, goons and gold during the elections; tanks, troops, and threats during the four days of February. They have seen the nobility of sacrifice in the death of my husband, they have experienced the power of an iron resolve in their democratic triumph. They are prepared to take on whatever burdens are required to rebuild their nation and make it worthy, by its material progress, of its great, unprecedented and unequalled political achievement.

If you still question their capability, consider the sacrifices they have already made: sacrifices that have borne us to where we are today. The present stability in our prices and exchange rates, the balance in our current account, have been achieved at tremendous cost in terms of our national product, our employment and our living standards. In 1985, for example, our real per capita income levels were down to what they were ten years before, while our external debt had increased by $22 billion dollars. We lost ten years in our growth process and had nothing to show for it but the dubious distinction of being the country with the fifth largest debt in the developing world.

Undaunted, we have embarked on a consistent and realistic economic recovery program which was drafted in consultation with the people and premised on social justice and private enterprise.

Mr. De Larosiere’s approval of a standby program for the Philippines two days ago is an affirmation of my government’s program and the confidence of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank that our objectives can be attained.

As you know, the government’s program is based on a labor-oriented and rural-based growth strategy that will in the long run enable us to pay all of our legitimate debt. We have determined that in the medium term, the Philippines should grow at an average rate of six to seven percent a year in real terms. This target was chosen for two reasons. One, because we would like by 1991 to regain our 1981 real per capita levels of income. And two, because it has been predicted by independent international studies that the average growth rate of Asia in the next five years will approximate that figure. You will agree with me then, that this growth target is, at the very least, eminently reasonable.

Given this goal, I leave it in the hands of your goodselves and my government’s representatives to hammer out the appropriate restructuring program that will allow us to achieve this modest target. For after all, ensuring our economic recovery in the short-term, and sustainable growth in the long run, also ensures that your own ultimate self-interest will be served by enhancing our ability to service our future obligations in full.

I should like to believe that when you and my government sit down for these negotiations we shall not do so across an adversarial table but beside each other, like oarsmen in the same boat, pulling in the same direction, for the haven of the same shore.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].