A LAST TRIBUTE

As the Japanese people shared the anguish of our struggle for freedom, as well as the joy of our victory, the President joins other world leaders in paying a last tribute to the late Emperor of Japan and the bright hopes for the reign of the new one.

We are leaving to join other world leaders in paying a last tribute to the late Emperor of Japan. In so doing, we express the desire to share with the Japanese people the burden of their grief at the final rites for their beloved emperor.

The emperor Showa’s reign spanned the most momentous events in the history of Japan and the world.

His reign opened at the rising of the Japanese sun. It has closed in greater and truer glory – a peace-loving, more prosperous, and neighborly Japan

As the Japanese people shared the anguish of our struggle for freedom, as well as the joy of our victory, so do we, the Filipino people, open our hearts to their grief at the passing of their old Emperor and their highest hopes for the reign of the new one.

In the new Emperor’s time we may see the fulfillment of his father’s hopes at a time when the world was rushing into war. I quote the poem he wrote in January 1940, the month of his death 49 years later:

On this New Year’s Day We pray for the time to come When east, west, and all, Making friends with one another Will share in a prosperous future.

I shall take to the Japanese people our condolences over their loss, and our congratulations at the new age that has opened for Japan and Asia — as expressed in the late Emperor’s hope.

Before going, may I say that every provision has been made to assure the tranquility of our own state in our absence, not least the vigilance of a free people on the eve of celebrating their democratic victory. This is the most dependable provision of all.

I leave in the profound assurance of our own strength and common resolve to keep the flag of freedom flying in our country. I shall be back well in time to join you at EDSA.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].