Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Berkeley University

[Delivered at Berkeley University, California, September 25, 1986]

SALUTE TO BERKELEY

The Philippines and Berkeley have much in common. Berkeley has provided a “model,” if a controversial one, for protest action. It was protest action of a peaceful kind that drove the dictator out of power in the Philippines. Berkeley can look at the Philippines’ problems today and be reminded of its beginnings as an institution. But it can also look at some of the Philippines’ solutions. Like the University, the Philippines will keep asking, seeking, inquiring in search of answers to some of the seemingly “permanent problems” of the human race.

As some officials in this university know, one of the very first invitations I decided to accept was from this distinguished institution. It is hard to say no to Berkeley.

First, let me salute you for your long commitment to human rights and to action in support of what you believe in. This university has never been a laggard in the area of human rights, or for that matter, in other fields.

President Kennedy said in his inaugural address, “Americans are unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of those human rights to which this nation has always been committed. . .” For some time, we wondered whether the word “always” had lost its meaning. We are glad that in the end, America’s political leadership decided, as Jesse Jackson puts it, to be on the right side of history. As Senator Ted Kennedy said the other night in New York, human rights violators have reason to fear visits by human rights groups – or by Senator Paul Laxalt.

We realize how Berkeley has provided a “model,” if a controversial one, for protest action. But a university must not shy away from controversy. And it was protest action of a peaceful kind that drove the dictator out of the power last February in our country. To the students of Berkeley, our people power revolution must have recalled some of the glorious excesses of your university’s famous “radical” politics. Yet without wanting to sound competitive, I must say that student power is only a shadow of people power. What makes our people power is that it is everybody: young, old, rich, poor, nun, soldier and student. All came together to turn out a dictator. And they were welcome. Ours was a broad coalition. Yet one selfless devotion to a higher goal, one spirit restless for freedom. These kinds of ideals that drove our revolution are the ones you share.

There is some irony in the fact that someone whom my predecessor derisively referred to as “Cory who?” a year ago, is now known to many Americans. But I am not alone. Another of your great Presidents, Abraham Lincoln, knew the feeling and was candid enough to admit: “Nobody has ever expected me to be president.”

So it is that we see mysteries in the political life of a nation.

This has been a long trip, but a refreshing one.

I do not wish to add much more to what I have been saying all these days.

After all, as we have been reminded, President William Henry Harrison spoke at his inauguration for nearly two hours, caught pneumonia and passed away within a month.

On the other hand, the first President of your country delivered an inaugural address of just 135 words and is now remembered as a great president.

Let me just give you a capsule version of the changes that can now be seen in our country. For perspective, kindly note that we have been in power barely 200 days, not enough time to rebuild what was hardly a Rome to start with, and that was systematically ruined and looted tor twenty years. Allow me to examine parallelisms between the beginnings of this university and the country seeking to rebuild from the ruins left by my predecessor.

I understand that it was the Rev. Dr. H. W. Bellows, a noted Minister from the east who exhorted, “mind before mines,” as soon as he had surveyed the dismal prospect in these parts more than a century ago. He then wrote back to Yale and Harvard for suggestions.

I have also been informed that the original plan of this university to admit “men only” was changed by the regents in 1870, and eight women registered that fall. Four years later, President Daniel Coit Gilman was to remark that the proportion of women who ranked high in scholarship was greater than that of men.

So what else is new? There are other parallelisms.

It was never easy going; “The university’s financial problems seemed endless for a long time,” so wrote the university historians. So might one write of my country’s problems today. The problems seem endless, the going won’t be easy. However, Berkely, whatever its financial headaches, was spared from a $26 billion debt. That is a special burden of our nationhood, a legacy of our recent sorry past.

You can look at our problems today and be reminded of your beginnings as an institution. But you can also look at some of our solutions: you can, for instance, look at our attempts to restore faith in the administration of justice by naming good judges. We are cleaning up the electoral process, the perversion of which led to widespread disenchantment. We are setting a very high moral tone in government beginning with the presidency. Compare this with the massive corruption of the past. Many exceptional men and women are serving the country for nothing or a fraction of what they could get in private life. We are professionalizing the military, we are reaching out to the rebels and the disenchanted. We expect to have a new constitution soon. We shall have elections early next year at the national and local levels. We are rebuilding our economy. We have dismantled the monopolies. We have a free press. We have regained our respected standing in the community of nations. We can look anyone in the eye and say we are Filipinos.

Yes, we too will be a success story by virtue of hard work and the help of our friends.

We are never too proud to look to others for models, inspiration and guidance. However, where there is a home-grown solution that fits the culture, we will do it our way, in the same manner that we did it our way last February. For like this university, we will keep asking, seeking, inquiring in search of answers to some of the seemingly “permanent problems” of the human race. For as long as the human spirit can soar, nothing is impossible. In this, your institution and our country can share the same vision validated by experience.

In this spirit, I humbly accept with deep appreciation the highly coveted Berkeley medal.

Tonight, we head for home, physically exhausted but emotionally exhilarated.

Summing up, I feel I have achieved what I have set out to do on this trip. I have met the top political leadership in this country. I have met people from all walks of life, in the private sector. I know I won’t be spoiled by the outpouring of warmth, kindness and affection shown me at every stop of my working visit. But have no fear that my feet are now, firmly planted – in mid-air.

We go home confident that we have the best wishes – of the American people. To them I say thank you.

I could only wish that for their part, my own beloved countrymen in this country would rise above party and faction. I intend to be President of all Filipinos, and hear out everyone, if only for the sake of those who will come after us. Our country needs the help of everyone who continues to care for it and our people. We cannot afford division, for even in unity, candor requires that we admit the road ahead is a rough one. But I am not new to crises and challenges.

May I conclude by recalling the words of a law school dean amidst the student crisis of the Sixties: “Like a family, we must survive our crises, mend the ruptures of our discord, and continue to live and function as a unit.”

For my part, I will, more than ever, pray with all my heart, work with all my might, and the rest, I leave to God.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].