LIFE SHOULD BE RULED BY THE SCRIPTURES

As Christians, we all have one call: to give glory to God and to bring love, justice, and peace to this world. Our lives should be guided by God’s Word, no matter what field we may be in. The Bible teaches us to be productive, be strong in the face of adversities, and to take care of each other. Thus, all Christians, to properly fulfill their duties as citizens, must read the Bible. The President extends the hope that the National Bible Congress will foster authentic renewal and increase peace and justice in the country. May our government officials be enlightened by God’s Word.

With much joy do I join you today, to celebrate the challenges of New Evangelization through the Bible towards the Year 2000.

The call to live the Good News of the Gospel is, I believe, the most urgent form of new Evangelization in our time. Whether President or Bishop, Minister or Catechist, our call is a common one: to give glory to God, and bring to earth His reign of love, justice, and peace.

It is a call that speaks to each of us, for you and I share similar aspirations: the total well-being of our people – the fulfillment of basic human needs.

As this Congress comes to a close, I know that all those who are here hope that the Word of God in the Scriptures may enter into our lives more meaningfully. It is my prayer, too, that the Word may increasingly light our way forward in the days ahead. For only from God’s Word do wisdom and power come to us, that we may know God’s mind. That we may make it more our own. And that we be empowered by God’s will to live His Word in our lives.

Contrary to those who aver that governance and the Scriptures cannot mix, I say that a life ruled by the Scriptures will always do well in whatever field and will be excellent in government. For the Holy Book, being all-encompassing, is the Ultimate Authority for a Godly life. As the Bible itself states, “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.”

So let me share with you some of the lessons that the Scriptures have taught me about society and governance in a Christian life. Then, perhaps, everyone here may draw from these Biblical truths, and make them each one’s own.

First, in the creation as contained in the Book of Genesis, we hear of God’s command to man and woman to “fill the earth and till it.” This is the order to multiply, to form communities and to be individually and collectively productive. It is a command to do work upon creation. To place the mark of human effort on the earth has been followed through the years in every society, not merely in man’s involvement in agriculture, but also in every nation’s call for its citizens to be productive. We are doing no less in this government.

The Holy Book teaches us individually to cope with life. When Christ said, “Take up your cross and follow me”, He was challenging all Christians to be strong in the face of adversities. If the Way of the Cross, as many perceive it, be thorny and fraught with frustrations at times, truly there must be great rewards for all these sacrifices. In the Bible, Job was amply rewarded for his patience and perseverance. My Christian faith has likewise given me the strength to bear past and present burdens, whether official or otherwise. The same must be true to most of you.

But more important for me is the Bible’s teachings for each man to care about his neighbor, for in these teachings are found all the good intentions of every government for a just and humane society. I take inspiration in the first Letter of John: “If a man who was rich enough in this world’s goods saw that one of his brothers was in need, but closed his heart to him, how could the love of God be living in him?”

These are but a few of the Bible-based thoughts that have guided my life, and many other Christians’ lives. The Bible is the basis of my continuous campaign for moral regeneration. The foundation of my untiring call for public servants to shun graft and corruption. I am sure that there are many in public office who are drawing strength from the teachings of the Holy Book, even as they continue to be involved in the intricacies of governance that our people may have a better life. I now would like to urge all Christians to keep to the straight path. And then, to invite them all to be involved in the goals of government. For, as Christians, they must be involved in social issues. And as Christians who follow the Bible, they must take their duties as citizens with all seriousness, as part of their discipleship and stewardship, as followers of Jesus.

Surely if all of us search the Scriptures for guidance each day, the Lord will help us arrive at those judgements and decisions which will foster God’s designs for us and our country. Surely too, God’s Spirit will lead us to that day-today holiness which is the endeavor and the cross, too, of our earthly existence.

It is my hope and prayer, in all sincerity, that this Congress may foster an authentic renewal in private and public responsibility and morality among us.

I hope too, that, as you return to your dioceses at the end of this Congress, your commitment to “Read, Live and Share the Bible” will bring about communities of faith, yielding fruits of peace and justice for our land, the true foundation of freedom and democracy.

I also ask you to pray in all earnestness that all those in I public office may, through the Word, be enlightened by the Father of all light, so that we may pursue the purposes of God’s Kingdom in our land and in our time.

Long live the National Bible Congress!

Long live us all!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].