Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the State Banquet with the Japanese Majesties

[Delivered on November 11, 1986]

APPRECIATING EACH OTHER’S CULTURE AND PEOPLE

President Aquino notes that the intense effort of the Japanese to rebuild their country from the ashes of war inspired the Filipinos to win back their own sovereign pride and independence. Closer cooperation which both people desire should be based on this feeling of pride. Cooperation will not only be in the areas of technical assistance and investment, but also in deep appreciation of each other’s culture and people.

The warm reception extended to us by Your Majesty and the magnificence of this banquet deeply honor us. Now I see that at the heart of the strength of Japan is a beauty unequalled, I think, anywhere else in the world. And perhaps I have begun to understand the intense and unflagging efforts of the Japanese people to make and keep their country strong and progressive. But the inspiring quality of Japan has always been felt by my people. It has long antedated my visit here.

It was the image of Japan in the 19th century, the equal of any power in the world, that inspired the Filipinos to win back their own sovereign pride and independence. You showed what an Asian nation could do given the will and a wise leadership. It is again Japan, rising swiftly from the ashes of war, to recover and improve on her former greatness that inspires us today in our efforts to rise from the economic devastation we have suffered. And now Japan, I am happy to note, stands not only as an inspiration but a helpmate in our effort to recover.

The gap between your progress and our beginning is very wide, but eight months ago we closed it in at least one respect. We are on a parity in pride. Yours a pride in an unbroken chain of authority, tradition, noble ideals of self-sacrifice and courage, and brave innovations that have met with unerring success. Ours a pride, like yours, in native courage, in our newly recovered rights, and in the unique way in which we restored the democracy that was the tradition of our nation from its birth. Now, in this pride, we have the common ground on which to work out the closer cooperation that, I believe, both our peoples desire. The warmth of affection is there, and certainly the concern. The Filipinos, and I especially, will not forget the intense interest and concern shown by the Japanese people in seeing justice done to my late husband and freedom restored to our nation.

The cooperation I hope will not only be in the obvious and necessary areas of technical assistance and investment, but equally in efforts at mutual understanding; in a deep appreciation of each other’s culture and people. I know it will be rewarding. For myself, I have found, in the practice of such arts of Japanese civilization that I have humbly tried to learn, a serenity that I can only compare with the consolation offered by my faith. I hope that it is in this area, more than in any other, that a stronger bond of friendship will grow between our two peoples.

Ladies and gentlemen, I ask you to join me in a toast to Their Imperial Majesties, the Emperor and Empress of Japan.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].