Message of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Diokno Foundation

[ Released on December 7, 1987 ]

THE MOST BRILLIANT FILIPINO

There is a need to breed more Dioknos, more brilliant Filipinos, so that we can match with competence and cap with real achievements, the passion of our nationalist aspirations.

Foundations like this are meant to keep the memory of a particular individual alive.

Pepe Diokno does not need this foundation. Those who were privileged to have known him directly will never forget him. I mean, both those he helped and those he fought. For in everything he did, he showed the courage, tenacity and brilliance of a champion. As with his co-prisoner in the first years of Martial Law, time and mounting difficulties had no effect but to reconfirm their total commitment to their causes. Every year that passed, every defeat that was suffered was not a reason to relent or regret, but an added reason to see through to the end the investment of courage and endeavor they had already made. As Antoine de Saint-Exupery said, One’s love for the flower grows with the attention and care you give it. So it was with their causes.

At Pepe Diokno’s funeral, I said:

Diokno, in the days of the Old Republic, prefigured the kind of politics that would be possible in this country only after the painful experience of dictatorship. Diokno represented the possibility that you can mix power and virtue, intelligence and popularity, professed devotion to the highest ideals with the willingness to pay the highest price for one’s commitment.

He won several elections without compromising his integrity or diluting his ideals – long before People Power made it possible for us to do the same with equal chance of success. Pepe Diokno showed, before EDSA, that you can be true to yourself, true to your people, and still triumph.

But Pepe has a lesson also for the EDSA generation in the post-EDSA period.

The flash of courage and the sudden surrender to Faith that enabled the Filipino to free himself from tyranny, which were preeminent Diokno qualities, must be supplemented by perseverance and competence if we are to defend and build on that miraculous gain. These qualities, especially supreme intellectual competence, were Diokno’s as well, the man Ninoy called the smartest man in the Senate and then the most brilliant Filipino.

I said that Pepe Diokno needs no foundation to be remembered. But to impart his qualities to the rest of his race so that his ideals will live on and prove victorious, a foundation such as this is needed. For we must breed more Dioknos, more brilliant Filipinos, so that we can match with competence, and cap with real achievements, the passion of our nationalist aspirations.

It is not enough to cry for true independence, we must be able to really stand on our own. We must show that we can give the least of Filipinos the economic security and physical well-being that others have offered them – but with a portion of shame.

True nationalism is not the mere rejection of everything that is alien but the confident affirmation of virtues and achievements that are undoubtedly ours.

The Diokno Foundation points the way by its commitment to help in the development of our youth, in the creation of a whole generation of Filipinos who will approximate the fortitude, the courage, and, above all, the brilliance of the great man we honor today.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library