Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Alay sa Kawal Foundation

[Released on August 29, 1986]

REMEMBERING THE FAMILIES OF FALLEN SOLDIERS

Being a widow who also lost a husband “in the front lines,” the President feels a special sympathy for the families of fallen soldiers. Unlike her family, however, the families of fallen soldiers have very little resources. For this reason, there is great need for a project like the Alay sa Kawal Foundation.

I have a special sympathy for the families of our fallen soldiers. I say this not just because these heroes of our new armed forces lost their lives in the service and defense of our new government. I have a special sympathy for them because I too am a widow: I too lost a husband in the front lines.

Ninoy, you might say, was with the advance troops of our people power march to freedom, as your husbands and fathers were in the forefront of the defense of this freedom that we had regained. And like them, he fell in the line of duty. I therefore know the pain of loss, the difficulty of carrying on and keeping the family together when the better and stronger half is no longer by one’s side, and the pride of being the surviving heir of a great sacrifice.

But my family is more fortunate than the other bereaved families your organization seeks to assist. We had financial and other resources to draw upon even after the head of our household had passed away. The families of our fallen soldiers are rarely left so secure. I am glad you did not simply choose to observe this sorry state of affairs and shake your heads with regret. You have taken the recourse I hope more of our privileged citizens will take in the future. After seeing, you took action. I am particularly appreciative of the efforts of the volunteers that came forward from the Philippine College of Surgeons, some 65 of them so far, who generously responded to the call of Alay sa Kawal with their free and expert services. These volunteers, among whom are some of the most distinguished names in the medical profession, will supplement the services of the military hospitals on a need basis.

Sabihin ninyo na makulit ako, I have said it before and I will say it again – we shall rebuild and we shall recover only by collective effort and we shall heal our wounds only by the help and care we give one another. The wounds of this nation were self-inflicted. Filipino having hurt brother Filipino, the wounds were deeper than the weapons had reached. Only the ministrations of fellow Filipinos will be able to heal them.

But there is an even better reason why it is important that we reach out and help the people around us who are hurt and suffering. We claim to be a Christian nation, and we point to the February Revolution as a marvelous manifestation of our deep faith. Well, those who claim to have faith, but whose deeds do not manifest it, are really not of the faith at all, according to the book of James. And James goes on to say, “If a brother or a sister is naked and short of daily nourishment, and one of you says to them: ‘Go in peace, keep warm and eat,’ but you do not give them what they need for their bodies, what good does it do? So even faith, if it does not have the acts of faith, is a dead thing in itself.” We should show our faith from our actions.

Or to put this more in the context of the goals of your organization, James also writes: “This is the pure and undefiled worship before our God and Father: to care for orphans and widows in their affliction.” I tell the visitors who come to admire the land and people of the February Revolution that no one can understand what happened here who does not see the role of faith in our lives. The work of the Alay sa Kawal Foundation expresses more than patriotism and civic duty: it is the acting out of our faith in the same manner as our Revolution.

God bless you and I wish you all the success you deserve.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].