Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the Integrated Bar of the Philippines

[Delivered at the PICC Meeting Room, June 3, 1989]

VIGILANCE AGAINST GRAFT AND CORRUPTION

The President calls on private organizations such as the IBP to help in assuring the most efficient use of the country’s resources and to call our attention not only to outright graft but also to bureaucratic mismanagement and delay. She looks to the lawyers as the strongest arm in the fight for honesty and adds that their first obligation is to do justice to their country and to give their client the best defense under the law, not outside the law.

I welcome this opportunity to address the members of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines and its distinguished guests. The three branches of government are well represented here by some of their top officials. We have as well the heads of the IBP’s 78 chapters throughout the country. The country’s legal lights shine nowhere more brightly than here.

But for a call of the heart that I could not deny, I would include myself among you. I was a pretty good law student when I got married. As it is, I stand with Magsaysay outside the tradition of lawyer-presidents. Only history will tell whether the country was better for having lawyers for presidents.

The legal minds of our country are here gathered in answer to the call that has been sounded by a nation conscious of the weakness it inherited from the past, and eager to go forward:

The bickering must stop, the waste must end, and the graft that yet remains must be uncovered and punished. Our limited time and resources must be more strictly conserved for the task that yet remains: The long-delayed fulfillment of our people’s age-old dream of freedom, justice, and progress.

Even as you enter into yet another political exercise, this time for your own sector, we are heartened by the simultaneous assertion that this will not be just another political exercise, but an occasion for high moral commitment: The commitment to take a stronger hold on the elusive goal of honesty, in the public service and throughout our society.

That corruption exists in the public and private sectors is admitted by the decision of the Integrated Bar to establish anti-graft bodies in each of its chapters.

Corruption must be stopped not only where it ultimately cashes in — at the disbursement offices of the government — but before it gets started: in board rooms, in law offices, and in the backrooms of government departments and agencies.

The Judiciary has made several initiatives to speed up the administration of justice on the theory that justice delayed is not only justice denied but a clear invitation to corruption.

The Judiciary is trying to re-instill in lawyers on the bench and across the bar a compelling sense of the high mission with which they have been trusted: the delivery of the highest service of the State — justice to one and all. There is a note of urgency in this effort, for at no time is society more in danger than when people finally despair of getting justice.

The new order in our country came to power on the crest of moral outrage over some of the worst examples of official corruption and private greed in the history of mankind. No small part of that corruption was prepared by lawyers and validated by judges from the legalization of dictatorship to the systematic plunder of the national patrimony. As one constitutional expert observed, while dictatorship was set up by one man, it was legally constituted by a majority of the Supreme Court in 1973 over the vigorous and admirable dissent of a valiant few.

Worse than usurpation and graft, is the legalization of crimes by the artifices of a corrupt justice system. It is lawyers in the end who make this possible. The fruits of official crime cannot be enjoyed until they are “legalized” and I put that in quotation marks — with the help, among others, of lawyers.

The commitment herein made by the Integrated Bar evinces a determination of the Philippine legal profession to prevent yet another travesty of its noble mission, and to lend its considerable expertise to the prevention, detection, and the punishment of graft and corruption.

In that mission, the help of the common citizenry is indispensable. Temptation is everywhere, and weakness is in us all. It behooves us to exercise a wide and unrelenting vigilance. We need every pair of eyes, here and abroad, to alert us against the resurrection of the past. That is how the corruption of the previous regime was uncovered. It is the prying eyes of Filipinos at home and abroad that will expose the houses of corrupt officials in California, New York, and New Jersey.

We are encouraged by the linkage that the IBP has established with various private sector initiatives for transparency in all transactions, in government and in business.

We have to lick this problem, on which the credibility of our national effort of recovery and progress depends.

In this regard, I repeat my warning: Nobody is above the law.

In fairness, we should not condemn officials before the evidence is in; yet for the common safety, we cannot delay the investigation and punishment of official crimes.

Even in the face of public criticism, we shall always be fair to officials who are recklessly accused of crimes, yet we shall never relent in our resolve to maintain the highest integrity and competence of government.

I call on the private sector, on organizations such as the IBP, to help us in assuring the most efficient use of our resources. We ask you to call our attention not only to outright graft but also to bureaucratic mismanagement and delay.

But laudable as these initiatives are of people-powered vigilance against graft and corruption, the real battle must be fought within each of us. No one in government will receive bribes, if no one in the private sector will give them.

I look to you, the men and women of the law, to be among the first to win this battle in your hearts. Over and above being counsel and defender of your clients, you are officers of the court, charged equally with judge and prosecutor to pursue justice for all. Your duty is to give your clients the best defense under the law, not outside the law. As lawyers, your first obligation is to do justice to your country.

Our country looks to you therefore as its strongest arm in the fight for honesty. We are confident that you will come through for us, for the Filipino people.

On that note of confidence, I wish you a successful convention. Good day and thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].