THE CHALLENGE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT

President Aquino affirms that the development of science and technology is among her highest priorities. The DOST must bring the academe, government and private sector together in promoting these twin concerns if we are to realize our national dream of being one of the newly-industrialized countries (NICs) before the year 2000.

Today, we confer the title of National Scientist on Dr. Paulo Campos for his outstanding work in medicine, particularly for his pioneering research on the genetic factor in endemic goiter which earned for him international fame and a Nobel Prize nomination. We are also honoring six outstanding young scientists for their valuable contributions to scientific and technological developments in our country; Drs. Efren Abaya for digital and data communications; Christopher Bernido for theoretical physics; Virginia Cuevas, Candida Adalla, and Alfinetta Zamora for their various researches that significantly affect agricultural processes and production; and Mary Ann Lansang for epidemiology.

To all of you, awardees, go my congratulations for your singular achievements. Your perseverance and dedication to work set you apart from your peers. Keep these traits for they are the hallmarks of the truly outstanding. Use them to advance your causes while you also help your fellowmen.

With the honor we confer on Dr. Campos and his colleagues in science, we pay homage to the scientists, science researchers and science administrators in our country. In giving due recognition to remarkable accomplishments we hope to instill in those who are in scientific and technological fields this desire to excel, that in so doing, they may propel us all to a better future.

I am aware that only a few of our countrymen are involved in science and technology, and of this few, only a handful may be deemed outstanding. This is regrettable, for our scientists and technologists are our best long-term bets for a prosperous and stable future.

I share with you the strong desire to develop science and technology. We have started to address this need. Soon after the Presidential Task Force on Science and Technology submitted its report in March of this year, I appointed Secretary Ceferino Follosco as the new Secretary of the Department of Science and Technology. Though I thwarted his desire to return to the private sector by this appointment, I am confident that he will ably meet the new challenges before him. I am telling him now to continue, and I urge all of you to join him in urging Congress and concerned agencies to cooperate with us.

Then I created the Science and Technology Coordinating Council composed of nine Cabinet men plus four members from the academe and the private sector to assist in our development goals. We will soon create regional science and technology councils to complement national efforts. Likewise, I have included the DOST Secretary in the NEDA Board to ensure that science will always be considered in national development plans. All Regional Directors of DOST are now members of the Regional Development Councils.

Moreover, I have directed the Department of Budget to increase the DOST’s budget for 1990, and this has been reflected in the national budget I recently submitted to Congress Except for one foreign-funded project that has terminated this year, DOST’s programs have been given increased allocations in the proposed budget.

All these support measures are part of the overall design to give preeminence to science and technology next year and the following years. For unless we do so, how can we realize our national dream of being one of the newly-industrialized countries (NICs) even before the year 2000?

In my State of the Nation Address last week, I stressed that the development of science and technology is among our highest priorities. The DOST must bring academe, government and business together in promoting these twin concerns.

But government resources alone will not suffice for the requirements of development. Industrialized countries reached advanced technological development with massive infusion of private funds. Perhaps, our private sector can do the same. Science and technology offer tremendous growth potentials which should prove attractive to investors. So, let me use this forum to invite the private sector, as well as the community-based organizations, to help in the generation, development and utilization of the fruits of science and technology.

Not only this; your government is considering measures to encourage more people, particularly the young ones, to be involved in science and technology. We are studying the expansion of the career system for scientists and researchers to include those in government service. This should result in a broader, and hopefully, a more rewarding national science career system in government. There is no reason why this should not apply equally well to those in the private sector.

Similarly, we shall have to upgrade the science curriculum in all educational levels, to make more students scientifically inclined. Science can flourish only when science components are included in all curricula – from grade school to graduate level. I urge the DOST, therefore, to monitor closely the operation of the science high schools, improve the quality of their teaching and heed their urgent requests for additional laboratory and library facilities.

I support your strategies for the modernization of all sectors of our economy, the upgrading of our Research & Development capabilities and the development of our science and technology infrastructure, including manpower training. In our quest for higher and better technologies, we must put highest consideration on the needs of the poorest of our population. They have an acute need for low and intermediate technologies to which you have the answer.

Today’s awardees have an exacting role to fulfill. I challenge all of you then to contribute to the planning and programming of science projects for national development and progress. Undoubtedly, you shall continue to reap laurels for future achievements in your respective fields. It is only right and proper that the government protect your exclusive rights to your intellectual properties and creations, particularly when beneficial to the people.

Once more, my congratulations to Dr. Campos and our outstanding young scientist awardees for their shining examples. I enjoin you now to be more aggressive in leading your colleagues in our march to take our place beside the NICs of the future.

Good afternoon to everyone.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].