Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the members of the Constitutional Commission

[Delivered on June 2, 1986]

NEW FRAMEWORK FOR A REAL DEMOCRACY

President Aquino exhorts the members of the Constitutional Commission to: 1) be quick about their work because the nation is eager to have a new constitution, and 2) limit themselves to their constitutional mission: to provide for a new legislature and let this legislature of elected representatives enact the laws.

You are here today vested with the full authority and the complete independence to write our country’s new Constitution. Nobody, not even I your President, can interfere with, or overrule you, in this great task. Our nation has placed its trust in you. Do not let it down.

I join you today only to honor your beginning. What happens from here on is a matter for you and you alone.

Today, apart from wishing you well and saying the hopes and prayers of our whole nation are with you, I want only to make two points. The first is, please be quick. Nobody can impose a deadline on your deliberations but you know that our whole nation is eager for a new constitution, and the subsequent elections as soon as possible. The people expect a constitutional draft for their sovereign acceptance or rejection within three months, so eager are they to have, in the shortest time possible, a full-blown democratic republic.

Second limit yourselves to your constitutional mission. Your task is to design a constitution that will provide for a new legislature. Not to do that legislature’s work for it. That is for the people’s elected representatives to do.

You must define and protect our individual freedoms and rights; you must decide how our different institutions of state will relate to each other. Do not be distracted by political debates and matters of policy that do not belong within your constitution-making exercise. You are here appointed, by the people’s wish, to write a constitution; you are not here as elected politicians.

Bear in mind that you shall be pondering, debating and writing a constitution not only for our contemporaries with their present concerns, but also for succeeding generations of Filipinos whose first concerns we cannot presume to know beforehand. Future Filipinos must always be free to decide how to address these concerns as they arise. Even the wisest cures for present maladies should not be imposed on succeeding generations that will have their own unique problems and priorities.

True and long-lived constitutions, a wise justice has told me, should be broad enough to be able to meet every exigency we cannot foretell and specific enough to stoutly protect the essentials of a true democracy; in short, open-ended documents that will always be relevant. Remember that constitutional changes are not safe or easy to come by. Our first attempt at constitutional revision was followed by a dictatorship. And this, our second endeavor, was preceded by a revolution.

Future Filipinos and their legislatures and Supreme Courts can best assess and address the challenges they will meet if they enjoy the widest latitude of thought and action. In writing a constitution have the fullest confidence that the wisdom of our race is exhausted in us. Our race has grown in wisdom over time. I believe it will continue to do so.

Yours is indeed no easy task. On the other hand, depending on the result, yours will be no small glory. Our people have suffered much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].