THE NAVY’S VIGILANCE

The first duty of an armed forces is the defense of its country’s boundaries and the first line of national defense is in its surrounding waters. This is the duty of the Navy, to secure the nation from internal and external threats. The President pledges full support for the modernization of the navy, to build a strong force outfitted to discharge their mission.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines has had the longest fighting experience of any military force in the Region outside Vietnam. And it has fought against the most tenacious enemy since that famous conflict. By and large, the Armed Forces has carried out its mission well. While this is Navy Day, however, I cannot help but comment first upon a matter that touches us all ─ Commander-in-Chief and Armed Forces.

I refer to the sorry image of the profession of arms at this time. Soldiering has become identified not with the noblest calling of man, but with the most sordid activities of the criminal syndicates. I grieve for the Armed Forces, at the injustice it is suffering.

I grieve for the tens of thousands who gave their lives to preserve the territorial integrity of the Republic and to keep the communist foe from turning our free country into a slave state. The shameful actuations of a few have insulted the vast majority of our fighting men who are, even at this moment, turning fields of fire into fields of honor.

What a few have done to the proud institution of the Armed Forces is beyond sympathy and forgiveness. Punishment commensurate with the damage done to the honor of the Armed Forces must be dealt out. We must restore the shine to the sword of state and make it again a trusted weapon for the national defense and for the advancement of the nation’s honor and destiny.

Our most potent weapon is not the rifle nor the artillery so much as the superior example of our forces over those of the enemies we fight. The scalawags in carnappings and holdups have left us weaponless in the most important battle of the rebellion ─ the battle for the hearts and minds, the trust and respect of our people.

I have directed the Secretary of Justice to apply the full force of the law so that the stain on the shield of the Republic will be wiped off by the severity of the justice that is done.

That said, I turn to the Philippine Navy and proudly salute it on its 91st anniversary.

The existence and pre-eminent role of a navy in a country such as ours is self-evident. The first duty of an armed force is the defense of its country’s boundaries. It goes without saying that, for an archipelago, the first line of national defense must be drawn in its surrounding waters. That line is drawn and held by the Philippine Navy.

With the inadequate equipment at hand, the Philippine Navy has nonetheless discharged its mission well. The contingency most feared by our strategists has to date been prevented — massive arms landing that will give a quantum leap to the insurgency threat. For this we must thank the vigilance of the Navy.

We have this also to thank the Navy for. Its readiness to challenge any state that trenches upon our territories. That readiness has kept open our maritime options for economic development in such key areas as fishery, offshore oil, and submarine mining.

We need every resource at hand to meet the challenges to our country: the challenge of poverty, the challenge of development and progress for a fast growing population, and the challenge of our destiny to become what we once were: the freest, most progressive state in Asia.

Our fishery resources are being depleted and destroyed at an alarming rate by foreign fishing concerns. As a country equally comprising land and water, this is equivalent to the foreign seizure of our entire industrial capacity.

The Navy has done quite well with very little, and much of that little is obsolete. Yet great dangers threaten from overseas. It behooves us therefore to build a navy equal to those threats. We have therefore embarked upon the long overdue modernization of the navy. We need a navy that can move fast and with the power to impress upon intruders the substance of our commitment and oath:

To uphold the Constitution that defines the historic boundaries of our state;

To see to the faithful execution of the laws that preserve the national patrimony for Filipinos, maintain the order of society, and advance the economic welfare of our people;

And to proclaim to all and sundry the pride of our name and the reputation of our arms.

You and I share a commitment and a vision. Part of that vision of a strong country, impervious to threat, calls for a strong navy. I pledge to you my full support to build a navy outfitted to discharge the mission we have outlined in our oath.

Long live the Philippine Navy!

Long live the Filipino!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].