YOUTH IN THE PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE

President Aquino calls on the youth of the Philippines whom she regards as the real hope of the Fatherland, to help her in her own effort to build a better life for our countrymen. The Ninoy Aquino Youth Talent Awards given on the day Ninoy died is a testament of his pursuit of excellence and our recognition of the youth’s important role in national development.

Today, we observe the sixth anniversary of the martyrdom of Ninoy Aquino. There is no better and more appropriate way to celebrate that historic event than by attending these, the awarding ceremonies of the NAYTA, the Ninoy Aquino Youth Talent Awards.

In this hall tonight are assembled the most talented and the most creative of our youth, boys and girls who have survived the most grueling of eliminations, young people blessed with a touch of genius in singing and dancing, in acting, in writing and in painting.

What would be more fitting, what would be more proper, than that these anointed ones should get their awards on the day that Ninoy died? On the day he laid down his life so that we may all live in a climate which would give free rein to the expression of our talents?

There is another reason why it is most appropriate that these awards should be given on this day: Ninoy’s entire life was a testament, an enduring manifestation of what youth can accomplish, of how determination and perseverance can triumph over inexperience in the pursuit of excellence.

Consider these facts: at 17, Ninoy was a war correspondent, chosen over other journalists more senior than he to cover the fighting in Korea. He was 20 when he negotiated the surrender of Luis Taruc, the Huk supremo. At 23, he was the youngest mayor the country had ever seen. At 27, when the Tarlac electorate voted him into office, he was the youngest provincial vice-governor in history. Then, at 28, he assumed the governorship of Tarlac, becoming again the youngest provincial executive the country ever had.

But Ninoy was not through yet. At the age of 35, he won a seat in the Philippine Senate, making mincemeat of the vaunted Nacionalista Party machine in the process. Perhaps, if fate had been less cruel, he might have become also the youngest President this country would have had.

But that is another story.

In a very real sense, therefore, these awards are an anthem to Ninoy, a recognition of the fact that in heeding the call of public service, youth is no handicap. That it can, if the truth be known, actually be an advantage since it is invariably accompanied by enthusiasm and resiliency.

For singing this anthem to Ninoy, these youths deserve my gratitude and yours. I thank them for reminding me that in my own efforts to build a better life for our countrymen, it would do me well to call more and more on the youth of the Philippines. For they are, after all, the real hope of our Fatherland.

With all my heart, I congratulate the winners. May their victory tonight be more than just a recognition of their talent. Let it be a pledge also for them to use that talent for the development of the country.

Thank you very much. May we all live long.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].