BANKER TO HALF THE WORLD

The President lauds the Bank’s mission of helping a nation achieve a sustainable level of progress by whatever reasonable means regardless of political ideology a sovereign nation has adopted. She stresses that ADB has been extremely generous in its support to the Philippines.

The last time I stood before you, I spoke of faith, of the faith that gave us the courage to stand our ground, and of the freedom that courage enabled us to achieve. I spoke of the new and promising directions that our newly won freedom would allow us to take.

I spoke of Providence. For it seemed, so soon after the February Revolution, that only the hand of Providence could have snatched my country from the worst oppression and set it safely down in freedom. Indeed, it seemed not inappropriate then to talk only about my country before this international forum, for what had just happened had attracted the deepest sympathy and attention of the world.

But that time has passed. What we have since done with our newly won freedom and the opportunities it created is a matter of record. We have had gains, I will insist on that, but on balance they have been modest. So much more remains to be done.

I spoke of miracles then.

Miracles are still needed, but one hesitates to speak of miracles now. The last miracle was when God put back into the hands of the Filipino people the fate of the Filipino nation. The next miracles must be the work of those hands.

It is a happy accident that my country has been the site of the headquarters of the Asian Development Bank. But this fortuitous honor does not diminish the pan-Asian character of this great institution. That character is as evident in its aim, which is the material upliftment of all Asian countries to the levels achieved by their most developed partners, as in the Asian style that increasingly marks its work.

Speaking from the Philippine experience, the ADB has been extremely generous in its support. Allow me again this opportunity to intrude a purely national matter by thanking the Asian Development Bank for the generous support it has given the Philippines, and for the profound understanding and sympathy it has shown for the country’s particular plight. I am a little embarrassed to say this, but, while we certainly need more help than you have offered, there was a time when you offered more help than we were prepared to handle. Yet, in the distinctive way of the ADB, you offered to help us improve our capability to fully utilize the support that the Bank would like to give the Philippine economic recovery effort.

This is distinctively Asian and it has worked It has made us a very satisfied client of the Bank, as it has made many other satisfied clients.

That satisfaction is derived from the manner in which the Bank has extended assistance to the developing countries of Asia, This assistance is usually extended with a modest assessment by the Bank of its prescriptive capabilities regarding the problems of developing nations.

This modesty is Asian; but the wisdom it reflects is universal.

This modesty, again, is articulated in the preferred manner of ADB decision-making, which is by consensus rather than confrontation. For every hand is needed in the enormous tasks before it. No one presumes he can force through a successful solution simply by the strength of the blind conviction that he is right.

We see this modesty again in the Bank’s view of its role as essentially a bundle of responsibilities towards its constituents. The Bank does not see its mission as one of vindicating a particular economic philosophy regardless of the political cost, but one of helping a nation achieve a sustainable level of progress by whatever reasonably acceptable means lie at hand, regardless of the political ideology a sovereign nation has adopted.

For policy deliberations on structural reform and short-run stabilization can no longer ignore the socio-political consequences of these prescriptions on the target nations. I know that politics cannot be measured and can find no place in the parsimony of economic models. But politics is real, and, at the risk of irrelevance and surprise, it must be accommodated, at least by a substantial flexibility, in policy dialogues with the developing nations.

This is the Asian way, the ADB way. And the success of the Bank argues strongly for its universal imitation.

Among the developed countries there is a growing sense of crisis, a vague but deeply felt conviction that something is terribly wrong with the way things have been run. There is a sense of a terrifying complexity beyond the power of man to understand and control.

In sharp contrast, the newly developed countries of Asia achieved a measure of coherence and progress through policies that violated the conventional wisdom at the time. Perhaps it is time for those of us who once aspired to follow in the footsteps of the developed world to come upon our own age of reason.

Bigness and complexity, and the tremendous power they generate, demand collective leadership and extensive consultation. Increasingly, this is the nature of the ADB organization – banker to half the world, and the issues of net resource transfer and poverty alleviation confronting it. The dominant culture must allow, even promote, wider consultation among its member-clients. It must encourage the formulation of appropriate conditionalities. It must continue to have patience in its endeavors. It must continue to view banking, especially development banking, as a relationship rather than a transaction (as wind upon wanting sails rather than a yoke upon the buffalo). It must, in short, continue to be Asian in the way of its leadership and must look from within Asia to the rest of the world.

A Chinese philosopher described a good leader as one who talks little. When his work is done, his task fulfilled, the people say, “We did this ourselves.” As a result, the accomplishments endure; the people continue to build on it. Therein lies the best prospect of the greater success of the Bank and the progress of the countries it serves.

I wish you every success on your 21st annual meeting. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].