TOWARDS A HEALTHY NATION

The health of the people of a nation is one major commitment of government. The signing of Generics Act, is one step towards the realization of a dream — safe, potent and affordable drugs for all.

We are all gathered here to witness the signing of the Generics Act of 1988.

We have all endured a very long time. Whenever we get sick, we are forced to bear the price of expensive medicine.

Because health is wealth, even the poorest among us do not hesitate to spend if it means recovering from illness.

And the importance of making the price of medicine affordable for our countrymen is recognized in our Constitution.

According to Art. XIII, Sec. 11, “The State shall adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development which shall endeavor to make essential goods, health and other social services available to all the people at affordable cost.”

I am grateful that after a long time, we have finally reached that goal. We can recall the initial study conducted by the U.P. Law Center. Their distinguished researchers revealed that the cause of the extremely high price of medicine is the common use of well-known brands or “brand names.”

The public, perhaps influenced by their preference for imported products, seeks the same for medicine.

Several years passed before a law was proposed to Congress regarding the promotion of so-called “generic drugs.” The prescription of “brand names” alongside “generic names” was not completely prohibited if that is what doctors in the private sector desired.

The courage and perseverance of Secretary of Health Alran Bengzon and his supporters propelled the law through Congress.

Significant help was also provided by several patriotic media outlets that launched a campaign to inform our countrymen about the great benefits of “generics.”

Above all, I would like to acknowledge the full support of our representatives in Congress who supported and legislated the Generics Act. There were many of them, but the main sponsors and Chairmen were Sen. Mercado in the Senate and Congressman Monfort in the House of Representatives.

But our work is not yet finished. We still need to create policies or “rules and regulations” with the help of our doctors in the private sector to implement the Generics Act.

Despite the strong opposition to this law, our citizens once again demonstrated the spirit of EDSA – our unity for the good of the Philippines.

I call on all of you, my countrymen, to patronize “generic drugs” towards a healthy and progressive nation.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].