Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Dallas Oil

[Delivered on November 11, 1989]

COMMITMENT TO ENERGY DEVELOPMENT

Recognizing that Philippine economy needs fuel to keep growing, President Aquino underscores her administration’s commitment to energy development and oil exploration. Foremost to this concern is the acceleration of the five-year energy development program designed to achieve energy self-sufficiency, promote energy conservation and other indigenous sources of energy, and provide attractive incentives to oil exploration projects.

This occasion is made auspicious by the gathering here of the industry leaders of American oil. Aside from my hosts, I see here the chief executives of the foreign oil companies operating in the Philippines, the pioneers of Philippine oil exploration, and the heads of the Philippine National Oil Company – the flagship of the Philippine oil industry.

There are enough important people here to settle some of the outstanding issues of Philippine oil and effectively set new directions for Philippine energy development. I doubt if there is a better venue for these discussions than the state of Texas, which remains the seat of the oil and gas business in the leading oil producing country of the free world.

Halfway through my term, I can look back with some degree of satisfaction at the transformation of the Philippine economy. From three years’ of negative growth rates, we jumped in three years to a 6.7% GNP. The significance of this figure comes out only when you consider that in the same period the Philippines faithfully serviced its debt with 40% of its national budget. The vigor of the private sector despite the enormous commitments of the government to the debt is quite revealing of the strength of the Philippine economy.

That strength has been recognized by other countries as well. Investments have started to pour in, mostly from Asia. Regrettably, US business is yielding its long preeminence in the Philippines to the competition.

The Philippines stands poised for greater progress. A US business report predicts that it will become one of the best performers among Asian economies in the early 199os. The elements are there in the right combinations. The necessary structural reforms have been made and need only time to produce their desired effects, some of which are already evident.

Political normalcy has been fully achieved. Constitutionalism is firmly in place. Many problems remain, which we could sum up in the observation that 49% of the people still live below the “official” poverty line. Yet stability is assured because the system enjoys legitimacy, and the people are committed only to constitutional courses of change.

A climate favorable to investments has quietly settled over the country, giving government room for policy initiatives to which the economy continues to respond positively. The increase in investments is already straining the capacity of existing infrastructure – such as telecommunications and transportation, as well as energy capabilities. The appetite for oil grows with the hunger for expansion. Yet that hunger cannot be stilled.

Gentlemen, to keep growing, the Philippine economy needs fuel to burn. Despite determined efforts to curb fuel consumption, energy requirements rose 9% in 1988. It is the best sign that the country is on the move. Close to 60 percent of Philippine energy demand was met by oil. Today we are using energy at the faster rate of 11%.

The problem of supply is compounded by the volatility of the world energy market, where periods of plenty are followed by periods of even more and suddenly by shortage and high prices. Among consumers, waves of complacency are followed by panic.

We have carefully nurtured our progress. We shall not leave it a hostage to the vagaries of the energy market. The need to find viable substitutes to imported oil is not just recognized, it is being seriously addressed by the government. We have accelerated our five-year energy development program to accomplish two goals at least:

First, to attain a respectable degree of energy self-sufficiency sooner than planned; and, second, to promote energy conservation and encourage shifts to indigenous energy sources, such as coal, hydropower, geothermal and domestic oil. In 1988, indigenous energy saved the country about half a billion dollars.

The Philippines must find oil or stop growing but it cannot do either. We won’t discover oil unless the search for it is intensified. And we can’t slow down the economic expansion because it is the only way to catch up with our people’s basic demands.

We have therefore adopted some of the most attractive incentives for oil exploration. Incentives such as service fees of up to 40%, reimbursable operational expenses, exemptions from virtually all taxes and duties, iron-clad legal assurances of repatriation of investment and profits, and free market determination of crude oil prices.

An independent report describes the Philippine contractual regime as the most profitable in the Region. A bill introduced in our Congress would increase those incentives. I shall support that bill.

The attitudes of the government institutions involved in oil reflect the government’s overriding aim to get oil exploration off the ground in the required scale. Red tape has been virtually eliminated in the Office of Energy Affairs. A model contract adopted by the OEA eliminates the need for negotiations on most items except work obligations. Our attitude is that there is no bureaucratic purpose so important as to justify any delay in the discovery of oil.

But there is really only one incentive that will get oil exploration really going in the Philippines. And that is the likelihood of discovery.

We must have oil. There is oil all around us – Malaysia, Brunei and Indonesia – and we have found some in the Philippines. Yet, our discoveries have not been anywhere comparable to our neighbors’. Oil is no respecter of political boundaries. The problem is not the geology of the country but the fitful character of oil exploration to date. To find oil, you have to drill for it – a lot; more and deeper wells. The US has drilled some two million wells to achieve its productive capacity.

After the 1973 oil crisis, we adopted an innovative service contract system to attract foreign investments and expertise. Under that system, 149 wells have been drilled up to the present. One hundred and forty-nine. That’s like sticking a toothpick in a haystack to find a pin.

Yet, with those few probes, we made significant discoveries in the Northwest Palawan Shelf. We have delineated 6 oilfields, five of them are currently producing, and all are found in this Shelf. A major gas discovery — the Camago well of Occidental Philippines — was recently made in the same area. A number of smaller discoveries have been made by an American-Filipino consortium led by Alcorn.

In 1983, a more systematic and scientific approach was taken. The Philippines did a nationwide basin evaluation survey. The World Bank funded this exhaustive study of Philippine petroleum geology. The survey revealed geologic features similar to those where oil has been found around us. This has strengthened our confidence in the commercial presence of oil in the Philippines.

In the meanwhile, there are other aspects of the oil industry that invite investments. On the downstream side of the energy business, existing refinery capacity will be used up in the early 1990s, given present trends. Given the lead time for setting up new refining capacities, it is not too early to start making plans.

For a country aspiring to become an NIC, it is necessary to think in terms of basic industries. One such industry is petrochemicals. Our government is granting a number of investment incentives in various aspects of this industry to encourage the entry of responsible foreign investment that will introduce genuine technology into the country. We are willing to consider a number of approaches, including a partnership between the strategic state oil company and qualified foreign companies.

Before I conclude let me address a few of your specific concerns.

You are worried about the legal environment for oil exploration. I don’t presume to speak for the Congress, but I know that there isn’t a single Filipino who does not want oil to be found. And there isn’t a single factor that could outweigh in anyone’s mind the imperative of finding oil.

I haven’t given a speech of this length during my entire trip. This only underscores the strength of my commitment to helping oil exploration and development in the Philippines.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].