Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Assembly of Evangelical Churches

[Delivered at the Quezon City Sports Club, March 12, 1987]

OF FAITH AND GOD’S WILL

President Aquino draws an analogy between her husband Ninoy and the biblical Jonah, whose name means “dove,” which came to symbolize the peaceful means through which Ninoy sought to liberate his people.

Just as Jonah spent three days in the belly of a whale, Ninoy spent three years in American exile. However, while Jonah was set down gently on shore to successfully convert the people of Nineveh, Ninoy came home to be murdered. It was this death, however, which freed the Filipino people.

The ways of the Lord are strange but the people must trust Him because He never forsakes those who do His will.

I know that all of you in this assembly seek guidance, inspiration and strength from the Scriptures. In the words of Paul: “All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction and instruction in righteousness.”

I too have sought counsel and inspiration from God’s Word, specially during the most trying and painful moments of my life. Ninoy and I would read the Bible often in his prison cell, finding comfort and assurance in its verses.

On August 21, 1983, when Ninoy went off on his fatal journey, I prayed and searched for some passages from Scripture that might strengthen and guide him. I came upon the book of Jonah, but I saw no relevant message for Ninoy there. I went on to read Paul’s letter to the Colossians, 4, verse 10: “My fellow prisoner Aristarchus sends you his greetings, as does Mark . . . You have received instructions about him; if he comes to you, welcome him.”

It was this passage that I shared with Ninoy when he called me long distance from Taipei. It was the last time we spoke to each other.

We thought that Mark meant Marcos and the passage augured well. As you know, there was no occasion for welcome on Ninoy’s return. Murder met him at the door.

But now, in retrospect, I see that the Book of Jonah had something to say about the future.

“Jonah” means “dove”, which became the symbol of the revolution and the representation of Ninoy’s non-violent approach to the resolution of the Philippine crisis.

Ninoy, like Jonah, felt called upon to warn a wayward ruler and his people that it was time to change their ways if they would avoid total ruin.

Ninoy, like Jonah, did not embark on this mission immediately. Jonah spent three days in the belly of a whale. Ninoy spent three years, more pleasantly, in American exile.

But here the analogy ends. For the whale deposited Jonah safely on shore, while Ninoy walked from the belly of the China Airlines Flight straight into his grave. At this point the analogy resumes.

Jonah’s words converted the king and people of Nineveh. But to a nation grown callous with lies and false promises, words were not enough. No less than Ninoy’s willing self-sacrifice would convert his people to renewal and revolution. But in both cases, a redeeming change took place.

We had missed the message of the Scriptures. Indeed, as Paul put it: “Now we see through a glass darkly . . .”

We cannot easily or immediately perceive God’s grand design or his individual plans for us. For we are assured that “No eye has seen, no ear has heard, no mind has conceived what God has prepared for those who love Him.”

We do not have to know. It is enough to trust.

The Philippines looks to a brighter future today than Ninoy thought was possible when he stepped out of the plane and into his role in the final liberation of our country. But he took that step nonetheless because he had faith.

And it is by faith that we proceed on the longer journey we have yet to take to bring progress, prosperity and justice to our land. But a journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step. And only faith, given the daunting distance to be travelled, can make us take it. As with your missionaries, so it is with us. In the end, it is by faith that we persevere.

As Paul, who was the first to heed his own advice, assured the Christians suffering persecution in Rome: “God causes all things to work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to his purpose.”

May that verse strengthen us to persevere in our individual missions. But most of all, may we never falter or fail in our love for the Savior who delivered us from the dominion of darkness at the price of his life.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].