Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Martha’s Vineyard

[Released on August 3, 1988]

LIGHTENING POVERTY

The President is happy to see the Marthas still hard at work; that their ranks have even swelled with new members. She reminds them of the real reason why we work: the aim of a Christian is Christ himself, that whatever we do to the least of our brethren we do unto Him.

I am happy to see you all again. When I last addressed the workers of Martha’s Vineyard two years ago, we were just enjoying the fruits of our peaceful revolution and were planting the seeds of a new harvest. One that might yield us unity and peace, and a better life for the millions of our impoverished countrymen.

I’m glad that the Marthas I met then are still hard at work, and that your ranks have even swelled with new members. I hope that in the months and years to come, more and more will hear your call to serve, and give more generously, not only of their material resources but of their time, energy and prayers. As the scriptures tell us the work is so much, but the workers are so few.

As an honorary member of your group, and as one called to tend a larger vineyard, I know how hard the work of a Martha can be. As we all have learned since we started afresh in Eighty-six, the time of planting and nurturing is the longest and most difficult period of all. First we must break new ground, and work new life into hard and tired soil, choked with weeds that we must uproot. These weeds are the old habits of corruption that cannot seem to die. I spoke of this in my State of the Nation with much regret.

Meanwhile, we must also cope with those who stand on the sidelines and tell us of the hundred and one ways we could have done things better.

Finally, we must be prepared for every wind and weather: the sudden storms that can come up in the night and destroy all our labors, or the long dry spells when our resources run low and there is very little to nurture what we have planted.

There are times when we find the work of a Martha just too tiring, as I am sure you occasionally do. The fields we must tend seem endless, the work is never done, the difficulties never cease. At such times, I remind myself of what Christ said when he called us to the vineyard, “Take my yoke for it is light.” And that is true, for he carries half the load. And when I am tempted to complain of the lack of understanding and appreciation, I remember that we are entitled to no more than just wage of the worker in the vineyard.

At the same time, we find fresh zeal and perspective by reminding yourselves of the reason why we work. As Christ admonished the original Martha, who was so caught up in her work, the aim of Christian is Christ himself. He did say that whatever we do unto the least of our brethren, we do unto him. And occasionally, perhaps, the best thing to do is just to sit at his feet and listen, and somehow things take care of themselves.

At this time, we in government continue to plant and sow, just as you do in your own portions of the field. The first fruits have come in of our earlier toils, but the larger harvests, those that can be shared by the greater number of our countrymen, have yet to come. I hope in the meantime that the Marthas here and the many more that I hope will join you will continue and increase their efforts to lighten the crushing poverty of our people.

I have been told of your recent work in military hospitals, and of your efforts to give material and spiritual help to wounded soldiers and their dependents. I am glad to know that your efforts have extended beyond charity to livelihood programs. I am also happy to see the new Marthas among us. As an honorary member, I would like to personally welcome the wives of our military officers to our ranks. The wives of those who defend our fields from marauders and poachers have come to join in the work of making them productive.

If only there were more Marthas in our society; more women willing to help solve our problems rather than talk about them, women who show their status by being servants first, then our country would yield larger harvests much sooner. I hope your numbers go on increasing and that you never tire of your work, which is one of the things that inspire me to go on. Thank you, and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library