Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the meeting with Regional Consultative Committee

[Released on September 16, 1988]

THE OPTION THAT BUILDS

The responsibility to preserve the unity and the integrity of the country rests on the President. She pledges to do everything in her power to arrest any drift towards fragmentation.

I am happy to be able to welcome you once again to Malacañang. It has been over five months now since I had a chance to meet with all of you as a group. This was during the first meeting of the RCC when you took your oath of office as commissioners at the Sharif Kabunsuan Hall in Cotabato City.

I know that during the intervening time, you have been busy conducting public consultations on the contentious issues of autonomy and in protracted discussions to reconcile the conflicting views on these issues within the Commission.

While I have not had the opportunity to meet with you these last five months, I would like to assure you that I have kept myself in touch with the activities of the RCC. I am grateful to learn from the reports I have been receiving that most of you have been working with great fervor and commitment to bring the autonomous region to reality.

I realize that you have not been given as much time and resources as the complexity of the work requires. But we have to live within given constraints. Congress has established a clear timeframe within which you have to deliver your results. You must realize that Congress must set firm deadlines because Congress itself is bound by the Constitution to draft an organic act within a fixed schedule.

I understand that the issue of what to call the autonomous region has provoked much disagreement and debate within the Commission. I hope that you will not allow yourselves to be paralyzed by the conflict over this issue. More important, certainly, than the name of the autonomous region is the nature of the powers and responsibilities that you vest in the autonomous regional government

Let me share with you my perspective as the President of this country. My fundamental responsibility is to preserve the unity and the integrity of this country. I would be culpable if I did not do everything in my power to arrest any drift towards fragmentation. I would hope that in settling controversial issues, you would be guided by the same principle. Cast your support for the option that builds rather than encourages discord.

The Constitution has delineated the areas proposed for inclusion in the autonomous region subject to the consent of the residents as expressed in a plebiscite. Autonomy, if it is to be acceptable, must be for all of those citizens.

I have expressed to you before my great hopes for this experiment in participatory democracy in which you are engaged. You have perhaps discovered in the course of your work that you have accepted a large and heavy burden. Part of that burden must come in the form of a willingness to submit your personal preferences to the consensus of the group.

We expected, as I warned you in Cotabato, that you would need to reconcile many different perspectives. But we have not given up on the hope that you would join hands to achieve our common goal of progress and peace. And we continue to expect that the recommendations you will forward to Congress will reflect a common concern for the protection of human rights, a commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflict and a compassion for the disadvantaged among our people.

Once again, my thanks for your contribution to nation-building and my best wishes for the successful completion of your work.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].