Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the occasion of Labor Day

[Delivered on May 1, 1986]

UNSHACKLING THE LABOR FORCE

In the February revolution the Filipino people stood as one – united in fighting the dictatorship. There was no laborer or employer, no rich or poor, no Pampangueno or Tagalog, only one single labor force working together for freedom.

Now, President Aquino says, the revolution for freedom is over and another revolution is to start – that is the economic revolution, wherein, the power of a united people can make it succeed.

She lists down a number of measures to help the work force of the country such as: honoring the commitment to ILO Convention 87 or Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize, ILO Convention 141 on Rural Worker’s Organization; repeal of LOI 1458; automatic certification election during the freedom period of collective bargaining agreements; removal of the 13th month pay ceilings; revision of the apprenticeship program, repeal of some requirements for valid strikes and calling of a National Tripartite Conference.

She promises to work for the lowering of prices of commodities, energy and gasoline, undertake massive low-income housing programs, and to provide more funds for loans to worker’s cooperatives.

My fellow workers in the work of national reconstruction, I greet you on the occasion of Labor Day.

You in the labor force and we of the former Marcos opposition have been marching side by side for longer than we realize.

From the hundreds of thousands at Ninoy’s wake, through the millions at his funeral, to democracy’s triumph last February, we were one. We prayed as one. We struggled patiently and peacefully as one. We dreamed, as one, of becoming a freed nation. There were no rich or poor among us in the struggle. No Pampanguenos, Tagalog, Ilocanos, Visayanos. No workers and no employers. We were all then one single labor force laboring for freedom and a fresh start. We worked together and we were victorious together. We were people’s power. We were Filipinos without distinctions to divide our resolve. As a result, we were distinguished from all the world by our unprecedented peaceful revolution.

Now the country is back in our hands. The revolution of freedom is over. Another revolution is about to begin. The economic revolution that will lift us from poverty, underdevelopment and economic injustice. And again, only the power of a united people can make it succeed.

There will be no flags, no speeches, no marching in this revolution. It will be a quiet revolution. One that will take place inside factories and offices, in government offices and private enterprises, on the farm and in the city. It will be a nation of Filipinos going back to work but fired with the zeal of one victory and confident of the next. Once again, it will require that we forget our differences and work as one. We must forget again whether we are workers or employers, provincianos or city people. We must work to increase productivity and efficiency so we can feed and educate ourselves and raise a stronger race of Filipinos. We must work so we can pay the $27 billion debt left by Marcos and his wife, and their cronies, and so we can hold our heads higher still in the community of nations.

I made a promise to you during the campaign and I repeat that promise. I shall ask for no greater sacrifice than I myself am prepared to make. I shall impose no heavier burden on our people than they are willing to carry. But sacrifices and burdens there will be, as I warned, but shared equitably by all for we shall be rebuilding from the ruins left by Marcos.

I ask you to respond now as you responded when I called on you to defy Marcos and win our freedom – without fighting, without envy, and with shared purpose and sacrifice. People’s power can put our economy back on its feet, put food on our tables, shirts on our backs, roofs over our heads, and pride in our hearts. We must now work hard to regain or rebuild what Marcos stole or destroyed. We must prove that, while he stole our patrimony, he did not break our will, that all the sufferings he inflicted has only made us stronger.

During the campaign I promised to provide for the welfare of labor in three ways. These were: to revise or rescind the laws that repress the rights of workers and their trade unions; to ensure that labor shall equitably share in the benefits of our developments efforts; and to create the conditions for the full human development of the labor poor.

Today, I come before you on this day of celebration for labor to redeem my pledges. I have also come to plead for your patience, understanding and support for specific policies and programs which may not immediately benefit your sector but will in the long run give us a country and an economy strong enough to fulfill the cherished dreams of labor.

My administration shall honor our commitment to ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize and to ILO Convention 141 on Rural Workers’ Organization.

My government shall promote and protect the rights of workers and employees to establish and form organizations and unions of their own choosing, with a minimum of government interference. Security guards in the private sector, employees of government corporations organized under the Corporation Code are hereby allowed to unionize and bargain collectively with their respective employers.

I now repeal LOI 1458 that allows management to replace striking workers who defy return to work orders. Your government will not pursue the “one-union one-industry” policy that has caused so much dissension in your ranks. I leave to you completely the discretion to combine as you may deem fit and necessary.

In representation issues, we shall now pursue a policy of automatic certification election during the freedom period of collective bargaining agreements, where the majority status of the incumbent union is questioned.

In cases of non-unionized establishments, a petition for certification election or to register a union supported by 20 percent of all employees will be enough.

I hereby remove the 13th month pay ceiling for all rank and file employees.

The apprenticeship program was used under Marcos to exploit the Filipino workers. I hereby direct the Minister of Labor to immediately review the existing list of apprenticeable jobs and limit them strictly to highly technical industries. In no case shall the period of apprenticeship exceed six months.

I am today repealing the following requirements for valid strikes:

– The 2/3 strike vote requirements under BP 130 is hereby revised to a simple majority vote. – In case of dismissal of union officers, constituting union busting, where the existence of the union is threatened the union can ignore the 15 day cooling off period and take action immediately. In all other respects, however, violations of collective bargaining agreements will still be dealt with in accordance with the existing laws and procedures. – Unless actual violence or other criminal acts occur in the picketlines. I am ordering the police forces to keep out of the picketlines.

Under this government there will be justice for the workers under the laws, and the laws will be just. But I hope that labor and management will respect the final adjudications of their disputes. We must cooperate to reduce the uncertain ties that have paralized economic activity in our country.

It is part of my minimum program of government to assure labor’s meaningful participation in decision-making at all levels of our society. I shall soon appoint representatives of your unions in all policy-making bodies of government. I ask you to submit your recommendations to these positions.

As my machinery for consultation with workers and employers groups and to boost collective bargaining as the primary means of promoting your economic interest and settling disputes, I hereby direct the Ministry of Labor to call a National Tripartite Conference consistent with the agreement signed last Monday by the Labor Advisory Consultative Council and the Employers Confederation of the Philippines to negotiate a Code of Industrial Harmony. This code will be the policy framework of my government in pursuing programs and projects beneficial to all sectors.

In this forum I shall propose to the three sectors to agree on the following:

– Amendments to BP 130 and 227 to sanitize them of their restrictive and oppressive provisions. – Removal of exemptions from present wage decrees and the integration of COLA into the basic pay. – Explore all mechanisms for profit sharing consistent with my policy of equitable distribution of wealth.

To speed the resolution of cases in order to minimize causes for strikes and facilitate their right to seek redress for legitimate grievances, the Ministry of Labor shall professionalize the dispute settlement machinery. The NLRC shall be cleansed of sectoral interests by appointing men of probity, honesty, and integrity into the Commission.

I know the plight of the worker and that his or her basic needs cannot be delayed. I shall therefore continue to work for lowering the prices of commodities, energy, and gasoline. I hereby suspend contributions to PAG-IBIG. My government shall explore other means to undertake a massive low-income housing program. We shall also give serious thought to the rechanneling of a substantial amount of government loans to existing workers’ and peasants’ cooperatives and those yet to be formed.

I shall continue to redeem all my pledges to you. And now I issue a challenge to you.

Purify your ranks of racketeers, kingpins and minidictators. You are not only the backbone of industry but the vanguard of democracy as well. Freedom and dignity for our nation starts with you. How can we be strong, if you are weak? How can we be proud as a free nation if you will not stand up for your rights within your own sector.

Assert our independence and show to one and all that you are not mere transmission belts of politicians and political forces.

You are the elite 10 percent of the labor force. You are the privileged by your organized strength. It is your obligation to spread the benefits of organizations to farmers, fishermen and other workers.

Finally, I appeal to you, in this period while the country is trying to recover from the tyranny and theft of the Marcos regime, to exercise restraints in exercising your right to strike. Use it as a last resort and only after exhausting all other means of resolving your disputes with management.

Make me prouder, my workers, of this second revolution to make our country free, not only of a tyrant in the palace but of tyranny everywhere: the tyranny of poverty and underdevelopment, as of the tyranny of political power. Make the world wonder again at how a country reduced to begarry by reckless debts and a people reduced to penury lifted themselves and their country from humiliation to the greatest pride.

Let the second revolution start now.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].