Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the Energy Management Association

[Delivered at the Manila Garden Hotel, December 9, 1988]

LIFEBLOOD OF INDUSTRY

Government has taken significant steps to forestall any crisis in energy in case the OPEC reaches a consensus that would result in higher oil prices throughout the non-oil producing world. The President however, emphasizes that the principal actor and factor for the success of the government’s energy program remains the private sector, the main energy consumer.

I am pleased to be here today before a sector that is crucial to our country’s continuing progress. This conference is held at an auspicious time: the upturn of the Philippine economy after many years of decline.

The economy pulled itself out of negative growth almost immediately after we took power, showing that it is morale more than material that the economy needed to get out of the doldrums. It posted a 5.7% GNP growth last year, and 6.8% in the first half of 1988. All the indicators favor our achieving the 6.5% GNP target we set ourselves for the year.

We have a right to be proud of the progress we have made. Yet equally we have the duty to take the measures necessary to maintain and increase the growth momentum we have achieved.

The price of economic progress has been higher energy consumption. Thus, in 1987, the country increased its energy consumption by 6.5%, it is now using energy at the faster pace of 10.9%. Electrical consumption alone is 12.8%, with industry showing the highest demand growth rate of 15% among all sectors.

These statistics prove the progress that is being made. Yet equally they show the area of our greatest vulnerability.

Energy is the lifeblood of industry; the single most important factor for economic progress, not to say survival. But energy, to a great extent still, is not a natural resource of our country.

It behooves us therefore to take stock of our energy requirements, to review our native energy resources, and study the measures that must be taken to achieve greater energy independence and a wiser and more conservative utilization of the energy we generate and import.

We may be tempted to delay in this duty. There is a glut in the world’s production of oil. But nothing is forever. The OPEC will one day achieve a consensus among its members and higher oil prices will again be the order of the day throughout the non-oil producing world. For that day we must make preparations.

Government has taken the significant steps.

We have organized training programs for your engineers to become energy conservation managers. We have already sponsored 69 training courses with a total participation thus far of 3,225 representatives from 1,120 government and private groups and 33 engineering schools. In addition, briefings are being conducted in schools and universities so that energy conservation becomes the natural reflex of a nation that is dangerously dependent on outside sources for the life-blood of its economy.

Government also offers to private industry energy audits for free. Thus far, 622 audits have been made.

The Federal Republic of Germany has been most helpful in our energy conservation campaign through its Rational Use of Energy project or RUE. I suppose the acronym expresses the warning that “We shall rue the day of higher energy costs and lower energy supply, if we do not act now to conserve energy.” The project gives expert management advisory services to energy-intensive industries.

We recognize that damage control, so to speak, is not enough. We must go on the initiative in finding more creative and efficient uses of energy.

Cognizant that new energy technology is expensive, we have set up, with the US AID, the Technology Transfer for Energy Management or TTEM project to spearhead the development of local energy conservation technology. The project, although new, has had notable successes, with PLDT and Benguet Corporation. Fully operational the project is expected to generate combined savings of nearly 1,234 megawatt hours of electricity per year. While this is a mere P2 million pesos, compared to the project cost of P5.2 million, we believe that over the long term we shall come out ahead.

We have started to offer tax incentives to industry for energy conservation measures and technologies, but the principal actor — and factor — of the program’s success remains the private sector, the main energy consumer. We are relying on this organization to galvanize the private sector in this campaign.

Other non-oil producing countries have risen to the challenge of high energy consumption and costs, and prospered remarkably. I see no reason why the same challenge before this country should not result in equal success.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].