Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the Philippine Air Force Day

[Delivered at the Villamor Airbase, May 4, 1987]

MEETING THE SECURITY NEEDS OF THE COUNTRY

President Aquino underscores the need for more military hardware which will give the Armed Forces of the Philippines greater ground mobility in dealing with threats from the Left and the Right. The Philippines’ security needs cannot wait on the generosity of the country’s principal ally. The AFP must depend on its valor and native ingenuity to meet the national security needs of the country.

I made a solemn vow at the Philippine Military Academy to end all threats to our democracy, coming from the Left or the Right, in five years. I aim to keep it. And when I say that, I speak for the officers and men of the AFP under my command. I called for a string of military victories to follow upon my announcement of war. For there is no better cure for the insolence of our enemies than swift retribution. In this regard, I commend Army Chief General Canieso for his swift and decisive resolution of the Black Saturday mutiny.

In the fulfillment of that oath, the Philippine Air Force plays a critical role. On such important matters as national security, I put first trust on the evidence of my senses. In Lupao, aside from the need for greater self-restraint on the part of our soldiers, I saw the critical part that mobility plays in bringing our power to bear on the enemy in a timely and conclusive fashion. I saw how the lack of it can bring tragedy.

The reports I received at the last command conference on the distressingly high ratio of patrols to contact revealed the inadequacy of our tactical intelligence and our inability to act quickly and decisively on the reports we receive in the field.

In the Kalinga-Apayao effort, an attempt to encircle the enemy in a highly inaccessible area demonstrated that, with all the will in the world to achieve a smashing victory, we can only do as much as the means available permit us. I will not dwell on what happened there, except to say that our principal military supplier should not expect our brave soldiers and determined commanders to fight the insurgents with our teeth and our hands.

I have, time and again, asked our military ally for more gunships, at least 10 per region, and for other means that will give our troops greater ground mobility. At the last command conference I gave the sense of their objections: inability of our Government to support such a capability and the inexperience of our military to use it. At the conference, too, I got the sense of what the Armed Forces of the Philippines thought of their objections. I am assured, however, by Chief of Staff General Ramos that JUSMAG, at least, has a better opinion of our ability to sustain and effectively use such a force. We shall continue to press for our requirements.

In the meanwhile, we shall, as I had warned, have to depend on our valor and our native ingenuity to meet the national security needs of our country. Much as we need relevant, adequate and timely assistance from our ally, our security needs cannot wait on their generosity. With the strength of our arms and the courage of our hearts, with such means as we have patched together, and above all with the support of our people, we have enough to fulfill our pledge to bring a wide and permanent peace and a just order to our land.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].