Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On a State Banquet hosted by the President of the Republic of Indonesia and Madame Suharto

[Delivered in Indonesia, August 24, 1986]

STRIVING FOR UNITY IN DIVERSITY

During a state banquet hosted by the President of the Republic of Indonesia and Madame Suharto, President Aquino says that to seek unity in diversity (“Bhinneka Tunggal Ika”), as the Indonesians have done, is a noble task. She praises Indonesia’s achievements in food production. The Philippines likewise is giving priority to agriculture, with the aim of achieving self-reliance in food production and establishing a solid basis for industrial growth. It will also continue to make reforms and repair in all areas, despite the difficulties.

Permit me at the outset to express my profound appreciation for the invitation of your Excellency the President of the Republic of Indonesia and Madame Suharto to visit this country and enjoy its kind hospitality. This invitation demonstrates the friendship and attention that mark the association of our two countries and it is with a sense of great pride and respect that I am able, on behalf of my people, to renew that friendship today.

Further, I would like to take this opportunity, together with all the Filipino people, to convey my sincere congratulations to the Republic of Indonesia, which has just recently, on August 17th, commemorated the 41st anniversary of its proclamation of independence. The accomplishments of this nation have been great, and its pride well deserved.

The very gracious and warm reception that has been extended to me this evening and during my stay in Indonesia is no small measure of the special relationship enjoyed by our two countries. This relationship has been shaped by the many goals and aspirations that we share and by the similarities that we are fortunate to enjoy.

Ours are both cultures of great diversity, rich in custom and history. We believe, as you do, that it is an ennobling task to seek unity in diversity: “Bhinneka Tunggal Ika.” Ours are both countries and nations proud of our heritage, vigilant in the defense of our independence and of our freedom – for freedom is the birthright of every nation and independence is the product of struggle.

And ours are both countries striving for a better life for our peoples.

This is not a matter of economic development alone, for the process of growing as a society and as a nation involves many facets of development. Nor is it a matter of growth just for the sake of growth, for to pursue such a course is to pursue no course at all. Rather, we are seeking to develop in a manner consistent with the fundamental values of our race and culture, informed by the sad lessons of our recent past, and adapted to the challenges of the future.

Finally, ours are states whose tasks reach beyond the confines of our territories to the well-being of the broader communities of which we are a part. In the birth of ASEAN, we have seen the association of member nations determined to provide for the stability and peace of the region and the prosperity and happiness of its peoples. Further, we each strive for the creation of an order in the world which is based on independence, abiding peace, and social justice. Indeed, these high ideals are enshrined in the preamble of your Constitution.

It is said that Indonesia is a fighting nation, a nation of fighters committed to upholding the ideals of the nation. These emerged from Indonesia’s struggle for independence, even as its fighting spirit was tempered in the fires of that struggle. We too have known the suffering of external intervention, and we have recently emerged from our own struggle to remain true to ourselves and to the aspirations that underlie our society. And we recognize that this is part of a struggle that has no end because it is in striving to realize ideals that we mark our progress as a nation.

If, therefore, our fundamental concerns reveal a kinship greater than the natural affinity of race and proximity, we may consider ourselves and future generations fortunate. For this kinship holds the promise of ever increasing cooperation, and affords the opportunity to gain insight from the experiences of each other. We may draw lessons from our difficulties and comfort from our success.

It is in this spirit that I would like to consider the cornerstone of our countries’ respective economic policies and that is agriculture. Allow me to express our profound admiration for Indonesia’s achievements in food production. Following a carefully planned series of 5-year development plans that established agriculture as the focal point and prime mover of development efforts. Indonesia has succeeded, by dint of hard work and responsible leadership, in doubling its food production in the past 15 years. This is part of the development movement in Indonesia which takes into account three essential elements known as the trilogy of development: attaining equitable development, economic growth, and national stability. If Indonesia has given priority to the agricultural sector, this has been with the intention of raising the income and well-being of the millions of farmers and their families who form the largest segment of Indonesian society.

Similarly, the agricultural and rural sector of Philippine society must be given the utmost attention so that the 70 percent of our people who constitute our rural population can gain their rightful share of the nation’s wealth and purchasing power. The objective is to achieve self-reliance in food production and establish a sound foundation for industrial growth. Therein lies the core of our recovery and development strategy.

The Philippine program of recovery is founded on the rebuilding of its democratic institutions and traditions which can alone provide stability to the political system. Mechanisms to hasten that process are now in place.

As you may be aware, in June of this year we entrusted a 49-person constitutional commission with the mandate to prepare a draft constitution for the country. This draft, soon to be completed, shall be considered by the Filipino people and, if accepted in a national referendum, shall become the fundamental law of the land. Thereafter we shall have an elected legislature to represent and fashion laws for the Filipino people. These will represent important steps in securing the kind of responsible leadership that will assure the political and economic stability of the Philippines over the long term.

These qualities, of course, are already exhibited by Indonesia to a remarkable degree. For hand in hand with carefully executed development plans, the Indonesian economy has been prudently managed. Even in the face of economic adversity caused by falling commodity prices, the Indonesian government has gained praise from its creditors and international financial institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank. Inflation in Indonesia is well under control, the foreign debt is within manageable proportions, and foreign exchange reserves are substantial. Indonesia has shown itself capable of adapting to changing economic conditions while maintaining the trust of the international banking and financial community. Unfortunately, it was profligacy rather than prudence that marked the management of the Philippine economy. But I believe that we have done our part to regain that trust. We excised that profligate management with the care of surgeons working on a patient whose life hung in the balance, careful not to inflict any damage to an already fragile system. We have immensely increased our international reserves, stabilized the exchange rates, effected fiscal reforms, renegotiated our debts with our international creditors, and have started on a massive employment generation program to immediately address the chief affliction of our society’s mass poverty. All this while laboring under a 26 billion dollar debt that eats half our export earnings to be serviced and is nowhere reflected among the resources at the disposal of our economy. Indeed, we shall need more than trust from that community; we shall need understanding and sympathy, even as we shall need the encouragement of friends like Indonesia.

We shall continue to make reforms and repair in all areas, knowing fully the difficulties that we now face and addressing them with patience and foresight. We shall raise the funds required to fuel our economy from both domestic and foreign sources. We shall honor our debts and foster an environment in which business and enterprise may flourish. We shall address the needs of the present and establish a sound foundation for the future.

The Philippines now seeks to rejoin its ASEAN neighbors on the path to economic, social and political progress. Nineteen years ago, representatives of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand gathered in Bangkok with the desire “to establish a firm foundation for common action to promote regional cooperation in Southeast Asia in the spirit of equality and partnership and thereby contribute towards peace, progress, and prosperity in the region.” To the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, we renew our pledge of support. Its purposes of accelerating economic growth, social progress, and cultural development in the region and furthermore of promoting regional peace and stability continue to hold great promise for the future.

To this ASEAN vision of cooperation and amity, Indonesia and the Philippines bring a long history of friendship, support, and sharing of common goals that has had the effect of a catalyst on the ASEAN effort to achieve the same things.

As of today, our two countries have forged no less than 43 bilateral agreements on subjects ranging from extradition to the purchase of oil. The Indonesian government has also consistently extended assistance to the Philippines. We deeply appreciate the efforts of Indonesia to ensure the continuity of our rice and oil supplies during critical times. We are in the same way grateful for her endless patience in allowing our use of the Palapa satellite. To archipelagoes like Indonesia and the Philippines, satellite communication is indispensable for the promotion of national unity and development.

Direct interaction among our peoples is healthy and increasing. In certain areas, they have become important enough to merit regulation by mutual agreement of our governments. A good example is our flourishing border trade.

We have also adopted common approaches to the economic challenges confronting us. Indonesia and the Philippines joined efforts in the adoption of the Archipelagic Doctrine by the International Convention on the Law of the Sea in order to take advantage of the doctrine’s infinite economic implications for our respective countries.

But nowhere has Indonesian-Philippine solidarity found more eloquent and higher expression than in the commitment to the ASEAN vision. Although our two countries are the largest members of ASEAN, we have consistently honored by faithful practice and supported its procedure of decision by consensus among equals. Without doubt, this has contributed greatly to the growing influence of the Association.

We are proud that ASEAN will commemorate its 20th anniversary next year by holding a summit conference in Manila. We believe that it is appropriate to consider fresh avenues and ideas, particularly in the fields of trade and industry, to give greater momentum to ASEAN. Let us invest the organization of our region with all our efforts in order that it may continue to play the valuable role that its history has led us to expect.

I now stand before you holding the reins of a free Republic. We have emerged from a turmoil that brought us to the edge of calamity but that has provided us with a renewed faith in our capacity to overcome our problems and realize the full potential of our nation. And as we set out on our new course, we are heartened by the confidence and support of the Indonesian nation. Recognizing that the interests of our two countries, and those of the region, are closely intertwined, we trust and believe that we will work even more closely together to achieve the ideals of our nations.

In this spirit, I ask you to stand and join me in a toast to the continued good health of President Suharto, the progress of his great country under his leadership, the special friendship of our two nations, and the flourishing brotherhood of the peoples of ASEAN.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].