Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Traffic Management

[Released on September 1, 1988]

A CALL FOR CIVIC INVOLVEMENT

IN TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENT

The traffic condition in our country has long been a problem. And TRIP seeks to improve traffic management within the metropolis by instituting short, medium and long term projects and activities. President Aquino congratulates the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Management for coming up with the TRIP.

Today, we shall put into effect the Metro Manila Traffic Improvement Plan, or TRIP. The TRIP seeks to improve traffic management within the metropolis by instituting short, medium and long term projects and activities.

I congratulate the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Management for coming up with the TRIP. I take pleasure in acknowledging the private corporations who are contributing their time and resources to the TRIP, particularly in the project under the Plan called POOK BATAYAN.

In each of the chosen Pook Batayan, traffic enforcement will be upgraded to eventually make Metro Manila a standard in terms of efficient and effective enforcement of traffic rules and regulations. Let us recognize, however, that this is a shared responsibility of the traffic enforcers and the motorists and commuters.

In the long run, the TRIP also seeks to develop a mass transit system and a road network responsive to the travel needs of Metro Manilans and necessary for an efficient traffic management

Let us collectively commit ourselves to help improve Metro Manila’s traffic in more and better ways. Let us start the collective commitment to TRIP with our individual and personal action. Whatever gains we attain in Metro Manila will undoubtedly be replicated nationwide.

I believe that the success of the Metro Manila Traffic Improvement Plan will prove our readiness to meet even greater challenges of development that lie before us.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].