WATER FOR LIFE AND PROGRESS

The Tulungan Program, which will benefit 31,000 families in 15 provinces, underlines the Aquino Administration’s commitment to make democracy a living reality for the people. The importance of water, whether for agriculture or health, cannot be overemphasized and the Tulungan sa Tubigan Program is one instance when the private sector and the government joined hands to work for progress and survival.

It is a great honor and pleasure on my part to formally accept the completion of these water projects under the Tulungan sa Tubigan Program.

Many of the needs of our people could be met by adequate water supply, whether we are talking about agricultural productivity or individual health, especially the health of our children. The awareness of the critical part that water plays in the survival and progress of our country and countrymen motivated us to launch this Program. I am happy to note that the Program is progressing according to plan.

The completion of these projects, with the indispensable help of the Philippine Business for Social Progress, expresses the concern of both government and private sector for the general welfare of our people.

31,000 families will benefit from these projects, which number 425 in 15 provinces. This shows a program that is definitely on the right track.

I’d like to take his opportunity to congratulate the Philippine Business for Social Progress and its staff for a job well done. I am proud to have you with me in these projects that make democratic government truly meaningful for our people.

It is a great honor and pleasure for me to formally accept today the completed irrigation projects under the Tulungan sa Tubigan Program.

Many of the needs of our people can be met through sufficient and proper irrigation, whether in our agriculture or in the health of each one, especially the health of children. Because of the great importance of water in our lives and even in the progress of our country, our government strived to launch this program. I am happy to know that the irrigation program is being implemented according to our plan and objectives.

The completion of these projects with the help and leadership of the Philippine Business for Social Progress expresses and proves the concern of my government and the private sector for the welfare and safety of our people.

More than thirty-one thousand (31,000) families will benefit from this project, which consists of four hundred and twenty-five (425) and will cover fifteen (15) provinces. This only shows that we are on the right track in implementing the irrigation program.

I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Philippine Business for Social Progress and its members for their good initiative. I am honored to be with you in this project that strives to make our democratic government meaningful to our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library