PEOPLE AND JUSTICE

On the 90th anniversary of the Department of Justice, President Aquino talks about the implementation and progress of justice in our country and announces the remedies and measures being instituted by the government to ensure speedy answers to the citizen’s clamor for justice. In the ultimate analysis, though, it is the dedication of the judge and of the prosecutor that will instill confidence in the hearts of the people regarding the adequacy of the judicial system.

I greet those who comprise the Department of Justice on your ninetieth anniversary. Justice is inseparable from freedom. Your Department should be considered a liberating instrument of the people. Justice is the soul of the law. And the law forges a God-fearing, humane, and patriotic democracy. This is Filipino democracy.

In a democratic setting, your Department evokes the spirit of freedom with responsibility. It also stands on a solid tradition of excellence. Some of the best Filipinos headed this Department: Araneta, Paredes, Qzaeta, Diokno, among them.

In the face of this spirit and tradition, your present mission is clear: to give the most and the best of yourselves to the speedy administration of justice to our people.

The record of achievements of the different offices comprising this Department is impressive. The National Bureau of Investigation, the Commission on Immigration and Deportation, the Prosecution Service, the Citizens’ Legal Assistance Office and the Office of the Secretary of Justice itself, all deserve special commendation.

These achievements are taking place amidst the impatience of our people.

To the people in the street, the best assurance of the protection of human rights and the fight against corruption is the sight of persons suspected of wrong doing speedily prosecuted and tried.

This is the psychological content of justice as service. The duty of government and concern of every law enforcement officer is to provide and meet it.

We must not allow a repetition of the sham trials of the dictator.

On the other hand, prejudice should not blind us. There is, for instance, a lingering mistrust of the military. While we can not deny that many crimes have been committed by men in uniform, it is not fair that the entire military establishment should be maligned and castigated.

To bring about closer coordination between military and civilian law enforcement agencies, the Joint Legal Action Committee (JOLAC) has been created. Its principal concern is to bring about closer understanding between the fiscals and the military lawyers in charge of the prosecution of rebellion and subversion cases.

I am pleased with the great efforts exerted by the military leadership in instilling a higher sense of justice among the armed forces. As long as a soldier or policeman adheres to the Constitution’s standards of justice and human rights protection, he will be a valued partner in our nation building.

I will not yield to the extreme left’s clamor of “an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.” Nor will I listen to the rightists’ cry for blood. But I will see to it that justice is done.

The provisions of our Constitution and laws have to be transformed into procedures that will really and effectively deliver justice to our people. To the average man, the presence of so many legal provisions against a scenery of delay, neglect or apathy, merely serves to heighten his disenchantment against the system and government

In line with the recommendations of the Task Force on Administration of Justice that I formed, government has initiated remedies and measures to ensure a speedy response to the citizen’s need for justice:

1. Filling of all court vacancies. After a delay caused by incomplete bio-data of some nominees, I have acted this week on the pending nominations for the Judiciary. The Judicial and Bar Council continues to meet weekly to screen applicants and candidates for court positions. In some municipalities, however, there are no applicants. While the Council has to recommend at least three nominees for each vacant position, in many a critical area, there is only one volunteer. This situation must be reversed.

2. “Fast tracking” of criminal cases ahead of civil cases. The national objective, based on our experience, is not to create more special courts to try criminal matters exclusively nor to constitute the existing regional trial courts as exclusive criminal courts, but to allow all branches of courts to hear both civil and criminal cases with the admonition that criminal cases, specially those involving human rights abuses, should be given a “fast track” approach.

3. Closer coordination between the courts and the prosecution service. A truly efficient delivery of criminal justice services can be achieved only by closely coordinated efforts of the trial courts functioning under the supervision authority of the Supreme Court, and the prosecution service working under the Department of Justice. It is very frustrating to litigants and counsel alike to see a judge call a case for trial only to be informed that the prosecution is not ready because its witnesses are not in the courtroom or that the matter is still under “reinvestigation.”

I am happy to note that to minimize this very sorry state, the Department of Justice has issued a Circular requiring investigating fiscals to certify under oath when they receive their salaries that there is no case pending resolution by them which has been unresolved for 60 days from the date that the case was deemed submitted for resolution. I expect Secretary Ordoñez to closely monitor compliance with this circular.

4. A proposed bill has been referred by your Department to Congress seeking to authorize the Sandiganbayan to petition the Supreme Court for three regional trial court judges to act as a court to try cases falling within the exclusive jurisdication of the Sandiganbayan. In this manner, the expense of transporting parties and witnesses from distant places to attend trials in Manila may be avoided. Approval of this measure will demonstrate to the people where the offense was committed that justice is indeed being meted out speedily.

5. A proposal for continuous trial of criminal cases has been submitted by the U.P. Law Center for consideration by the Supreme Court. This is now being discussed by the Supreme Court’s Committee on the Revision of the Rules of Procedure.

6.Under study now is a system of satellite national prisons in various regions in order to decongest the New Bilibid Prison which was originally designed to confine 1,500 prisoners but which now has custody of 6,633 prisoners. Jail riots and infliction of demeaning body marks on prisoners in congested jails can be avoided by the adoption of this measure. Prisoners will then be more accessible to their families because visits will be more frequent, thus making the prisoners feel that they are still remembered and loved by their families.

7. In order to make our courts truly temples of justice where the people can expect redress of grievances, I have instructed the release to the Department of Justice from my discretionary funds for 1988 of P350 million for the construction of court buildings having a common, readily identifiable design. This will include populous areas like Manila, Quezon City and Makati, as well as depressed provinces such as those in Western and Eastern Visayas and Mindanao. I have asked Congress to appropriate an additional P300 million in 1989to augment this fund and further improve the infrastructure of our judicial system.

In the ultimate analysis, however, it is the dedication of the judge and of the prosecutor that will instill confidence in the hearts of the people regarding the adequacy of the judicial system. Credible and dedicated officials will maintain the people’s faith in government.

I believe that the yearning for justice resides in the heart of every person and citizen. Every time they enter the doors of our courts, they hope that this yearning will be met by the judges and prosecutors and that they will obtain due justice. Let us not disappoint them.

This is my call to all who serve in the Bureau of Justice on this grand occasion of your celebration.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].