Philippine Free Press August 8, 1988

LET THY SPEAR KNOW NO BROTHER

The Free Press has long been missed. Now, in its aim to revive the lost era of free journalism, its motto is again thriving: Let thy spear know no brother. Objective journalism, and uncompromising morality. The President looks to the journalism of the Free Press for the unvarnished truth and moral insight that guided the champions of Philippine democracy.

The Free Press as it was before Martial Law has been too long missed. I am very happy to see it back in its old fighting form. The balanced and comprehensive news and the fearless views of its editors and writers, for which the magazine was shut down and sequestered by the dictatorship, were of course back with us when it resumed publication in a small format during the SNAP election campaign. But I share everyone’s pleasure in seeing the old format back again. May I say it was also Ninoy’s favorite magazine, principally because he was often on the cover.

Since it resumed publication, the Free Press has steadily built up its circulation in the only way it knows how: honestly and exclusively by hard work. After the Revolution, it never asked any favors of this government, nor any restitution for what it lost as a result of its seizure by the dictatorship.

Chipping in its share of patriotism, rather than encashing patriotism, has always been the way of its editor. He will no more change than I will. I guess we are just too stubborn.

The motto of the Free Press has been: “Let thy spear know no brother.” It adhered to that motto throughout its 80 years of existence, minus the martial law years when it disdained to publish despite generous offers from the dictatorship. We look to the journalism of the Free Press to give us again the unvarnished truth and the moral insight that guided the champions of Philippine democracy in the past.

“Let thy spear know no brother.” Objective journalism and uncompromising morality. The answer to blackmail journalism.

The public has reason to welcome this event.

I just want to ask one question of Teddy, Sr., “Will that spear recognize a sister?”

I am only joking. Thank you for inviting me and God bless you all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library