Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the delegates of UNDA/OCIC/ASIA

[Delivered on October 10, 1989]

APOSTOLATE OF TRUTH AND JUSTICE

President Aquino reminds delegates of UNDA/OCIC/ASIA that the vocation of communicators has three facets of services: apostolate of justice, understanding and unity. Thus, she enjoins them to do their share to attain the country’s goals and use the power of broadcast media, particularly radio, to relay truth, justice and unity to the majority of our people.

I see three facets to your vocation — three magnificent things that the communicator does. The first is: the apostolate of justice. Martial Law was declared against mass media. The most noticeable event on the first hour of Martial Law was that all radio stations, all television channels and all the newspapers were closed down — except the ones that the government controlled. And how did Martial Law end? When those in government then lost control of media.

For the snap elections in 1986, an army of communicators, just like you, came from all over the world. Some of you must have been there, too. When the revolution broke at EDSA, there were five satellite transmissions going out to all the world from the Manila Hotel. In New York, in Bangkok and elsewhere, people all over the world watched the miracle of EDSA in their homes. Here in the Philippines, our provinces were kept abreast of the drama at EDSA by radio. And when television stations were forcibly shut down and print media could not keep pace with successive developments, it was radio that fanned the hopes of millions who stood ready at EDSA to regain our freedom. In those crucial hours, radio was the most important communications medium.

As EDSA demonstrated, media now, is our last tribunal of justice. You, broadcasters, are the channels of justice for all the people on the face of the earth.

Your second service to all the world is understanding. The vocation of the communicator is to tell the truth. From the truth, people get to know and understand each other. This is a blessing. Freedom of speech is a beautiful principle. Freedom to tell the truth paves the way for deeper understanding of ourselves.

From understanding comes your third service: unity. Unity in the Philippines is a rare element. Not since EDSA have we been one for such a long time. We are 7,107 islands, separated from each other by water. We are just now developing a common language since we are divided by 87 dialects. We have a multitude of cultures — ancient, beautiful cultures – but very different from each other. We find it difficult to subordinate our personal feelings, our personal desires, our personal goals, to one common national objective. But when the miracle of EDSA occurred, we stood united in our common love for freedom. Thence did we show that we were capable of unity.

Events after our bloodless revolution have led many to return to their old ways. Sadly, we have become fragmented again. But I am hopeful, that with the help of media, especially of Catholic communicators, we shall become truly one people, united in our search for economic progress, truth and peace.

Let me remind you that here in the Philippines and in other countries where television can not yet beam signals to the remotest places, radio is still the most important agent for mass communication. Radio is our farmers’ most accessible medium of information. Our fishermens’ most reliable warning instrument of a coming storm. Our provincial schoolteachers’ favorite adviser of current events. As Asian broadcasters, you must recognize the importance of your vocation in bringing truth to the lives of the majority of Asia’s population.

Thus, I ask you now to do you share to attain our goals. Use the power of your words to relay truth to all our people. Use the broadcast medium to bring justice to our people. This is the heart of your vocation, as Catholics, and as broadcasters.

Through you, hopefully, the whole world will come to realize that we are all brothers and sisters. That we are one family. And that we really are one world. Through communication, we can hope to achieve permanent peace someday.

Thank you and a very pleasant day to all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].