Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the ASEAN Economic Ministers’ Meeting

[Released on August 27, 1986]

OVERCOMING ASEAN MEMBERS’ SELF-INTERESTS

To a great extent, the President says, the ASEAN economies have gone their separate ways, emphasizing linkages outside the region and pursuing respective self-interests. Despite this, the members have friendly ties, and the goals of ASEAN have been achieved. The task now is to find renewing gestures of a friendship that will last.

As you know, I have just arrived from visits to two ASEAN countries, Indonesia and Singapore. With the leadership of each country I discussed issues particular to the relationship between the Philippines and that country. But, from both, my people received, in the person of their President, a warmth and depth of affection one could expect only from kinfolk. It was this sentimental outpouring that constituted the ASEAN component of my first official trip abroad. I am sure that I would have encountered the same warm fellowship from the other ASEAN countries, if the pressing duties of my office had not prevented me from extending my trip. So, although I expressed before the ASEAN Ministerial meeting that was recently held in Manila some impatience over the slow progress of ASEAN towards its stated objectives, I must now say that ASEAN will endure regardless of the speed or, I have learned to state things diplomatically, the circumspection with which the Association proceeds towards its objectives. And I have come to appreciate the tremendous value of the mere existence of the Association and the great contribution that a continuing dialogue rooted in durable affection has made to the stability, peace, and, yes, the potential for progress of the region.

I see ASEAN now as the regional analogue of the democracy that my people gloriously reestablished in their country. For the value of a democracy lies not so much in the actual achievement of its present objectives but in the limitless creativity and potential it releases and in the sense of community it fosters. For a democracy is a process of continuing reappraisal and correction, of taking stock from time to time in the belief that the future will always reveal something new that should cause us to reevaluate the steps we have taken and even the goals that we established when we first set out. And this is necessary so that the policies and objectives we set for ourselves do not harden because of long veneration into obstacles to the attainment of our ultimate goals or become distractions from the things we really want.

ASEAN was established as an instrument for fostering regional cooperation. That cooperation, it was felt, would contribute greatly to the economic growth of the particular members of the Association. The progress of each particular country in the region would in turn contribute to its general stability and peace.

If we take this progression of steps as a complete statement of the meaning of ASEAN, then we might well feel disappointed at the record. Particular projects of economic complementation have failed or have never even gotten off the ground. To a great extent, the ASEAN economies have gone their separate ways, emphasizing linkages outside the region, in the pursuit of their respective self-interests. Almost all the steps that were deemed essential to the attainment of ASEAN’s objectives and indicative of the respect in which its members held it have largely failed, as I have said. And yet, peace and stability reign in the region. And, as I was delighted to discover in my recent trip, the amity and affection among its members are as strong as one could wish.

Perhaps we have failed to see the forest for the trees. The goals of ASEAN have been achieved. They were there already at her foundation. How else was it possible for our countries to come together and work out the structure of an association dedicated to goals that seemed irrelevant to Southeast Asia at the time? The region was the horrified spectator of a terrible conflict. Never had the world seen such a convergence of so much hate, blood, technology, and anguish in such a small place. We converged in Bangkok to create this Association with a great fund of peace, friendship, and stable affections for one another already in our hearts. We gathered to reassure one another that these good feelings were very much alive and created the ASEAN to serve as the expression of those feelings and as an instrument to make sure that they will abide.

What else is the meaning of efforts at complementarity among economies that are so much alike? So much alike because we come from one family and live in neighboring countries that naturally share nearly identical natural features. The best and brightest of ASEAN’s minds bent their intellects to refute the economic wisdom against the integration of the region’s economies. That is very Asian and democratic as well. For it is the way of Asians who are deep friends to go out of their way to strengthen a friendship that needs no improvement. This is also the way of democracy. For in the freedom it guarantees, some of us can thrive better if we go our separate ways but we don’t. We don’t because, in addition to the private fruits of freedom, we wish to enjoy as well the incomparable joy and fulfillment of community.

And so I return from my ASEAN journey bringing back the greatest advantage and benefit that I could have hoped from it. I bring back word of the enduring friendship and affection among the peoples of our region. Now I see the meaning of my ASEAN journey. It was as though I had told my friends and fellow countrymen here that I was leaving merely to visit our friends in ASEAN to bring them our well wishes and assuredly bring back their best regards. To peoples who come from a heritage of hate and enmity, this may seem a slight reason for the grave occasion of a state visit, but not to the peoples of ASEAN who have shared a long history of friendship.

And so I say to you, we reached the goals of ASEAN a long time ago, long before its foundation. Our work today is to find renewing gestures of a friendship that is certain to abide. I know that this message, instead of discouraging you with the redundancy of your tasks, will inspire you to work harder to bring the economies of the region as close together as our hearts.

What I have told you today is merely the unspoken truth of our long standing relations that I have come to fully appreciate. And you will forgive me, I hope, for the excitement and delight of my discovery.

Welcome, our friends, to our home.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].