NATIONAL EMPLOYERS COUNCIL

Allow me first to express my gratitude to the organizers of this conference, as well as my recognition for the keen interest shown by this assembly towards the Philippines, particularly at this time when the Bicentennial is being celebrated.

It is a great honor for us to participate in this event, which is both historical and rich in symbolic meaning. The special participation of the Philippines in the celebration of the 200th anniversary of the French Revolution highlights our common roots through our political convictions in the field of the primacy of the individual and freedom, the ideal of the spiritual development of man and the material progress of nations.

It is these common fundamental convictions that should lead to closer ties between French and Philippine businesses.

The next consolidation of Europe could lead one to think that it will find its own future within itself, thus dispensing with the rest of the world.

But two elements should lead Europe to question the prospects for growth after 1992; we are entering the century of the Pacific, and on the other hand this region holds considerable development potential.

The Atlantic and the Mediterranean cannot be the only horizons of Europe. Remaining the only European power present in the Pacific, France is well placed to see that the future of Europe is in Asia.

Our presence here is aimed at promoting the Philippines so that this country becomes the central point of French investments in Asia as well as the springboard that leads France to a more active presence in the Pacific.

The Philippines offers to all alone multiple opportunities for foreign investments.

Our country possesses a solid and dynamic economy, an expanding domestic market. The takeoff and speed of its political reforms illustrate the determination of its leaders, who will tolerate no questioning of their objectives and the nation's deep commitments to democracy.

The speed of the economic recovery and the ground already covered testify to the willingness of the Filipino people to work and discipline, and to the real solidarity of an economic structure that was able to bear the weight of a colossal debt while ensuring the indispensable economic recovery and growth.

In three years, the Philippines went from a growth rate of less than 10% in 1984 and 1985, then less than 4.2% in 1985, to a rate of more than 2% in 1986 (year of the Revolution) and more than 6.7% in 1988.

Exports increased by 46% between 1986-1988, and registered investments went from a level of 128 million dollars in 1985 to 1.5 billion dollars in 1988. During the first 5 months of 1989, an amount of 2 billion dollars of investments is noted.

Meanwhile, the Philippines has dedicated 40% of its national budget to debt service, representing 7.7% of the GNP. It is estimated that over the next five years the Philippines will repay the sum of 12 billion dollars to its creditors.

The confidence of our creditors in the Philippines' ability to faithfully and uninterruptedly honor its debt service is in a way a tribute to the fundamental vitality of our economy on the part of the very first interests, namely our creditors. We would certainly have done without this demonstration of esteem, but we nevertheless invite you to consider this fact as the best justification for a Franco-Philippine partnership.

This is where our strength lies, in this determination of a people resolved to keep their word of honor, in the assiduous effort of a nation to regain the place it occupied at the forefront of free and committed nations on the path of progress.

We believe that we have established an environment conducive to growth. One of the first acts of the government was to abolish monopolies and privileges that hindered those who wished to do business honestly. We have almost completely deregulated the economy to give greater leeway to the private sector and make it the main engine of growth. We are accelerating infrastructure construction – roads, bridges, ports, energy, telecommunications, and transport (land, air, sea) to better connect Philippine products and markets to the rest of the world. France's commitment to offer its expertise and financial assistance for the construction of a new airport in the Philippines represents a major aspect of this infrastructure program.

French interest in the Philippines is deep, largely inspired by the principle of equity, particularly with regard to external debt. As President of the Paris Club, France has provided valuable assistance in developing an agreement on the rescheduling of Philippine debt last May.

The French initiative at the Toronto Summit, where France proposed partial debt relief for heavily indebted countries like the Philippines, facilitated the emergence of a consensus for more daring solutions than the traditional prescriptions regarding Third World debt.

However, we would like the interest that French authorities have in the development of this country to be accompanied by a greater availability of French business people to seize the opportunities offered by the Philippines.

For example, our country must discover more hydrocarbon reserves and increase its production. These goals will only be achieved through a major effort based on technological development and the training of people. These new technologies will provide the energy sector with the essential means for its development. Our country will need assistance to achieve these essential advances. We would welcome those who have the experience and are willing to help us in our task.

France has had to reflect on the Pacific and the rapid developments that are shaping its future. It must certainly realize that it will soon have to strengthen its positions there. This is precisely where the whole question lies.

The logic of Philippine geography, the results of its economy, the qualities of the Filipino people as workers and partners, a common heritage of freedom, and a growing recognition of the affinities that exist between the French and Filipino peoples, all of this, and many other reasons, strongly advocate for a partnership between our two countries that would be geared towards the progress of the Philippines, and towards the century of the Pacific.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library