Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Catholic Educators Association of the Philippines’ Annual Convention

[Delivered in Cagayan de Oro City, July 6, 1986]

QUALITY OF EDUCATION: A PRIMARY CONCERN

President Aquino assures the Catholic Educational Association of the Philippines that quality education of our youth is a primary concern of Government. While the main burden of educating the youth should be borne by Government, private sector has earned a substantial part of the burden. She announced implementation this year of the service contract scheme whereby students who cannot be accommodated in government schools may be enrolled in private schools.

I wish to thank Mr. Javier for now making me officially a member of the Jesuit Mafia. I wish to add that I was joking, before things get out of hand. I am very glad that the Catholic Educational Association of the Philippines, chose to hold its annual convention here in Cagayan de Oro City. You have allowed me to pay a second visit to the south and to reaffirm a central policy of our national government. Early in my term, I pledged to decentralize the operations of my administration to reach out to the provinces and to formulate the policies in collaboration with the people, who will be most affected by them. I also promised to focus visual attention to the South to do my best to heal the wounds inflicted by decades of economic exploitation, political neglect and cultural misunderstanding.

Thanks to the CEAP, we are here in another key Southern city opening direct lines of dialogue with the population and able to discuss our national program of recovery in terms that are relevant and practical to the people of this region.

The government’s concern and intent to reach to the grassroots is also shared by the CEAP. You comprise a network of 1,200 schools distributed in key municipalities throughout the archipelago, though your central seat of operations is in the City of Manila, your program and policies are made to come to life in hundreds of dioceses, or mission schools run by rural based parishes, and religious orders. This is a network you have carefully nurtured over a number of years. Your special concern for the development and welfare of Filipinos in the provinces adds to the moral component of the government in the areas of economic improvement. In the past four teen years, our rural populace were not only politically starved and abused, but also morally and spiritually undermined. The 14-year spectacle, of .moral turpitude rewarded and moral rectitude that was put on by the old regime called into question the continuing relevance of many of our lives.

But fortunately, enough of our values were meant to call the Filipinos to rally perhaps for the last time, in defense of those values, and in powerful rejection of the old regime.

It is now our task to pick up the momentum of spiritual and moral renewal. In fact we have the advantage of working with the people who themselves started that momentum.

We are building on a substantial foundation, made firm by the triumph of the people in the last elections and revolution. Our focus must be on the young, on those who were born and grew up in the age of our shame, and who were witnesses from the most impressionable age to the triumph of vice and punishment of virtue. One event last February, will not wipe out the work of 14 years. For this reason, your government recently launched a values reformation program implemented by MECS. Until a few days ago, I made the teaching of human rights mandatory in schools.

In a message to educators in Baguio City, I outlined a broad direction of this program. This involved the instilling in our youth, of a love for peace, a jealousy for their political rights, a firm sense of justice, and a willingness to be responsible for themselves and to the community. I specially stressed that the promotion of self-discipline, hard work, respect, and concern for their fellowmen regardless of social status, and an abiding trust and faith in God and the triumph of good. The theme of your 18th convention, national reconstruction through moral regeneration, underscores the identity of our concerns and objectives. At long last, the Catholic academic community and your national leadership are now of a single mind and purpose. I should now like to review the areas where the CEAP and the government can work together.

First, let me assure you that I am keenly aware that Catholic educational institutions are as deeply affected as public schools by the issues of tuition fees and teachers salaries. But where your resources permit, I appeal to you to reach out to the even more financially strapped, if not outright impoverished schools, in your various communities.

I would propose a kind of adoption program, where in a CEAP affiliated school could adopt a public school catering to the same student age-levels. You could then work out a scheme for sharing facilities, services and faculty development programs.

A second area of cooperation is one you have already started to work on. And that is the formation of the total school environment, or the inclusion of the surrounding community or parish in teaching and learning activities. The Assumption experiment in San Simon, Pampanga, is a particularly inspiring example of the conversion of a formal school structure into a community wide learning experience. It is an experience that mutually enriches the studentry and the community; the community by the immediate relevance of what the students are taught and the students by the immediate awareness of the needs of their communities.

The main burden of educating our people should be borne by the government, and I am therefore grateful that the CEAP’s network for all the financial constraints under which it operates, has carried a substantial part of that burden. I would therefore like to assure you that the government is exploring every possible source of support for private education. We have identified several areas where we can assist.

For this school year, the service contract scheme which was pilot-tested in two regions will be implemented nationwide, not only on the high school but also on the elementary level. This means that thousands of students who could not be accommodated in government schools are now enrolled in private schools. The impact of this program is two fold: first, the government saves by paying minimal tuition fees instead of constructing new school buildings; second, the private schools have another source of revenue.

Because of the merits of this program, a funding scheme will be evolved so that this partnership of government and private schools can be extended into a tertiary level.

I wish I could make a long list of incentives and other forms of assistance. But I know you understand the enormous demands from all sectors that government must respond to. But, I assure you, there is an earnest effort to find feasible incentives.

The quality of education of our youth is our primary concern, even if it does not appear always as our first priority. We have to address the immediate and dangerous problem of unemployment and mass poverty, particularly in the rural areas. We have to keep bodies and souls together before we can get minds working. And working in constructive rather than destructive directions. That democracy is the first and highest value is unquestioned by a race that cannot live without liberty and pride. But let us not give our people the exclusive choice of bread or freedom. But while the immediate alleviation of poverty is our first priority, the quality education of our youth is the best assurance of maintaining the progress we hope to achieve. I said in Davao that we were left with little by the previous government and we shall not be helped much by our friends abroad. But I also said that, nonetheless, we shall achieve the progress we desire. And that is because, pushed to the wall, we shall fall back on the intangible resources of the people and push ahead by the strength of our will and the power of our intelligence. Both these resources are created by the kind of education we provide. I know the ultimate priorities. Whatever it takes, they will be followed.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].