Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Upon her arrival in San Francisco, U.S.A.

[Delivered in San Francisco, September 15, 1986]

AT HOME IN A FAIR CITY

President Aquino shares with Americans proud memories of a democracy won back and the excitement of building a new country.

San Francisco was the first stop on that life or death mission to give my husband, Ninoy, a triple heart by-pass in Dallas. Ninoy felt very weak on the plane. But when we stopped over here and Ninoy breathed in the clear, blue air of San Francisco, he immediately revived. The color went back in his cheeks. That’s the effect of freedom on anybody who has been denied it too long. I felt it, too. I can’t say I feel it now, for I come from my country that has just won its freedom. And so, now, I guess I feel somewhat at home arriving here in your fair city. I say only somewhat for I feel here the strong and rich earth, and the vigor of America, that has sustained its democracy. We Filipinos are not so fortunate yet to have the progress to keep our democracy going forever. But we are starting. We are starting to put our country back in shape, starting to rebuild a many-pillared house worthy of our new democracy. I have come to America to share with its people our proud memories of how we won back democracy and the excitement of building a new country. I have come here also to thank the American people for their prayers and their cheers as we Filipinos advanced to freedom in our country. My Government has issued several formal reasons for my visit here, having to do with economic and political issues of bilateral concern. They are all valid reasons that I am going to press hard for. But to tell the truth, the overriding reason I am here is because I wanted to see our friends. Thank you for your warm and gracious welcome.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].