Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Davao Military Camp

[Delivered on May 23, 1986]

TAPPING THE UNARMED FORCES OF THE PEOPLE

President Aquino exhorts the members of the armed forces to help in the work of rehabilitating and rebuilding the country. Military might, she says, must be used for right. Her visit to Davao was the first outside Manila that she would undertake since assuming the presidency.

Soldiers of Davao, I have made it a point to visit you today to remind you how much our new government depends on you. I know that your numbers are small compared to the entire civilian population you are committed to defend and protect. I know that your military supplies run low and that your wages cannot fully compensate for the dangers and the risk to your lives that your service in the army entails. I know that though you have mastered the use of weapons, and that the sight of your troops in uniform inspires fear and respect, you suffer and struggle to earn your daily wage like the rest of us from day to day.

And yet, despite the limitations and difficulties you must bear with, so much of the future of your province, and the stability of your government and the entire country must rest on your shoulders.

You, our men in uniform have the task of keeping the peace, and upholding law and order in the province of Davao and the larger area of Southern Mindanao. As long as there is widespread poverty in your region, and as long as insurgents continue to terrorize your coastal towns and your hills and forests, it will always be a difficult battle.

And yet, I am cheered by the fact that there are factors in your favor today that were never there in the past decade. What you now uphold and defend is a government that enjoys a tremendous mandate and the confidence of the people. You have leaders that have pledged to rule by dialogue and consultation, that are sincere in their intentions to safeguard and redistribute the nation’s wealth, that are committed to public service rather than to the pursuit of unlimited power and privilege. Most of all, you have a government that fears God more than the wiles and threats of ruthless men. And as we all know by now, when God is with us, who can prevail against us?

I would like you to recall, that during that fateful last week of February, a poorly armed and vastly outnumbered military contingent prevailed against the tanks, Sikorsky helicopters, planes and troops of Marcos. Their secret weapon, the answer to all our prayers, was a backup contingent of thousands of unarmed and peace-loving men, women and children. As these civilian volunteers surrounded the reformist troops staked out in Camps Crame and Aguinaldo, the missiles, machineguns, tear gas and bast-laid plans of General Ver and his cohorts were rendered useless. God was on the side of the reformists, and he had called on the people to their defense.

I must recall those four fateful days again and again because it reveals a strategy that you, the reformed military forces of Davao, can also use to your advantage. Your army may be small compared to the land area and size of the population you must patrol and protect. But remember that at any time, there is a vast reserve force that can immediately surround and support you. They are the people that live in your neighboring houses, the vendors in the public markets, the pedestrians, the farmers and the fishermen, your relatives and your friends. This is your hidden army. Your potential informers and field reconnaissance men. Your patrol and surveillance forces. Your living barricade against the guerilla and subversive tactics of the insurgent force that is in truth a minority. For if the ordinary, average and unarmed men, women and children of Davao and the rest of Southern Mindanao trust and respect you, who can prevail against you? They are the secret weapon that I recommend. People’s power and the guidance of God.

Soldiers of Davao, I urge you to maintain the utmost courtesy and regard for the rights and privileges of the civilians around you. I challenge you to be humble, polite and in your day to day dealings with them. I ask you to participate wholeheartedly in the less glamorous tasks of national reconstruction. To participate in such military assistance programs as the building of bridges and roads, the provision of emergency shelter, relief and transportation in times of natural calamity, in protecting the routes of trade, in the giving of emergency medical aid, in community programs of reforestation and irrigation. I urge you not only to be model soldiers but also model citizens. See that you consistently behave in a creditable manner in public. In your off-duty hours, remember to lay aside your firearms. Practice moderation in all your indulgences. Never threaten, never swagger, never display cruelty or arrogance. For by doing so, you will invite allegiance to your enemy. Remember always that the people you protect will one day protect you when you hang in the balance between life and death.

In return for such commendable and soldierly behavior, your government will exhaust all the means within its reach to improve the standard of living of the military. Government will also intensify its counter-insurgency campaign. At this date, we are speeding up the structuring of a credible amnesty and rehabilitation program for surrendering rebels. We are also continuing negotiations for an honorable ceasefire, one that will not result in treachery, or loss of lives on both the side of the insurgents and the military. We are also pursuing our reform and reorganization program within the armed forces of the Philippines to insure that the most deserving and brave of our soldiers get the rank and recognition that is due them. We are working towards rehabilitating and rebuilding a country that will be easier for you to protect, to uphold and to defend.

Soldiers of Davao, you must help us by proving everyday that the military arm of the new government are truly defenders and not the offenders of the people. You must impress upon our struggling populace that military might is not right just be itself. Might must be used for right.

Soldiers of Davao, your commander in chief, the highest ranking officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the people of our Republic are depending on you. And so far, the majority of you have not failed us. For in many instances I am told, the soldiers and officers of the Davao military have not only proven themselves warriors but also upright citizens and gentlemen.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].