POWER OF PRAYER

Freedom was the Filipino’s greatest reward. But the real price was the reaffirmation of his faith, the demonstration of its power.

I would like to thank Filipinos and friends of Filipinos in Washington for your significant contribution to the restoration of freedom and democracy in the Philippines.

Some of you may be asking, what exactly is this great contribution I refer to? Well, aside from the financial assistance and political lobbying and support extended to us by our friends in this state, I refer particularly to your prayers. For I am told that, at the height of our recent political crisis, many Christian groups and individuals in Washington and other parts of the United States prayed earnestly for us.

Those not firm in the faith cannot understand the power of prayers. Those who are, never fail to be amazed and delighted at how they are answered. As proven to us last February, the answers come in the most unforeseen ways, and always exceeding human expectation and understanding.

We know by faith that nothing happens by accident. Christ knows full well what He put into us and what He must put us through to make us what we must be. I do not fully understand why it is I who am the President of a free country today, except that I, who was not made for politics, led a people who had lost faith in politics and led them to victory.

Who of us can claim to have sequenced the events that led to our successful bloodless revolution? How could those cunning minds in the previous government have made the blunder of making a martyr of my husband? And in such an ill-planned way? Why did the dictator open his mouth on American television only to swallow defeat in the snap election? What possessed our people to produce a million signatures to convince me to run? What moved them to risk their lives to protect my votes in the polls and proclaim my victory in the streets? Why did the military defect when it did? Who stayed the hand of Marcos as it poised to smash us? And why were Filipinos, who watched my husband fast nearly unto death, without a murmur of protest or pity, suddenly stirred to concern and action when he was already dead?

It began with the willing sacrifice of one man and ended with the offer of sacrifice of millions.

In assessing the gains of our uprising in Manila, I would say that freedom was our great reward. But the real prize was the reaffirmation of our faith, the demonstration of its power.

The Filipino raised his head and turned a new face to the world, the face of faith and courage.

And so it is that I thank you today for your prayers and ask you to continue with them. I stand here as living proof of their global reach. We need them in our country still. Freedom is priceless but memories are short.

I ask you to pray for me, that I be spiritually guided in every decision that I make. I request that you pray for our government, that we do not become an organization of men for the control of men; that we do not act like kings but rather as servants of the people and the one true king. And so that, once more, there might be peace and prosperity in our land. For it is also written that Christ completes what He has started in our hearts. And I pray that that time will not be far away.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].