REBIRTH OF POLITICAL PARTIES

Political parties play an important role in the molding of a nation. These parties should serve as an organization of people with shared ideas and aspirations from where the people could get insights and enlightenment. In the LDP convention, President Aquino expresses her support for the rebirth of these parties and of the Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino. She stresses that LDP should not only be for the elections in 1992 but more especially for the people in these times of crisis.

The founding of this party inaugurates, I hope, the more efficient use of political power for national ends.

The past two years have been a time of building up democratic institutions, of shoring their defenses, and developing their capabilities to absorb the shocks of the free-wheeling politics of a full-fledged democracy. Now that the institutions are in place and the processes have been tested, it is time for the political forces to start aligning themselves on the basis of their respective beliefs and programs.

There can be no democracy without parties, for the various strands of opinion in the country cannot make their influence felt unless they are organized and able to pursue systematically their specific political agendas. Without the organization of political beliefs and programs into disciplined parties, we would have only a riot of conflicting opinions but no effective action. The people, who unavoidably speak in many voices, will be frustrated because none of these voices will be clearly heard.

Perhaps, it is time to have political parties. Perhaps, indeed, the time for realignments is now. Yet, I hope that these realignments do not portend the permanent and total division of the forces of democracy in our country. For should that happen, it will mean the end of all of us. The coming anniversary of Martial Law should be a tragic reminder of what happened the last time the friends of democracy fell out with each other. Democracy was left defenseless, and each of us was left friendless against the small but organized forces of dictatorship.

It is good for the country and for democracy if people with shared ideas and programs organize themselves into separate parties. But it would be disastrous if we divided ourselves again into permanently hostile camps, and thereby divided the attention and energies of the natural leadership of this nation into mutually destructive and frustrating factions.

It was like that in the past, it cannot be that way again in the future.

For we have stepped into a new age of politics, an age we ourselves invited when we fought and overturned the dictatorship in the only way possible, by calling out the people to do it. Now that the people have tasted what it is like to make history, they will not go back to being its victims.

The politics of the present and the future is a people politics, just like the character of the revolution that brought us all here, was people-powered. In the same manner, the full recovery of this country and the fulfillment of its potential must be an affair of the people, and for the people. There is no other way.

First, because the people will not allow themselves to be relegated to a minor role again. Second, because our problems are so great, the challenges before us are so daunting, the enemies of our freedom so many and persistent, that only with the active participation of the people can we prevail.

The breakup of the democratic coalition into parties, like the LDP, is, as I have said, an unavoidable, even a necessary feature of democracy. Yet, the popular unease over this development is understandable. For the general feeling is that every hand is needed to work in unison at the great tasks before us: giving justice and jobs to the people, strength to the economy, and security, both internal and external, to the nation.

The people are uneasy at the formation of parties because it has yet to be shown that parties will work for the people, and not against them.

The people must be convinced that this need not be the case.

But words will not sway them. They have heard too many already. Only actions will move them to give the next stage of democracy, which is the full-flowering of the multiparty system, their respect, support, and defense in the time of crisis.

You and I went through the Revolution. We have seen the power of the people; we know the price that leaders pay for the people’s disenchantment; and the great power for transformation that the people represent.

That power is not a mindless thing that politicians can do with as they please, as they did in the past.

That power has a mind and purpose of its own.

It has goals to which the destiny of this country is tied.

It has a leader, who stands ready to protect it. And I am sworn to pursue its goals with every breath and ounce of strength in me.

I am pleased with the resurgence of political parties. This is needed for our democracy to flourish. I believe that the Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino, which has many members and leaders known for their intelligence and patriotism, will be a partner in the work we have begun. Likewise, the people hope for the help and advice of the LDP in the difficult problems we face.

I expect that the LDP was established not only for the 1992 elections but to help the nation face and overcome our burdens.

With that belief, let us celebrate the birth of the LDP.

Long live the Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].