LET HISTORY JUDGE US

Much of government’s non-political concern has been towards our economic development. Along this line, there are those who argue that reducing the political liberties available to the people will concentrate our people’s energies on economic development.

This argument, although it strongly appealed to many who were in a hurry to bring about the development of this country, had been tried before with dangerous results; it stilled our people’s energies and prefaced the total loss of our freedoms. We should never allow that to happen again to us.

I strongly believe that the political liberty of the people is a necessary precondition to economic development. Without that political liberty, the fruits of economic development will accrue only to a few and will not benefit the many. Thus, when I became President of the Philippines, I was determined to return democracy to this Republic as my primary objective.

Democracy, simply put, is to guide our national life as a nation, not by the arbitrary dictates of a single ruler, nor by the anarchy of the many, but by the fundamental law of the land, accepted by all as the yardstick by which we relate to one another. It is the collective will of the people expressed through their duly elected representatives, in the context of universal suffrage.

That fundamental law of the land, our Constitution of 1987, is rooted in a higher law – the moral law of Divine Providence. It is no accident that in the Preamble, we implore the aid of Almighty God.

As you are aware, my immediate task at the start of my term as President was to replace the previous de facto Constitution of 1973.1 called for a new one to be drawn up. The Constitution of 1987 was written by the Constitutional Commission in an atmosphere of freedom. It is now a historical fact that our Constitution was freely ratified by an overwhelming majority.

My second task was to install the mechanisms of a free electoral process, which we did, first in May of 1987, and in subsequent elections for local officials down to the barangay level.

My third task was to restore freedom of the press. That the press now should take to its freedom as a duck takes to water is a delight even if, more often than not, I should be the subject of uncomfortable comments in media. Media today is vocal and vociferous. And these are sure signs that democracy is in place. There is truth to what others say: democracy can be noisy, and that noise may be made by a free press. I hope, however, that it will always be a responsible noise which defends democracy.

With our political reforms, I believe I have laid down a stable basis for faster economic development. I hope, therefore, that political parties take this precondition seriously: not to sacrifice political liberty in the name of economic development, but to defend political liberty as a precondition to economic development.

Too often we refuse to discuss ethics in our political life. But this is contrary to the reality that we are a nation of believers. When we rose against the dictator at the EDSA Revolution, our people, Muslims and Christians alike, did not hesitate to manifest their faith in God. During that period, the people did not forget who the Final Author of their life and nation is. Such an uprising was a political act based on moral grounds.

If we are to learn from our experience, therefore, we must remember that in all political acts, we must be guided by ethical considerations. To adhere to the politics of pragmatism devoid of moral basis is to court disaster all over again. True progress goes along the path of what is morally right.

I am pleased to note, therefore, that Christian Democracy has taken root in our country. I am equally pleased to watch the emergence and growth of Muslim Democracy as the sister idea of Christian Democracy. It is not surprising that both ideas spring from the moral teachings of the two holy books, the Bible and the Koran.

Thus, I am glad that this Center for Christian-Muslim Democracy has been put up for the study and development of ideas to reinforce Philippine democracy. For, our liberty cannot be better strengthened than by the moral fiber that largely comes from having faith in the Almighty.

I note the participation here of leaders and members of long-standing organizations that have pursued this ideal in their fight for justice – the Federation of Free Workers, the Federation of Free Farmers, the Christian Social Movement, among others. Your contributions to the discussions will surely enrich the Center’s perspective.

I also note the participation of foreign delegates who have come to share with us their experiences in strengthening democracy. I believe they can also learn a few things from us, particularly how our Faith played a key role in winning the EDSA Revolution which was, probably, the first of the bloodless revolutions of this century.

I call upon all the participants here to be steadfast in their belief in the Almighty. Our task is to build a nation based on the moral values of your collective beliefs. There is space for a pluralism of ideas, just as there is space for a pluralism of cultures. The blending of these ideas and these cultures has enriched, and will continue to enrich, our land for the benefit of all Filipinos and of the world.

There is no doubt that history will judge us. Let history, then, judge us in the light of the past and the present. With Filipinos like you committed to the future of our country, I believe that our liberty is secure. You are the shapers of that future, and freedom belongs only to those who are willing to work hard to sustain it.

Continue your excellent start in the name of our democracy. Long life to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library