Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the Philippine Bishops/Businessmen Conference

[Released on July 10, 1986]

FORGING A POST-DICTATORSHIP AGENDA

The fight is not over, President Aquino tells members of the Bishops/Businessmen’s Conference. Systemic injustices on which the past regime fed, remain and must be removed. The people must be on their guard against the enemies from within and without.

Fifteen years ago, a group of 35 bishops and an equal number of businessmen lifted their noses from their breviaries and bank books and took alarming notice of the state the country was in, and the even more alarming direction in which it was headed. They decided to combine their respective attributes of spirituality and pragmatism in a systematic effort to uncover the roots of the Philippine crisis and find the appropriate solutions.

One year later, Martial Law was declared and the country was plunged deeper into crisis. To the socio-economic problems they pledged to tackle, the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference added the politics of dictatorship to its agenda. It was a brave decision in the circumstances and the Conference never faltered in adhering to it. For 14 years, the BBC was one of a handful of voices raised in protest against the abuses of the Marcos regime and the social abuses it added to those already endemic in the system.

The BBC brought wisdom and a profound ethical concern to the important issues confronting the nation: minimum wages, labor-management relations, the impact of large enterprises on communities, the role of different instrumentalities of government in a democratic society, and human rights abuses. In this last category, the BBC puts the stamp of Christian approval to the personal outrage felt by many Filipinos over the abuses of the authoritarian government and its military establishment. It was a consolation and a source of strength to feel that what we felt and thought about these abuses were not merely personal reactions, and that the need to do something about them was a Christian duty.

The BBC was one of the chief influences in the education of our people in the humane values of a true democracy, even while this democracy was still a dream. In preparing us for it, it emboldened us to bring it about in a unique and Christian way that has made us the object of the world’s admiration.

Last week, an attempt was made to overthrow our democracy. It failed miserably. It failed because the political order, not to mention the personalities, that was offered as the alternative to our democracy went against the grain of the values of our people, values for which the BBC has stood and which it tried to engrain in us.

The fight is not over. The dictatorship is gone, but many of the systemic injustices on which it fed remain with us. The work of the BBC is far from over. The Enemy has many more disguises than the ludicrous one it put on last Sunday at Manila Hotel. We must be ever on our guard. We must be on our guard, not only against the enemy without, but even more against the enemy within. The cynicism that paralyzed our people could creep in again and weaken them against another assault on their liberties and values. That spell of cynicism was broken by the gunshot that killed my husband. Let us not depend on such startling and costly events to keep us alert to danger.

We are presently engaged in the work of giving permanent constitutional form to the gains of the Revolution. We will need the same wisdom and morality you have brought to bear on other issues in this particular project as well. I wish you a fruitful day of deliberations and look forward to receiving results of your dialogue.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].