A number of essential infrastructure projects have been set in place including health and education services to insure the development of Region 8. The President cites all efforts to address the endemic underdevelopment of the region in her determined effort to lift the area to the prosperity envisioned for all the people.

My beloved constituents.

I came to you to continue the consultations here in Region 8.

I have already spoken with your representative in Congress, as well as your local officials. But I am eager to understand your problems myself, and how our government can help all of you.

I am here to continue my consultations with Region 8. I have talked to your representatives in Congress and in local governments. Secretary Mita Pardo de Tavera, the CORD for Region 8, has kept me informed of developments here. But there is no substitute for first-hand knowledge from those who know. Being right here, you know better than anyone else what is happening and what is best for you.

Eastern Visayas is one of the least developed and poorest areas in the country. This is a tragic waste of the great potential the region represents.

To tap that potential, we have identified several areas where government should direct its resources and efforts. These areas are infrastructure building, health services, education, security, reforestation and stopping illegal logging, more electrification, more communication services, and more post-harvest facilities.

We have given great attention to these needs. Thus, the budget for public works for Region 8 was increased from P625 million in 1987 to P735 million in 1988. But the problem, I discovered, was not in the amount allocated but in the failure to spend the budget at all. Only P1 38 million of the 1987 budget was spent. So now we are set back two years in meeting the infrastructure requirements of the Region. Care in the selection of projects and in the expenditure of funds is commendable, but the country cannot wait until all the safeguards are in place. I have directed the Department of Public Works to hasten the implementation of projects, and ask the private sector to monitor their progress.

For 1988, we have programmed P566 million for roads and bridges, and P46 million for an improved rural water supply system. In this connection, I have been told that there is duplication of functions between the Catbalogan Water District and the provincial government. This controversy should have been resolved without my intervention, but I now direct Secretary Santos to ensure that the provincial government does not duplicate the work of the Water District.

To bring Free Secondary Education to the Region, we have allocated P42.5 million to take in 73,000 high school students. We have also increased the allocation for school houses and other facilities by 50 percent. The ESF-financed construction of 22 municipal, vocational, and technical high school buildings costing P25 million will start by October this year.

The total budget for the improvement of seven airports in the Region will cost P15.9 million over a 3-year period starting in 1987. P4.3 million will be spent this year. The program covers the improvement and extension of runways, terminals and control towers of the Catarman, Calbayog, Catbalogan, Borongan, Maasim, Ormoc and Hilongos airports.

On the other hand, Public Works will be spending P24 million for the improvement of eight seaports and lighthouses in Tacloban, Ormoc, Calbayog, San Jose Caragian, Catbalogan, Palompon, Maasim, and Borongan.

The Department of Health has completed 24 projects involving the improvement of provincial and district hospitals at the cost of P6.25 million. Nine more hospitals will be upgraded. P3.2 million has been procured out of savings for medicines. The PAGCOR has donated P1 million to the Department of Health Region 8 for the purchase of generic medicines and equipment for public hospitals. There is also the Italian Government’s generous TB Assistance Grant in the form of medicines, equipment and funds for medical personnel training.

Government has found the assistance of the private sector indispensable in the reforestation program. Thus, I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the Rotary Club of Tacloban which has agreed with the Department of Natural Resources to help in the reforestation of 100 hectares of denuded upland areas. I would also like to cite the Knights of Columbus of Tanauan, Leyte, which has committed to help in the seedling propagation program of the DENR.

The private sector has been most helpful in the catching of illegal loggers by informing on them to the authorities. Through their vigilance, we confiscated 5,600 cubic meters of illegally logged wood products or the equivalent of 450 ten-wheeler truckloads. I would like to announce that by virtue of EO 277, we shall award as much as 20 percent of sales proceeds of contraband to anyone who helps in the apprehension of illegal loggers and timber smugglers.

We have started monitoring gold panning operations in the area to avoid some of the tragic accidents in other regions. An educational drive will be conducted to assist the gold panners.

There has been some improvement in the peace and order situation, which is so essential a component of progress. We have appointed Governor Oscar Tan as Chairman of the Regional Peace and Order Council to act as coordinator for all agencies and the private sector in further improving the security condition of the Region. I ask the people to support them, to lend their eyes and ears to this effort to bring order and progress to their communities.

On rural electrifications shall reduce power rates in all electric cooperatives in Samar from the present high of P4.35 per kilowatt hour to not more than P2.50 kilowatt hour. Last May, the installation of 81 kilometers of transmission lines crossing Ormoc-Baybay, Lemon-Biliran, and the San Juanico Strait was completed The NEA has programmed the P20 million Amanjuray Mini-Hydro project in Eastern Samar for immediate implementation. As of last month, Leyte 2 and Southern Leyte Electric cooperatives became NPC direct customers which will result in a significant reduction of power rates. 2,000 families will benefit from the operation of generation sets donated by the Australian Government covering three municipalities in Northern Samar. By the end of this year, 10,000 more households will be extended electric power services. The costs of these programs are tremendous and again we shall need the cooperation of the people to help us keep down costs by informing on electricity thieves.

On communications, as of May this year, 95 percent of the five provinces have telegraph facilities. We are finalizing plans for 1,800 digital telephone lines for Ormoc, Borongan, Catarman, and Catbalogan to be operational in three years.

The National Food Authority is operating 17 warehouses in the Region with a total capacity of 50,000 metric tons. Another 1,500 metric tons will be added when we complete the warehouse in Catubig. Two small grain centers in Las Navas and Hilongos will soon be completed and will be turned over to farmers’ cooperatives.

From 1986 to June 1988, NFA bought 35,163 metric tons of palay valued at P123 million, an increase of 54 percent from the 1983-1985 level. The NFA has allotted P40 million for palay procurement this year. In addition, the Department of Agriculture is undertaking several programs to increase productivity, such as the Rice Production Enhancement Program which has increased average production by 45 percent per hectare.

This report on our efforts to address the endemic underdevelopment of Region 8 underscores our determination to lift this Region to the prosperity we envision for all our people. It does not sum up by any means the measures needed to achieve that goal. We barely scratch the surface of the problems. But we want our people to know that the commitment is there, and action has started. What better way to do this than by the concrete measures and tangible results thus far achieved.

I ask all of you to continue your support and help that is being offered to me by our government. Thank you and have a good day to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library