Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the signing of the Omnibus Investments Code

[Released on July 17, 1987]

A BASIC FRAMEWORK TO ENCOURAGE INVESTMENTS

The basic framework that will guide and encourage investments in the economy has been laid with the signing of the Omnibus Investments Code. Freedom and stability have been put in place while the necessary economic policies have been issued and are being implemented. The country is now back in the mainstream of the world’s growth economies. However, much more can be done to promote industrial peace.

Two and a half months ago, I spoke before many of you who had gathered at the PICC for the meeting of the business community with the President.

At that time, reviewing how far we had come and looking ahead in the direction we were heading, I said we were no longer talking of just economic recovery but of growth.

The economic indicators that have since become available appear to bear this out. Our real GNP grew by 5.5 percent in the first quarter, something we haven’t experienced since the late ’70s.

In particular, we are proud of this feat because it is investments that led GNP growth with an increase of 23 percent; and it is industry which led the way with a 9.9 percent growth.

I am also specially pleased with the results of the last election. If you recall, I asked you at that meeting to vote for my candidates “if you still believe in Cory Aquino.” I made that appeal throughout the country, to all sectors. Getting 21 out of 22 senators thus far proclaimed, is not a bad way of learning the level of confidence our country still has in my Government, not to mention the strength of our people’s reborn faith in democratic institutions.

I think, ladies and gentlemen, we must all finally agree that this country is off to a good start.

But it is still just a start. Poverty and unemployment continue to hold the majority of our countrymen in their grip. Our economy is still tossed about on the surface of international economic forces over which we have no control whatsoever.

We are certainly proud of our accomplishments so far. And I am deeply pleased with and proud of my team. We have gone farther than any would have thought possible, and we did not violate a single democratic principle nor did we act in the kind of haste that we would live to regret. We showed that democracy, for all the apparent confusion, need not be sacrificed for speed and efficiency. Yet our accomplishments have hardly made a dent on the legacy of problems that the dictatorship left us.

We shall not rest on our achievements. On the contrary, our successes will spur us to greater efforts. For every advance we have made has merely opened a wider view of the many problems that still lie ahead.

Today, with the signing of the Omnibus Investments Code, we have taken another giant step forward. We are putting in place the basic framework that will guide and encourage investments in our economy.

With political stability, and now this Code, most of the elements of a supportive climate for investments are in place. We need only to enhance industrial peace.

It is gratifying to note that with the efforts of the Department of Labor and Employment, the number of strikes for the first six months of the year has dropped 22 percent in the last year. More significantly, the number of workers involved in strikes has gone down by 60 percent and the man-days lost by 56 percent.

Still there is more that can be done if we are to accelerate the setting up of factories that will employ our workers and compete effectively in the world market.

Our Constitution itself enjoins the principle of shared responsibility between workers and employers in the development of the economy, and mandates the State to promote industrial peace through the voluntary resolution of disputes.

In this light, even as we acknowledge our responsibility to protect the rights of workers and to promote their welfare, we also acknowledge our responsibility to foster the right climate for investments and growth.

Without losing sight of the substantive gains made by the Secretary of Labor, I want to see how all of us, working together, can further the cause of industrial peace as an essential factor in our take-off. I would therefore like the Department of Labor, the Department of Trade and Industry, and the representatives of labor and management to meet and submit to me as soon as possible a realistic program of action that will bring industrial peace to our economy.

The stage is set for the great cooperative effort. All the institutions necessary to our freedom and stability have been put in place. The necessary economic policies have been issued and are being implemented. We are back in the mainstream of the world’s growth economies.

In ten days, Congress will convene and to them will pass much of the power I have exercised to bind our nation’s wounds, restore its strength and give it the confidence to be all it can.

I am counting on all of you to carry your share of the work that must be done.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].