Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Philippine Air Force

[Delivered at the Fernando Air Base, Batangas, June 27, 1987]

THE IDEAL AIR FORCE

With its speed and mobility, the Air Force should be able to strike back immediately when the insurgents strike in any part of the archipelago. This is the ideal, but unfortunately not the case. The Air Force lacks gunships and weaponry to fulfill its mission. And the country’s ally has been advised on this deficiency. But the renewal of the country’s fighting forces need not wait on the arrival of foreign equipment. Training must start now to meet the needs of the future.

It is a happy coincidence that I met yesterday with Air Force officers. This occasion gives me the opportunity to answer some of their concerns.

The first of those concerns is the inability of the Air Force, given its present organization and resources, to fulfill its mission as the fastest of the Armed Forces in providing security to the people.

Speed is ideally the essence of the air force. The mobility of the Air Force is Government’s answer to the stealth and mobility of the insurgents. Its firepower, brought immediately to bear wherever the insurgents strike, is the best assurance we can give our people that, even in the farthest reaches of our widely spread archipelago, Government can protect them. That is the ideal. The reality is something else.

The Air Force officers I met with underscored the serious lack of gunships and weaponry that will enable the Air Force to fulfill its mission. The Government has repeatedly brought up this deficiency before the highest officials of our military ally. A few weeks ago, the first 10 helicopters were delivered. But this only begins to meet our requirements. I am assured, however, that every effort will be made to answer our needs.

Yet, even as we recognize the critical role of gunships and weaponry in the fight to protect our country from its internal enemies, we must never lose sight of the fundamental fact that it is people that make up armies; it is the individual that makes up a soldier.

The Armed Forces – airborne, earthbound or seagoing – are only as strong and effective as the individual fighting man that is its basic unit. It is in the individual soldier that we find the will to fight which is the moving spirit of victorious armies.

The renewal of the Philippine fighting forces need not wait on the arrival of foreign equipment. The most important work of military renewal should be taking place already.

It begins now, in this time of relative peace: Si vis pacem, para belium, as the saying goes; if you want peace, prepare for war. The training of efficient fighting forces and capable commanders takes time. We must start to meet the needs of the distant future today.

It begins here, in schools like this, where the soldier gets his first taste of a life of rigor and total dedication, and learns that the object of his efforts cannot be wealth but honor.

Honor is the motivation and inspiration of the soldier. The soldier risks all for strips of colored cloth and pieces of bronze, because these are the age-old badges of honor and the signs of rank. It is therefore imperative that the procedure for the awarding of ranks and honors be transparent and objective, so that no sacrifice or outstanding performance is overlooked.

Very soon, the Defense Secretary, the Chief of Staff and I will meet on how we can improve the procedures for recognizing merit and awarding promotions.

In the last analysis, however, the best assurance of a promotion is your consistent performance. One of the officers I met with said that, unlike other professions where there is a one-time test for admission, the officer is tested every day of his life. The test becomes even more rigorous and persistent from the moment of his graduation from formal training.

Today, therefore, marks not an end of one period of your lives, but the serious start of the constant testing of your abilities and your character that will henceforth mark your lives. That test of a lifetime will decide whether you will cap your career with the highest honors and ranks that the Republic can give the men and women of its Armed Forces.

Unlike other graduations, this is not a welcome but a send-off. I wish you luck in the challenge you have bravely taken up to prove the mettle of the Filipino soldier.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].