THE HOUSE OF DEMOCRACY

In the Camp which only recently was the scene of fierce fighting following the abortive coup, the President praises those military men who ably defended “the house of democracy.” She also announces a series of low-cost housing projects for soldiers and their families.

In this camp, the Filipino soldier redeemed his pledge to the colors and the Constitution of the Republic, in a victory that has brought us as much sorrow as relief that democracy has been saved again.

That victory did not come cheap.

In this Camp whose buildings are pockmarked by bullets, whose General Headquarters is a burnt ruin, and whose General Headquarters is a burnt ruin, and whose gates and walls had to be rammed down, we must rededicate ourselves to democracy and to the ideals of military professionalism that were here violated.

Here soldiers defended the house of democracy with valor and sad resolve against their comrades-in-arms. The choice was painful but their duty was clear: to flag, country, Commander and Constitution. To the Rule of Law and ordered liberty.

The Government is not perfect, but Democracy and the Constitution cannot be compromised. Any illegal and unconstitutional shortcut to solutions will be met and stopped, as they were here, by the Armed Forces and our people.

Democracy must be matched by progress, by a better material life for our people. Those who stand in the way of this progress are as much our enemies as those who sought to kill democracy.

There can be no greater enemy of the State than the enemy within: he who causes the machinery of Government to slow down; the bribetaker and influence peddler who puts self above country; the public official who follows any agenda but duty to country.

We cannot isolate ourselves from each other. We cannot tolerate even the appearance of disunity. Our people expect us to work together as one solid team. After all, we have one constituency: the Filipino people. One objective: their progress and rescue from poverty. Our people are impatient for results. We cannot tarry or fumble. We must move with speed and telling effect.

The 280 housing units we are inaugurating today are just the first batch of the on-base housing project jointly funded by AFP financial institutions. It is a modest attempt to match the house of democracy so ably defended here with homes and livelihoods worthy of the soldier’s daily sacrifice.

The project covers not only Camp Aguinaldo but also Villamor Air Base, Fort Bonifacio, Camp Bagong Diwa and eventually all major AFP camps, ports and stations countrywide. The San Mateo housing project, covering 120 hectares for some 6,000 houses for enlisted personnel and officers, is inspired by the same objective: a home worth defending for the soldier offering his life.

The Development Bank of the Philippines and PAG-IBIG have committed themselves to this same objective. The National Housing Authority is providing assistance in developing major areas designated for AFP housing.

Jointly with the Military Housing board, the NHA has announced that 5,000 lots in Taguig will be fully developed by the NHA. Under the NHA sites and Services Project in Carmona, Cavite, 3,000 lots are ready and developed for enlisted men’s housing. The total lots made available by the NHA is 8,000.

Retired General Mison, now in the PNB Board, submitted last month another housing project to be financed by the Philippine National Bank.

The GSIS came up with a solution to the ownership problem of 596 enlisted personnel under the old Presidential Security Command.

The basic issue is affordability. I would like to encourage you in your projects to cut the cost of housing units without compromising the comfort, convenience and safety that our soldiers and their families deserve.

I know the concerns of military widows, specially regarding the education of their children. Existing programs are not adequate to their needs. I have therefore asked a number of private schools to provide special scholarships for the children of soldiers killed in action. Southridge School and the Aquino Foundation have already responded enthusiastically to my plea.

There are other needs that must be met. We were working on this long before last Friday’s tragedy. But I am sure that the work which now bears fruit in concrete projects will be deliberately misinterpreted as yielding. But I will not let false pride stand in the way of basic needs.

I am endorsing to the Congress a special public works bill in the amount of P200 million.

The AFP has proposed the release of P16 million from the Calamity Fund for the Officers’ Club House, which shall serve as temporary quarters for GHQ. I approved this request today.

I devoted a third of my State of the Nation Message to the requirements of greater military effectiveness, for military initiatives are needed to buy time for our economic programs to bear fruit. The Budget that followed that Message therefore reflected this first priority. The budget for the AFP as endorsed by the Defense Department was therefore readily approved. But after the Budget was submitted to Congress, I was told that original Defense estimates nonetheless fell short of AFP requirements. The estimates were re-calculated and the addition is now the subject of a supplemental budget bill.

The soldiers are not the only public servants whose needs are urgent. But we have only so much to spend for the needs of our people.

The progress of our economy, which last Friday’s coup has undoubtedly set back severely, will answer for these other needs. If there is progress. And if our enemies will let us.

We must all work harder now to regain what we lost, and to take off again from where we were on the road to recovery.

It has seemed like one step forward, two steps back since democracy was restored in the Philippines. But we cannot give up. Our people have made so many sacrifices already. Let us take up the burden again and move forward, retracing the steps we lost, and with a stronger resolve to overcome.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].