THE PHILIPPINE ECONOMY: ONE OF 1990’s BEST PERFORMERS

Citing the economic and political gains of the country after the revolution, President Aquino does not fail to stress that Filipinos here and abroad can be very potent forces in national development. This can be done by way of investing in the Philippines, spreading good words about it, patronizing Philippine-made products, contributing to the Philippine Fund, and by being loyal to the nation they are very much a part of.

I am privileged to be the first Philippine president to visit Canada. And I am very happy to be able to share this privileged moment with my fellow Filipinos.

I came to reaffirm and, if at all possible considering the help that Canada has given us, to further strengthen the relationship between our two countries.

But I came also to be with you and to tell you, from one who is guiding our country, how things are really going over there.

For those who fled the country because of the indignity of living without rights and without freedom, your country is again what it was – the showcase of democracy in Asia. Only, I think, it is even better, because we don’t take our liberties for granted anymore. I think we have a more vigilant and concerned citizenry so that what happened before will not be repeated. No tyrant will again abuse our ignorance and imprison our spirit.

The insurgency situation has improved tremendously. Your Armed Forces are now the people’s armed forces. They have captured virtually the entire top leadership of the Communist Party and driven insurgent forces out of their old strongholds in the rural areas. It is not the end of that problem, yet. But we are way past the beginning of the end of it.

The economy has improved tremendously. I won’t give you anymore statistics than this, that from the negative 4% in 1985, which means the economy was shrinking, we attained a GNP of 6.7% in just three years. That is remarkable, when you consider that we were able to do it despite the fact that nearly half our taxes are taken away to service our foreign and domestic debts. It is like running on one leg and still going fast. Unemployment has dropped significantly.

A well-known American investment group, Merrill Lynch, predicts that the Philippine economy will be one of the best performers in the 1990s. We stand on the threshold of becoming a Newly Industrialized Country in the coming decade.

Filipinos, here and abroad, are a very potent force. They can help make this development take place sooner – by investing in the Philippines or simply by spreading the word among potential Canadian investors that something good is dawning in the Pacific and it is our country. Wouldn’t they like to be a part of it?

It is not unknown to all of you that you are ready to respond to the timely challenge of developing our country. Therefore, I would like to strengthen your concern for our countrymen, and your desire to help in the progress and prosperity of our nation.

We hope that even though you are far away, this will not be an obstacle to your unity and help for our countrymen. Many methods have been established to implement your patriotic goals:

In these matters, we have the Commission on Filipino Overseas which is ready to help you.

With your help and our efforts, the time will come when we can proudly declare our own prosperity as a nation. In that time, perhaps it will be appropriate for you to return to our country to reside here forever. Long live us all!

Maraming salamat.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].