Message of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the Business Community

[Delivered at the Philippine International Convention Center, May 5, 1987]

A REVIEW OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

President Aquino emphasizes the promotion rather than the regulation of trade and industry. For its part, the Government has restored initiative to the private sector with such measures as dismantling of monopolies and special privileges that dampened free enterprise and implementation of tax reforms aimed at more efficiency and equity. Every structure of unfair competition has been removed. Now in place are programs such as privatization, the provision of necessary infrastructure, and an efficient market information system.

The President also campaigns for Congressional and Senatorial candidates who will back up her programs. She notes that it is better for Congress and the President to have a shared vision of the country’s future and direction.

It was only five months ago when I addressed a sizeable gathering of our business community. This was at your Philippine Business Conference. Since then, there have been so many favorable economic developments; making this, perhaps, one of the most remarkable five-month periods in our economic history. The activities of our business sector have been accelerating at such a rate that I thought it would be timely to meet with you in order to review these developments and look ahead.

The bedrock of our economic policy, we had pledged, would be one of restoring to the private sector the initiative and the principal role in the development of the economy. Insofar as Government must have a role, it would be supportive, and always informed by the widest consultations possible among the sectors affected. You would be the engine of economic growth. Government might stoke the engine when it stalls, but never to the point of overheating.

To restore initiative to the private sector, we dismantled the monopolies and special privileges that had strangled trade and dampened the spirit of enterprise. In an effort to improve the much eroded purchasing power of our people, we implemented a package of tax reforms aimed at more efficiency and equity.

After judicious assessment and wide consultation, Government has spelled out its economic priorities. We would welcome substantial investments in employment-generating, export-oriented, agriculture-based and import-substituting industries. We have removed every structure of unfair competition and put in their place such programs as privatization, the provision of the necessary infrastructure, and an efficient market information system.

This is apart from Government’s own investment program in such basic services as transport, power, water supply, social infrastructure and agriculture. The aim is to stimulate demand-led growth. The Community Employment and Development Program was our response to your call for some pump-priming measures and its effects are already being felt in the economy. In fact, some economic sectors are beginning to strain with the surge in economic activity. My economic ministers have sadly advised me that this is not a sure sign of sustained growth. Well, it sure beats depression.

Our priorities call for investments that will create new jobs, and not just buy out well-established and flourishing enterprises. We need investments in those areas that can generate much needed foreign exchange, and that will put our native resources to the most efficient use.

Government is currently targetting a 33.4 percent growth in construction investment for 1987. This is up from 15 percent last year. Government expects to spend P35.5 billion in investments in the current year, and a total of P330.7 billion for the next five years. Among the programs planned is the construction of 91,800 housing units in 1987. This will benefit not only the construction and real estate industries, but also other industries related to construction.

On the other hand, the private sector is expected to increase its share of total investment in construction from 17.4 percent this year to 24 percent in 1988, or an annual average of 20 percent over the next six years.

The Department of Trade and Industry is reviewing the New Omnibus Investments Code of 1987 , which will feature a tax holiday incentive. The new code will make our incentives more competitive with those of neighboring countries. It will be much simpler to administer and understand than the former tax credit scheme, and will emphasize the promotion rather than the regulation of trade and industry.

As a further help to prospective investors, the Department of Trade and Industry and its 120 industry associations are finalizing the organization of a One-Stop Industry Center. Its aim is increased coordination in Government efforts to help trade and industry and the elimination of red tape.

It appears that everything is now in place and in motion. So much so that many sectors now speak, not of recovery, but of economic growth and accelerated development.

But the private sector should not confine its role to just investments in the economy. Much to our satisfaction, a harmonious partnership is taking shape between Government and private business, a partnership whose first expression is the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan, in the formulation of which the private sector was extensively consulted.

But the private sector’s role need not end at the policy formulation level. Its participation is even more important in the implementation of policies and programs. A number of our community service programs have been much improved by their implementation by private individuals contributing their expertise, experience and grassroots reach. We are seriously studying the use of private organizations as conduits for government-lending programs, to cut down on graft.

The efforts of non-governmental organizations, particularly the NAMFREL, the Rotary Clubs, the Jaycees, to monitor the CEDP program is an example of continuing democracy in action. We had people power to restore democracy. This is people power to keep it honest.

We remain as determined as ever to untangle the web of corruption spun by Marcos and his cronies. He is reported to have told one recent visitor in Honolulu: “Tell everyone, malakas pa si Marcos, at mayaman pa rin .” Not everyone is happy with the way we are unravelling his empire. And sometimes zeal gets the better of those particularly charged with the task of doing it. But we reiterate our commitment to restore to the people what was stolen from the people.

When I said I want Government off the backs of business, I meant honest business. I don’t want those business thieves back in this country. I don’t want them buying back, with the money they stole from us, the revitalized enterprises they plundered. That is adding insult to injury.

A week from now we shall have Senatorial and Congressional elections. In July, Congress will convene. The circle of our democratic achievements will be complete. Yet even before this event, for which our people have waited 15 years and for which so many of our loved ones and friends suffered and died, the Congress which doesn’t yet exist is being criticized. I am being rushed to legislate on a variety of subjects before Congress gets its hands on them. This is unfair. Many of those who will make it to the Senate and Congress have shown their worthiness in the long fight for Philippine freedom, when the odds were against them and commitment to the good involved the highest risk. Surely they will not fall short of the high standards they themselves have set.

While on the subject of Congressional and Senatorial elections, it has been said that I should stand above the fray and not devote time and energy to elections involving a separate branch of Government. This observation ignores the realities of power and the legitimate workings of democratic governments through the world.

The Constitution mandates a separation of the powers of Government to protect liberty, not to promote paralysis. The Constitution recognizes the desirability of an independent executive and an independent legislature working together towards a shared vision of what this country should be. In giving the veto power to the President, the Constitution even strengthens her hand against any attempt by Congress to change her policies and programs. It is better, of course, that Congress and President should be of one mind and heart with regards to the direction of the country.

It is therefore my duty as President and chief of the political movement that brought me to power and restored democracy in our land to campaign for those who will back up my programs. Let’s not kid ourselves. The opposition will be an obstructive force. Their track record shows them to be interested only in seizing power by promoting instability. They won’t hesitate to ruin the country just to get it back. Let us not forget that in 1972 they destroyed democracy in order to save it.

It has been asked: Why do I use government planes and other facilities in my campaign? I answer: because, much as our enemies would wish it, I cannot be physically divided. The President who campaigns to get the friends of her programs into Congress is the same President who is obliged to accept maximum security measures for the safety of the Republic. I have done no more, and in fact much less, than other democratic leaders before me, whether of this or of any other democracy.

This is our first election in over 15 years. I want it to be the best we have had in our history. I want it to be the model of future elections – honest, orderly and fair. I have gone around the country to campaign not only for the candidates that have pledged to support my programs but also for the cause of good elections. To that end, I have refused our candidates the use of Government resources to match those accumulated by the opposition while it was in power. I have given the opposition equal access to media, even media that is presently government-controlled, although the opposition has more money than our candidates to exploit that access. I may be sorry for this. But this is not just a campaign to get our candidates into Congress, but also an effort on my part to establish the true style of genuine elections and hopefully set the future tone of Philippine democracy.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].