Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the World Economic Forum

[Delivered in Geneva, June 14, 1988]

STARTLING POSITIVE GAINS

Twenty eight months after the Revolution, the economy bounced back to health and started its trek to recovery. The President is optimistic that we can surpass this progress if all effective challenges to democracy will be eliminated. She said that foreign investments and foreign technology must complement our efforts to achieve prosperity.

I would like to thank the World Economic Forum for organizing this conference on the Philippines. I would like to thank the participants most of all as your presence attests to the world’s continued interest in my country. I hope the afternoon session with the Philippine ministers has given you a more accurate picture of the real conditions in a country whose portrayal abroad has made Filipinos at home think it is a foreign country that is being talked about.

28 months after the Revolution sent the dictator packing out of the country he had abused and plundered, the Philippines, reports and rumors to the contrary notwithstanding, is alive and well, democracy is there to stay, and I will be there to make sure of it.

In that brief span, we restored honor to the Philippine justice system by reforming the courts, we adopted a new democratic constitution and ratified it. We elected a Congress and a Senate, and the nationwide system of local governments. In all three electoral exercises, the voter turnout was unprecedented anywhere in the world, at any time in history. And yet the country had just emerged from 15 years of corrupt and incompetent dictatorship: half the population was too young to have known any form of government other than that by fiat and terror. The turnout and the result proved the deep roots of democracy in the racial memory, and the complete ignorance of foreign analysts about the prospects of political stability in the Philippines. I am not surprised.

In the same period, the Rightwing made repeated attempts to destabilize the government by alienating the military from it and picturing the government as one of appeasement and naivete. These efforts succeeded only in frightening away foreign investments, which is a shame, but had no other effect but to convince me finally that the Rightwing had no place in our country. It is now in flight and hiding after my forces crushed their most determined and ruthless attempt to seize power last year.

Yet in this period of unwanted foreign publicity, our economy bounced back to health and started on the road to recovery. From negative economic indicators, including rate of investments, the economy made startling positive gains. Not much, of course, if you make comparisons with countries that haven’t been robbed by their governments, but in the light of our experience, the growth was a respectable one.

After all, we had inherited only devastation from Marcos: pillaged industries, bankrupt banks, a rifled treasury, and a shockingly large foreign debt with nothing productive to show for it, until we uncover and recover the man’s hidden wealth from where he has hidden it. The Philippines, which had been Asia’s second strongest economy 20 years ago, had become the Southeast Asian basketcase after 15 years of dictatorship. The economic wreckage spawned a widespread insurgency which we have finally began to turn. In two years we have recovered much lost ground.

This afternoon’s presentations explained the progress we have achieved. That progress is by no means the best we can do. We can surpass it, and we shall, given the elimination of all effective challenge to Philippine democracy from the Right, and the significant reverses suffered by the Left.

Early this year, the top leadership of the Communist insurgency was captured. Documents captured from recent urban raids have revealed a much diminished insurgent army. Credit for this goes, ironically, to our failed attempt to negotiate a peace with the insurgents. The truce I called had allowed many rebels to revisit their families and see for themselves the earnest efforts we were making, and convinced many of them to give peace another chance.

Our offer to negotiate was interpreted as surrender by the insurgent leadership until the offensives we launched corrected all misconception about our determination to achieve civil peace only on our terms, the terms of democracy.

Am I saying that the Right will not try again, or that the Left has finally laid down its arms? Certainly not. The Right will keep on threatening as its impotence increases, because threats are all that are left to it. And the left must fight because that is its militant faith, but the fighting will progressively be marginalized in the hinterlands and mountains, far from the areas of commerce, industry and agriculture.

Preparing the framework for recovery and progress was itself a very difficult task. Striking a balance between the priority of immediate relief to the people, injecting life into a listless economy, and satisfying the insistent demands of our creditors, which at times were inconsistent with each other, was an especially arduous task.

The Medium Term Philippine Development Plan has sought to address these and other problems, and has set as our primary objective, a sustained growth based on balanced agro-industrial activities. The creation of new jobs and the attraction of foreign investments became the principal elements of our strategy.

On debt repayment, we have sought and obtained the agreement of our creditors to a short breathing spell via the restructuring of a significant portion of our outstanding debts so that we can allocate more resources to poverty alleviation, and other urgent needs of our people. Yet we continue to search for fresh options that will lighten the debt burden during this critical period, and help us achieve the progress that will, in the end, better assure the fulfillment of our obligations. I hope that the explanations I have made will inspire the international financial system, represented here, to cooperate with us even more closely in finding these fresh options, and, of course, in helping us recover what we lost.

A key element of the Program is job creation on a massive scale to absorb the 750,000 new entrants to the labor force every year, not to mention the large number of the already unemployed.

This brings us to the question of labor. Here let me digress for a moment The restoration of full, genuine democracy tempted the extremists in the labor movement to test the limits of their new rights and liberties. 1986 saw a distressing increase in strikes. Our careful handling of labor unrest in the spirit of the new tolerance was taken as a sign of meekness and surrender. Our appeals for sobriety and reason were ignored. Last year, I lowered the boom on this exuberance and ordered the strict enforcement of the labor laws in the spirit of their true intent: as affording protection equally to labor and management. The number of strikes dropped by 70 percent. But there still are strikes, businesses still have labor problems, but that is only because ours will not be a slave economy, and our people shall enjoy many of the same rights, even if not yet the same prosperity, as labor in your own countries.

We shall not achieve progress by the exploitation of a labor force whose skill, industry and commitment to work, given decent treatment, are the match of any in the world. But we shall insist that once the terms of employment are accepted, they will be upheld and enforced. Industrial peace means agreement and cooperation, not the subjection of the worker or the intimidation of management. Although these are not hardnosed business concepts, we aim for progress and justice for all in a climate of freedom.

Thus, last Friday, I signed the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program the effect of which will be the progressive redistribution of land on a more equitable basis. Its higher aim, however, is greater productivity in agriculture and higher incomes for the farmers to create the markets for the industries we want to see rise up in our country.

But there are more markets within reach than the domestic in the Philippines. We are in the most promising part of the world, in the Pacific whose century is coming. Not surprisingly therefore export is a prominent component of our strategy. We have started to recover many of the markets we had lost. Still, our 18 percent growth in exports is not enough to meet the foreign exchange requirements we have projected. We have set ourselves higher targets in the expectation of making exports the source of sustained growth in the long term.

The flow of investments has increased. We are heartened to note that most of it is Filipino. This is a confident sign: those who know the country best have regained faith in its future.

We have tried to create an attractive investment climate by offering incentives, and, more effectively, by removing disincentives such as the elimination of monopolies and the withdrawal of the public sector from the economy. We have reduced red tape and other causes of delay, and adopted an import liberalization program that will enhance the efficiency of Filipino industry by exposing it to the challenge of fair foreign competition.

The construction of roads, bridges, communications is opening up more of the country for private enterprise.

The nation has put its shoulder to the wheel. The serious work has started and we invite you to join in the effort, and pitch in with the capital, and know how we need. Foreign investments and foreign technology must complement our efforts to achieve the prosperity that we can all enjoy in the country that you too will come to love.

Thank you and good evening.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].