Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Philippine Business Conference

[Delivered at the Philippine Plaza Hotel, November 11, 1988]

FOR GREATER DECENTRALIZATION

The President is gratified to know that the thrust of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry is the countryside because this is also the special concern of her government. This is indicated by the CORD program where each region has a cabinet member assigned to see to its specific needs. She assures the group that their recommendations for greater doses of decentralization will be seriously considered particularly on minimum wages, administrative regulations and law enforcements.

The participants of this conference conclude today a year’s work on the challenge of rural development and progress. I congratulate you on the recommendations you have made and on the democratic methods by which you arrived at them. I can appreciate your satisfaction with the work you have done, for it was no easy task culling the concerns and refining the recommendations of the business conferences you held in all the regions.

When the Board of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry paid me a visit last February, they advised me that the thrust of the Chamber would be in the countryside. This was gratifying for the government’s first priority had become, after the restoration of democratic rights, the equally democratic enjoyment of material progress by the people — most of whom are in the countryside.

That the countryside is our special concern is shown by the organization of our government. Your regional business conferences have become familiar with the CORD program, where each region has a Cabinet member assigned to track and see to its specific needs. Mr. Victor Lim tells me that this arrangement has made a major difference in the productivity of the regions. Rural projects and programs given high priority by the Regional Development Councils are seen to get the fullest support from the government. So far as I can tell, the CORD program has achieved what was intended: to open a two-way channel of communication between the seat of power and the people, whose welfare and progress are its first responsibility.

Yet, I have been in power long enough to know that you can never relax your vigilance, we cannot take anything for granted. Checks and double-checks must constantly be made to keep everyone on their toes. Thus, in addition to CORD, I have placed the Cabinet Action Committee on Implementation Assistance or CACIA to audit the performance of government in the regions. The CACIA has made weekly visits to the provinces to evaluate the programs being implemented and correct their mistakes and shortcomings with the utmost speed.

So, whatever anyone says, we are confident that the system for effective government action is well in place, and it has been producing results on which I shall report more fully on the occasion of the One Thousand Days of the Aquino administration.

Let me turn now to some of your recommendations.

We see great merit in the fostership program whereby business corporations may adopt a province or municipality as the focus of its countryside investments. The incentive will be in the form of tax exemptions. I think this was inspired by the Pook Batayan concept of asking private sector help to alleviate traffic congestion in Manila. Let me say, however, that rural development will certainly be a more complex and expensive proposition than traffic decongestion. Let me also express the hope that this extension of the Pook Batayan concept will work even better than the original.

I shall give this proposal to the Cabinet Assistance System for study, after which they will submit their recommendations to me. In the meantime, you should convince your business colleagues to start the program even before the tax incentives are in place. For the best incentive is already there: progress and material well-being in the countryside are the best insurance against instability and revolution. Consider that carefully.

You recommend a further decentralization of government services. I could not agree with you more. Which is why as early as May 30, this year, I issued Memorandum Circular No. 63 launching four decentralization projects, namely Davao del Norte, Laguna, Negros Occidental and Tarlac. A Cabinet Action Committee on Decentralization was created to formulate plans and guidelines to implement this policy.

I must tell you, however, that, based on our experiences, administrative decentralization and even central government initiatives are not enough. We are doing our part. The DBP has launched its Proactive Development Fund, which opens loan windows to worthwhile but undercollateralized projects. The PNB has its Small Enterprises Loan Program. There are several more credit programs. Yet, all together, they barely scratch the surface of rural requirements.

We need you, the private sector, to start that engine of the economy that you got back together with your freedom. We need that engine running in such investment-starved areas like Regions I, II, V, VIII and XII. Without those economic commitments, decentralization will mean nothing more than the central government turning its back on the autonomous problems of the regions as no longer its concern.

I am pleased to note that you have made some investment, at least of your time and talents. I mention specially the contribution of managerial expertise in the Agricultural and Fishery Councils. Your participation in the People’s Economic Councils has been equally useful and praised, particularly by the Department of Trade and Industry.

The general theme of your other recommendations may be summed up in the words: Red Tape. Not just less of it, but eliminate it altogether.

That is a dream. For as long as there is need for government, which means for as long as we live in an imperfect world, there will always be bureaucrats and regulations. At most, we can strive to make bureaucrats and regulations more useful and less frustrating in the daily activities of the people. The process of elimination will be gradual. Much ground that is gained will be lost again, because regulations that promote progress today, may retard it tomorrow. What is important is that we do not stop listening to the complaints, nor stop trying to improve.

The Board of Investments has streamlined procedures and reduced processing time from 44 to 24 days, and the number of forms to be filled out from seven to one.

Your suggestions of greater doses of decentralization will be seriously considered, particularly on such matters as minimum wages, administrative regulations, and law enforcement. The process of preparing budgets can only improve by closer contact with the economic and political leaderships of the communities those budgets are designed to serve, allowing these communities to define priorities.

Let me conclude by expressing again my appreciation for your efforts; for the great concern you have shown in the vital area of countryside development. With government and the private sector working hand in hand, I am sure that more successes will crown our joint efforts. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].