PC-INP Day August 8, 1988

A LOOK AT TWO MAJOR FORCES

The President is not about to overlook the achievements of these two major forces. On their anniversaries, she discourses on problems in the areas of carnapping, gambling and drug addiction among the youths. What is more important to her is putting a complete stop to the participation of military and police personnel in these criminal activities.

The PC and the PC-INP celebrate today their 87th and 13th anniversaries with good reason to be proud. All the carping critics who never risked their lives in combat cannot diminish one bit what you have achieved this year, which I have called a turning point in the Republic’s war against the insurgency. There is no need to list your achievements, and that of the Armed Forces as a whole, in order to answer these critics. It is enough to recall that the Communist threat became a military giant when they were in charge – a giant this Administration has cut off at the knees. It is not now – but in their time – that the AFP had years of defeats and retreats as never before in our military annals. We had been written off by the rest of the world as the next Vietnam.

No, we do not have to remind anyone that it was under this Administration that the leadership of the new Khmer Rouge was captured.

It is not in the tradition of the Philippine military and police to celebrate their great occasions with self-praise but rather with the acceptance of new challenges. There are many new and grave challenges before us.

Our military achievements can, in no way, make up for our comparatively poor performance in bringing to our people the most basic security against criminality and anarchy; against threats to their families and properties; and against the near-total breakdown of traffic control that has all but paralyzed the center of the Philippine economy.

Carnapping continues to be a major syndicated crime that blackens even the record of our military and police. In the first quarter of this year, carnapping hit a high of 6.6 vehicles per day. The average has dropped to 3.3. I do not know if that is due to our renewed vigilance or a slackening in the market demand for stolen vehicles. It is bad enough that this is happening because of our apparent inability to arrest the criminal elements responsible. But it is absolutely intolerable that certain elements in the military and police have been implicated.

Another area is illegal gambling. Again, I must congratulate the PC and the INP for the increased number of arrests in gambling raids. Yet again, we must acknowledge the general impression that this criminal activity enjoys the patronage and protection of military scalawags and especially public officials. I have received a report that an anti-gambling raiding party was actually arrested and jailed for carrying out their duties.

Drugs are another problem. Here I must commend the PC and the INP for the great number of arrests effected, even as I deplore the justice system which has allowed the cases to drag on endlessly without resolution. The almost complete ineffectiveness of the judicial and prosecutorial arms of government in drug enforcement is matched by its near total paralysis in all other cases, so much so that billions of pesos of assets have been tied up in litigation for decades.

Failure to give justice to the victims is as much a denial of due process, as punishing the innocent by haste.

More important to me than bringing down the average of stolen vehicles, curbing illegal gambling, getting drugs off the streets and the mouths of our children, is putting a complete stop to the participation of military and police personnel in these criminal activities. Because what is at stake here is the very bond of our people’s allegiance to the idea of government and democracy.

I will make no more promises to our people. But I hope I will be able to report to them very soon that this has ended, or that those who have failed the people have been separated from the service.

An important element in the drive against crime is gun control. I won’t bother to describe the obvious: more and more guns are being seen in public; more and more powerful weapons are being used in crimes.

The laws against illegal possession are among the most stringent in our arsenal of legal remedies. I want to emphasize again that no one, but no one, is authorized to carry firearms unless he has a license and permit-to-carry issued only by the Chief of Constabulary. I hereby instruct the Chief of Constabulary to supply me with an updated list of all such licenses and permits, however long it may be. This is necessary so that anyone apprehended with an unlicensed firearm will not suddenly be able to produce a license and permit. Mission orders can be issued only by the Chief of Staff and by those specifically authorized by him, and by the Office of the President. A similar list of mission order holders must be submitted by the Chief of Staff.

I will not have this government and this army authorizing crime.

The war against the insurgents must now be pursued with greater vigor and vigilance. A desperate enemy is the most dangerous and brutal. As it loses all hope of victory, the insurgency will opt for chaos and violent anarchy regardless of the outcome. In short, the Communists intends to punish the people for their failure and to bury this nation in the graveyard of their failed ambition. This will not happen, whatever it takes.

In the less dramatic but equally important area of traffic control, several schemes will be tried. I have cut through the tangle of bureaucracy and proposed 18 pilot traffic centers to be operated with private sector assistance in order to decongest major traffic bottlenecks in the city. Let us wait for the results and be prepared to take even more sweeping measures to halt the chaos in our streets.

These are the challenges to mark this joint celebration; challenges that I know you will meet with the same distinction as your unappreciated successes. I will be with you all the way, supporting you every way I can.

This will be one of the few joint celebrations of the PC-INP left. Soon, depending on the Congress, a national police force will stand here before me to face the challenges of the future. Many of you will be among them. Our confidence in the ability of the Philippine National Police to fulfill its obligations rests on the performance that you, the PC and the INP, have shown and will continue to show until the day of its creation.

A measure of the confidence that I feel is our promotion of a total of 1,330 AFP and 751 INP officers to the next higher rank since January, 1988.

Congratulations. I wish you all the best.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library