Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Congratulating the Ten Outstanding Young Men Awardees of 1986

[ Released on February 4, 1988 ]

REWARDING EXCELLENCE

The times and the pressing task at hand – national recovery – call for acts of patriotism from each and every Filipino. President Aquino congratulates the TOYM awardees for their achievements in their respective fields and for their contributions towards national recovery.

T-O-Y-M, 1986, I understand, scored many firsts. This is the first time TOYM has two women awardees in a single year, and it is the third year in a row when a woman is cited. I see the men have finally realized that the handwriting on the wall is a woman’s.

It won’t be long before you’ll just have to call this award, T-O-Y-F, or Ten Outstanding Young Filipinos.

It won’t be just to avoid being sexist.

Because the trend now, is to be Filipino – in your convictions and in your real commitments. Regardless of sex or age, the times and the pressing task at hand – national recovery – call for acts of patriotism from each and every Filipino.

The judges have chosen wisely because it appears that the awardees’ respective spheres of excellence represent our highest priorities.

There is the area of law with Chavez, although he thinks that this principal asset is his unflagging fidelity to his wife, despite his uncanny resemblance to Richard Gere. But his real achievements, for which he is here honored, are his brave defense of human rights under the dictatorship, and his brilliant defense of constitutional principles under the democracy.

There is order with Colonel Coronel, the precondition of sustained development.

There is cultural understanding with Lopez-Gonzaga, the foundation of peace among the diverse cultures that make up our nation. There was no selection just to fill the space. You, who stand here represent the near unanimous choice of the judges. And those judges are some of the most notable men and women in our community. There was little argument, and a great deal of concurrence about your high and remarkably early achievements. I congratulate you on the honor and that has been conferred on you.

May I also express my sympathy for you. You have set the hardest standard to meet – that of your own early achievements was essentially yourselves: your dedication, the skills you developed, and the talents God graced you with at birth. You won’t lose them so long as you remain true to yourselves.

I congratulate you again, and wish you all the best.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library