DEMOCRACY’S FRONTLINE FIGHTERS

On the 2nd anniversary of the PSG, President Aquino cites and thanks the men and women behind the PSG who have offered their services to protect her and the heart of the Republic. Truly, they deserve a lifelong gratitude.

On its first anniversary, I called the Presidential Security Group “the armor protecting the Heart of Republic.” Some people said that I was overdoing it, and charged my zealousness to special friendship.

Not so. If I have any gift for survival, it is my ability to read the character of people. And I had read courage, steadfastness, and absolute loyalty and protectiveness towards me in the ranks of the Presidential Security. Even as I read preparedness, superb intelligence, and decisiveness, in their officers. I had every confidence that when the test came, the PSG would prove equal to the generous praise I had given.

The test came on August 28 last year. The enemy chose a moment of greatest vulnerability. I had scheduled a regional visit to Central Luzon for the following day. A sizable portion of the PSG had therefore to be deployed in the area beforehand.

At this time, the head of my security had already received intelligence of a massive strike by rebel troops against the seat of Government. Yet I was determined to go on with the regional visit.

Clearly, the PSG would have to make up for their lesser number with greater skill and daring. For the first would have to begin and end right here in Malacañang. I had no intention of leaving the field to my enemies.

In the event, the PSG fought like tigers, fell like heroes, and repelled the attack. The stand they made was so valiant, the rebels did not think of trying again.

This was where the coup began and effectively ended, for without taking my life there was no way for the coup to succeed.

My instincts were right in my selection of the men and women who would guard my person, who would shield the heart of the Republic from all its enemies.

On its second anniversary, the PSG is still a young force in terms of years, but in terms of experience, they are tried and tested troops. Few Palace guards anywhere can boast as many challenges as you have faced, nor as a great victory as you have won. Recent history is littered with murdered Presidents, with slain hopes of peace and democracy, and with the lame excuses of their security. But here you showed that soldiers know how to fight and die for their leader.

I thank you, for your sacrifices: for the long tedious hours of guarding and for the flashing acts of courage. I thank you for my life and for the life of our democracy. Congratulations to you all. For all my admiration and respect for your fighting qualities, I hope that this year you will not have to impress me again. Thank you and good day.

After my speech this morning, what can I add except to say that the PSG can walk on water?

Well, whether you can walk on water or not, it’s been proved that you can watch like hawks and fight like tigers to protect me and my family, the Presidency and Philippine democracy.

My children and I are deeply grateful and appreciative of the protection you have given us, and take this opportunity to raise a toast, in which I ask everyone to join me:

To democracy’s frontline fighters, the shield of the Presidency – the Presidential Security Group, and to Colonel Voltaire Gazmin – the smartest decision I ever made – my profound admiration and the nation’s undying gratitude for your courage and loyalty, for the great deeds that you have done, for the care and protection you have given to me and my family.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].