Environmentalists Malacañang July 11, 1988

THE OTHER FILIPINO

According to the President, the environmentalists are the other kind of Filipino, those whose love of country grows with the sacrifices and contributions they make to its strength and progress and to the preservation of its beauty.

One of the most encouraging signs of the times is the near universal concern for the environment, and the growing number of Filipinos who have committed themselves to its protection. I regard this as a flowering of patriotism. For the object of environmental concern, which is the very land itself, makes it the most fundamental form of patriotism. Indeed, no Filipino should hold back from a total commitment to save the beauty of his country, the richness of its earth, and the purity of its waters for himself and his posterity.

Yet there are those among us who lack this patriotism. They are the ones who have been stripping our country of its natural wealth, leaving nothing for the future but the destitution and ruin that we are already experiencing.

These are the main culprits, yet the focus is always on the poor kaingero . But the random destruction of the kaingin system is merely the revenge of those who have been neglected by their country, even as the floods that sweep away our harvests are the last link in the chain of corruption that has characterized the management of our forest resources. So it is with the drought that inevitably follows. The kaingero will learn civic responsibility only after we show that the big-time ravishers of the environment have been duly punished and their activities curtailed.

I am pleased and honored to have you here because you are the other kind of Filipino. The kind whose love of country grows with the sacrifices and contributions they make to its strength and progress, and to the preservation of its beauty and potentially inexhaustible productivity. The government’s environmental program has benefitted greatly from your insights on how we can use our natural resources without destroying the environment, on how we can meet the needs of the present without surrendering the future. For the program derives its strength from people like yourselves.

I thank you for your presence here and commend you again for the noble work you have been doing to keep our country whole. Good day and God bless you!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library