Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Council of the Laity Magnificat Awarding Ceremony

[Delivered on December 4, 1987]

PEACE FROM THE HEART

The President presents the Magnificat Award to Canon Rene Laurentin of Paris, an outstanding Marian scholar and theologian who has dedicated his entire priestly life to Marian studies and whose scholarship and wisdom has enlightened and enriched the church.

I am pleased to welcome the heads, (Cardinal Sin, Ambassador Dee), organizers and staff, of the first International Theological and Pastoral Conference on the Two Hearts, of Jesus and Mary.

In a special way, May I welcome one hundred foreign visitors and guests, especially the speakers and resource persons. It is significant that many of you, who have come for the first time to this country, have come in connection with a major religious event which centers on the themes of UNITY, SELF-DEDICATION, and PEACE: themes particularly meaningful for our nation today.

We are informed that the Holy Father has sent a special Apostolic Letter to this Conference. This is a recognition of its importance as an event for the worldwide Church. The Holy Father underlines the inner significance of the conference in relation to peace in the world. With the Holy Father we believe that no authentic peace will come except “from within”, ie., from the heart . There has to be a conversion to the values of truth, justice, freedom and love. The hearts of men and women, in private and in public life, must learn to make these values their own. Pope John 23rd spoke of these four as the great pillars of society; he spoke of a society

grounded in truth guided by justice realized in freedom perfected by love . . . and thus flowering in peace

True, human hearts find it so hard to be unwaveringly committed to these great ideals of human community. And yet without them, an authentic and enduring peace is impossible. We, as people of faith, believe that it is by God’s grace alone, by God’s power alone, that these values can become truly part of the life of persons, part of the life of communities.

In this I see the relevance of your conference not for the Church alone, but for the larger community. I have myself so often said, “We must work with all our might, we must pray with all our hearts, but always we must leave “space” for God to work in.” If I understand it rightly, your conference was concerned precisely to widen,” I join myself then, to your prayers and your resolve in this. May your conference bear ample fruitfulness in our country in the months and years to come.

It is with a special joy that I have gladly consented to present the MAGNIFICAT AWARD to Canon Rene Laurentin of Paris. The Council of the Laity has, I believe, done well to confer this award on one who is regarded by many as the outstanding Marian scholar and theologian in the entire Catholic Church today, one who has dedicated his entire priestly life to Marian studies, and whose scholarship and wisdom has enlightened and enriched the entire church. We are honored by Canon Laurentin’s presence, as also by the presence of Fr. Michael O’Carroll of Dublin, Msgr. Luciano Guerra of Fatima, and all the other speakers and visiting resource persons. We trust our visitors are having a pleasant visit with us, and we hope they will want to return.

We may be going through difficult times, but our people are going through them, I believe, with much faith and courage and trust.

Thank you for your visit. I ask you to pray for our people, and for us who try to serve them. May you have a blessed Advent season and a truly happy Christmas.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library