Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the 88th anniversary of the Supreme Court

[Delivered on June 9, 1989]

IMPROVING THE JUDICIAL PROCESS

As men and women of the highest integrity, intelligence and wisdom and with a new Code of Judicial Conduct, the President believes that proper deportment of judges in the disposition of justice may reflect more honor on the Bench and generate a greater respect for the law throughout our society.

According to a constitutional law expert, the President – equally with the Court – may interpret the Constitution in her own lights as part of her duty to uphold and defend it. The Court owes her interpretation the deference due to a co-equal and preeminent political body. Naturally I am extremely pleased with this reasoning, but I am not kidding myself. The last word in the Constitution and the laws is still the Court’s.

The theory is that all three branches are equal. The reality is that one is more equal than the others when it comes to the Constitution. Therefore, from an equal to one who is more, may I as President extend to the Supreme Court my best wishes and our country’s congratulations on its 88th anniversary.

It is not meet for me to lecture the Court and the vast judicial system on duties it knows far better than I. Yet it behooves me at this juncture to express to you the growing concern of our people over the deterioration of the image, not to say the substance, of Philippine justice.

The greatest peril we face is not in the economy nor from any external threat, but in the disenchantment of a people with their own society when that society denies them justice.

We are troubled to hear it said in this country justice cannot be had, unless it is bought. That, as usual, is an exaggeration. Yet it proves the case that the just and honorable work done by the vast majority of our judges is easily undone by the handful of exceptions to the general integrity and competence of the courts. Yet this false but spreading view of a corrupt justice system, may spell the end of the democratic faith that was born with our freedom three years ago.

I would not raise this problem publicly for it reflects sadly on us all. Yet, standing before men and women of the highest integrity, intelligence, and wisdom in our country, I must raise it. For I believe that you, if anyone, can do the most about it.

The value of assets immobilized in litigation is already beyond estimation. The insecurity of property rights because of judicial delay has had a far more chilling effect on further investments in our economy than the insurgency. We are distressed to hear people say that if they cannot get justice from the government, they will take it into their own hands.

The spread of common crimes undermines our sense of security at home and in the streets. The failure to punish corporate crimes undermines our faith in economic opportunities and in the general fairness of our society and government.

The structural weakness of our economy, the legacy of debt, the corrupt values that linger from the past regime, all these continue to take a terrible toll on our country. Yet the heaviest toll is exacted by one simple act repeated again and again throughout our society: a man is denied justice, not in the streets, but in the courts.

We–the Court and the Executive–share the primary responsibility of doing justice to the people. Equally, I might add. The new Constitution gives the Judiciary the fiscal and administrative independence to pursue its mandate free from any influence, other than that which the judges invite. The Court has used this independence and discretion most widely towards the solution of the problems of our justice system.

The problem of delay has been seriously tackled by the Court. The judges have been put on notice to dispose of cases within defined periods. The judges, I understand, would like to serve the same notice on the Supreme Court.

A new Code of Judicial Conduct has set forth in unmistakable terms the proper deportment of judges in the dispensation of justice, so that their work may reflect more honor on the Bench and generate a greater respect for the law throughout our society.

We hope that the Executive has done its part to help. We have tried to speed up budgetary allocations for court house construction and for the relocation of the high Court to premises commensurate with its high dignity and vastly expanded responsibilities. The help comes late, but better than never. For too long, the temples of Philippine justice–our courthouses–have reflected the shameful neglect that justice has suffered in our country. We hope that the new allocations and constructions will reflect the first priority we have put on justice.

Infrastructure is basic. We must show towards the work of justice the respect it deserves. Yet a more difficult job remains: improving the judicial process and the men who run it so that justice may come through more easily.

This is largely the work and responsibility of the Honorable Court. The best that I can offer would be, not suggestions, but rather this commitment: I stand foursquare behind your efforts and will do all I can as Chief Executive to make them succeed. Give the word and it shall be done, if it lies in my power. The fate of the nation hangs on your success. That is the sum of what I have tried to say in these remarks.

Congratulations and thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].