106th Anniversary MWSS September 8, 1988

WATER FOR ALL

The President greets the men and women behind the MWSS on their 106th anniversary and urges them to continue the commitment of giving the people clean, potable and safe water.

As you celebrate the 106th Anniversary of Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System, it is good to bear in mind that it is given only to a few government agencies to observe over a century of service to the people.

If your corporate life has spanned the different political structures of our nation, it is because you deal with that precious commodity, water. Water that is vital to life and health. Vital to trees and crops. Vital to industry and development.

I take this opportunity to tell you that providing the people with clean, potable and safe water is a major thrust of my administration.

As you may know, as of the end of 1987, only about 63% of the total population of the country had access to water supply systems. The service area coverage included 86% in Metro Manila and its adjoining areas, 55% in other urban areas and 62% in the rural areas.

So the rest of the population, or approximately 37%, still depend on water from open dug wells, rainwater cisterns, lakes and streams, most of which are of doubtful quality.

It is for this sector that I launched the Tulungan sa Tubigan program. With the indispensable help of the private sector represented by the Philippine Business for Social Progress, we have put up 425 water projects in 15 provinces which will benefit 31,000 families.

Reflecting the high priority that my administration accords to the water sector, we have allocated the amount of P28.35 B to fund the water supply and sanitation program for the period 1987 to 1992. This is embodied in the Medium-Term Development Plan of the Philippines.

Likewise, Congress has responded to the constitutional mandate to provide basic social services, particularly safe and adequate water supply for all Filipinos.

Senate Bill No. 47 which was later converted to Senate Resolution No. 13 strongly urges the Department of Public Works and Highways to undertake a comprehensive feasibility study for the construction of water wells and the development of springs in all barangays. To the same effect is House Bill No. 3282.

As you are aware, the MWSS is now part of the Multi-agency Task Force created to implement this directive.

I am pleased to know that the Angat Water Supply Optimization Project, which we have just launched, will serve an additional four million people, while the Manila Water Supply Rehabilitation Project II will benefit about a million people. On the other hand, the Cubao Pumping Station, which we have just inaugurated, will increase the water pressure in 11 areas in Quezon City benefiting 350,000 people. Because these are costing the government several billion pesos, I am pleased to note that under the leadership of Administrator Luis V. Z. Sison, you have increased your water bill collection by 23% and your billing efficiency by 16%.

I congratulate you all once again on your anniversary. Let us continue our cooperation to provide our countrymen with clean and uninterrupted water supply.

Thank you all very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].