Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the Safety for the Workingman

[Delivered at the Philippine Occupational Safety and Health Center, Diliman, Quezon City, March 12, 1987]

SAFETY FOR THE WORKINGMAN

The Philippine Occupational Safety and Health Center is a manifestation of the Aquino Administration’s commitment to provide for the safety and well-being of the people. The worker’s health and safety must not be sacrificed for progress and the government is determined to reduce the incidence of industrial accidents.

Today we break ground for the Philippine Occupational Safety and Health Center. This ceremony expresses our double intent: to achieve progress for our nation and provide for the safety and well-being of our people, especially the workingman, on whom that progress so much depends.

We shall not buy progress at the price of the safety of our workers. That determination is what this Center symbolizes: our care and concern for the workingman.

It is a determination that is obviously shared by our Japanese brothers, who have contributed so handsomely to this project. Even as we encourage and hope for increased Japanese investments in our country, we are deeply touched by this Japanese investment in the safety of our people.

Progress has its costs. Every year, millions of men and women throughout the world are killed or maimed because of occupational hazards. The ILO estimates that 50 million accidents occur at work sites year after year. That is 160,000 a day. It is obviously worse in developing countries.

In our country, one out of 29 workers are victims of industrial accidents. And these are only the reported cases. Progress indeed has its costs. But we are determined to cut them.

To the Japanese who share that determination with us, may I express the gratitude of the Filipino worker and his government. May I express equal appreciation for the men and women of the Department of Labor and Employment who worked so hard to make this project happen. This is patriotism: not to talk love of country but to work quietly for the safety and well-being of one’s people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].