CANADA, A GENTLE GIANT

Canadians have been good to the Philippines. In spite of the absence of historic ties and the distance separating Canada and the Philippines, it is remarkable that Canada has extended its assistance. Canada is the image of uprightness, caring and peace. The President hopes that this visit signals the beginning of a new, more meaningful chapter in Philippine-Canadian relations.

Mr. Prime Minister, allow me first to thank you for the extremely warm hospitality you have extended to me and my party. The most descriptive word for your hospitality and the friendliness of the Canadian people is “Filipino”. In the future, when my countrymen entertain me in their accustomed manner, I shall say only, You have given me a Canadian welcome. And they will take it as the highest compliment one could give, for I shall tell them of how well you have received us here.

Canada has been a good friend of the Philippines. Canadian assistance has been quite substantial over the years, and, more importantly, consistently wise in its application. The generosity of this country is all the more remarkable given the lack of long and direct historic ties between Canada and the Philippines. Such disinterestedness is rare and must be rooted in a special ability to sympathize with the human condition everywhere and in an acute moral sense that is not diminished by distance.

On the contrary, the deep impression Canada has made on the world has been that of a gentle hand of caring and of a soothing voice of peace. Yet these attributes spring astonishingly from a fund of strength that might have been put to selfish and profitable purpose. For it is remarkable, given its great and well-deserved martial renown, how much this nation is given to peace at home and abroad.

We hear it said that Canadians are upright, hardworking, civic-spirited, but too inward looking. Yet these days, many of you wear a red flower in memoriam. I passed by vermilion fields of poppies in Europe and remembered the war poem we learned at school. I was seeing not just a wonder of nature but a fitting memorial to a wonder of man — his ability to sacrifice. But it dawns on me now that I had also seen a part of Europe that shall be forever Canada.

History has had its usual empires of greed and national aggrandizement. Through its international commitments to world peace, human rights, fairness among nations, through the sacrifice of many of her sons, Canada has carved out an empire of right and a dominion of caring that would — but for her modesty — claim the undying gratitude of each and everyone of us.

I leave Canada with the wise insights that its leaders have shared with me, with fond memories that will make our friendship yet stronger. I leave also with a sense of a new, and even more meaningful chapter opening in Philippine-Canadian relations, given the special initiatives we have made. These initiatives will be followed up by Philippine missions to Canada to pursue the possibilities we have seen for greater economic cooperation between our countries.

Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Mulroney, ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast: to Queen Elizabeth the Second, Queen of Canada, a long and happy reign over a great and good country.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].