CFM National Convention Heroes Hall, Malacañang November 28, 1987

NO UNITY WITHOUT GENUINE RENEWAL

It is pleasing to note that the theme for this year’s convention is “Unity and Renewal.” There is an urgent need for unity in our nation and we cannot hope to have a lasting unity without genuine renewal. No genuine social and political renewal can ever take place without renewal of the person and this shaping and re-shaping of the person should first take place within the family.

Before events swept me into this office I now occupy, I was a housewife, a woman who had made the care of her husband and children her main occupation. It was a task I gladly took on, for it had not seemed then a duty. It was work that instead gave me great joy and fulfillment, even if, because of the demands on Ninoy’s time, the duties of parenting fell mainly on my shoulders. But those days are behind me now, and as I have said time and again, there can be no turning back.

But even as I perform the duties of president and commander-in-chief, at the end of the day, I revert to Cory Aquino, mother, and grandmother. And it is within this loving circle of my family that I find renewal and strength. Which is why I feel such a close kinship with the couples, the solo parents, and your children here today.

I am especially pleased to take note of the theme you have chosen for this year’s convention, which is “Unity and Renewal.”

The events of the recent past have shown there is an urgent need for unity in our nation. Twenty-one months after the events at EDSA, we find our nation wracked by dissent and division. Threats not only to our government, but to our democratic ideals.

The Filipino people have proven impervious so far to these divisive elements, yet there persists a niggling sense of national unease. We cannot hope to have a lasting unity without genuine renewal . During the campaign for the presidency, I made a commitment to restore the tenets of public service and public accountability in government. I had hoped to serve notice on the grafters and corrupt officials within our ranks that their days were numbered, because I would not tolerate their putrid presence. But government by example and dictum has proven a puny weapon against their entrenched ways. Which is why we have strived to clean up the ranks of the public service and bureaucracy even more vigorously, with the appointment of men and women of proven integrity and dedication.

But we seek renewal not just in government, for we in the public service do not exist in a vacuum. We operate within a society, and the men and women who serve in government take their signals from the citizens they serve. They would, I suppose, be less brazen or cavalier about corruption, if they knew society would not tolerate it.

Our search for renewal, then, should not stop at merely cleansing the ranks of civil servants. The entire fabric of Philippine society needs not just laundering and repair, but perhaps re-weaving as well, changing ways we relate to one another, our attitudes towards government and civic responsibility, our sense of justice, our spirit of nationhood.

But to re-weave the tangled threads of our social fabric, we must work on the individual filaments. For no genuine social and political renewal can ever take place without renewal of the person. And where else does the shaping and re-shaping of the person take place than within the family?

This is where organizations like the Christian Family Movement could prove most helpful in our task of nation-building. You have made it your mission, as your statement of purpose says, to “promote the human and Christian values of the family, so that it may become in the community a force that forms persons, transmits the faith and through its members, is committed to the total development of family and community.”

I commend you for your programs reaching out not just to every member of the family, but to all kinds of families. I am especially pleased at your Solo Parents program. Being a solo parent myself, I know full well how solace can be provided only by those who have shared the bittersweet experience of loving and then losing. And how strength can be derived from those who have survived the loss and have gone on living full lives, not just for the “sake of the children,” but more important for themselves.

I am also told you have begun a program for wives and husbands of overseas workers. These men and women toiling in foreign lands truly deserve the nation’s gratitude. The amounts they pour into our economy, by way of precious dollars earned by their sweat and paid for by their separation from those they love, have provided our country a buffer against total economic disaster. And I am truly happy to see how the CFM has taken as one of its programs, the task of looking after the spouses and families left behind. That is the least that society and the government owes them.

But let me add that what truly heartens me about the Christian Family Movement is its firm commitment to providing a social dimension to all your activities. For as I have said earlier, of what good to a nation are strong and happy families if they, like the children in our analogy, only end up fighting one another? Beyond your marriage and family enrichment programs, you have placed CFM squarely in the center of the movement for change and social restructuring, which will in the final reckoning, be your source of strength and continuity.

For my part, I have strived, from the very start of my administration, to make the family, and family-centered values, an integral part of government policy and programs.

Earlier this year, I signed the Family Code, which seeks to attune our laws governing relationships between and among spouses, parents, and children to present conditions and changing mores of Filipino society.

The majority of CFM couples and families belong to the more comfortable segment of society. In this sense you have much to lose, but also much to share.

I ask you to consider sharing not just of your time and treasure, which you already do through your CFM involvement, but, as with the Biblical widow, to share of your substance. In our context, I ask you to commit yourselves to building a truly just, equitable and human society.

And lest you readily assent to these beautiful words, let me remind you what they could entail:

* Many of you are employers. Justice, and the papal exhortations, ask you to pay your workers not just a legal wage, not just a living wage, but a family living wage. Which means, paying a worker enough to provide for his family’s basic survival needs, plus education, leisure, medical care, and savings.

* Some of you may be landowners. We have recently promulgated (or are about to promulgate) an agrarian reform law that seeks to redistribute ownership of land and its fruits among a greater number. I ask not only that you throw your full support behind this program which I am convinced could end the age-old cycle of poverty and dependence in the Philippine rural heart-land. I also ask that those of you who receive remuneration for the lands re-distributed to your tenants, re-distribute this wealth, in turn, among people you will employ, re-channeling the wealth you have reaped from the land into economic and business activity that will further fuel our growth.

These are but two examples of what are demanded of you as citizens who profess to believe in the Christian ideals of justice and peace, and commit themselves to seeing them translated into everyday reality. I hope I have not already frightened some of you away.

Thank you for inviting me to share these thoughts and challenges with you. Congratulations and my best wishes for the success of your National Convention. May we as a nation, find unity and renewal soon.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library