AGRICULTURE: THE NATION’S LIFEBLOOD

Agriculture takes priority in the efforts towards national economic recovery. This priority follows the Aquino Administration’s main objective of alleviating poverty. Among the administration’s achievements in agriculture are the following: the liberalization of the market, the stabilization of the prices of grains, the rationalization of taxes and tariffs, and the provision of agricultural credit.

May I first congratulate the Fair’s organizers.

I welcome the holding of this Fair for it emphasizes our determination that agriculture shall be the lead sector in national economic recovery.

The highest priority given to agriculture follows from our first objective in government: the alleviation of mass poverty in the countryside where the vast majority of Filipinos live. Our aim in a short phrase is: To make farming pay for the farmer.

We are counting on the Department of Agriculture to provide the services and prepare the necessary policies to achieve this goal.

Some of the Department’s policy recommendations have already been adopted, such as; the liberalization of the market, the stabilization of the prices of grains, the rationalization of taxes and tariffs, and the adequate provision of agricultural credit.

We destroyed the agricultural monopolies that strangled the spirit of initiative and enterprise in the agricultural sector. We have returned the importation of wheat, wheat flour, and soybean meal to private business. We have curtailed corn imports until local corn becomes competitive in the world market. We have decontrolled the fertilizer trade. And, as a result, the competition has grown in that sector. With competition, prices have dropped. Bad for the fertilizer importer and dealer, but good for the farmer.

On grain prices, the Department has developed a stabilization scheme to support farmgate prices in surplus regions and stabilize them in the cities. Part of this scheme is the direct linkage of farmers and consumers. I congratulate both the Big Integrators and Farmers Organizations who are involved in this effort.

The Department’s policy proposals to lower the prices of farm inputs and increase the prices of farm products are being reviewed. As recommended, we have abolished export taxes, lifted the copra export ban, reduced sales taxes on fertilizers and pesticides, and eliminated the ten peso surcharge on fertilizer which was being collected to save one fertilizer company. We also liberalized the importation of fertilizer grades.

As for agricultural credit, we are about to complete a rehabilitation package for a select number of rural banks. Other proposals of the Department are the consolidation of loan funds for specific commodities under the Comprehensive Agricultural Loan Fund or CALF, which I hope does not grow into a milking cow.

These are only some of the policy proposals of the Department that government has adopted. Let me say that the Department of Agriculture enjoys my greatest confidence in the integrity and competence of its leadership, in the wisdom of its policies.

I have a pragmatic turn of mind. I have little patience or respect for endless theories. I shall involve myself deeply in agriculture because here the payoff can be immediate. We can see our investment in the sector reflected quickly in improved living standards for our people.

Agriculture is our first priority and our last fallback. Whatever happens, a successful agriculture means that our people will never go hungry, will always be well-fed and therefore able to keep working for a better tomorrow. Agriculture is our nation’s lifeblood, whose vigor it is your special duty and privilege to protect. Keep up the good work. You are Cory’s special battalion in the fight for national recovery.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January 16 – March 31, 1987 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].