Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Ninoy Aquino’s Death Anniversary

[Delivered at the Sto. Domingo Church, August 21, 1987]

THE EXAMPLE OF A MAN NAMED NINOY

President Aquino compares liberty to a tree, in whose shade Filipinos today enjoy peace and dignity. This tree grows from the grave of Ninoy Aquino, and continues to draw its greatest nourishment from his sacrifice.

This is the fourth year we observe the death anniversary of Ninoy, the second in the freedom he purchased with his life.

The tree of liberty, in whose shade we enjoy today the pursuits of peace and a life of dignity, grows from his grave and continues to draw its greatest nourishment from his sacrifice.

The Revolution that restored democracy in our country drew its ideals and courage from his example: the example of a man who could have avoided, but instead resolutely accepted, seven and a half years of imprisonment, three years of exile, and then a bullet in the head.

No other Filipino was like that. Because no other Filipino loved his people so purely, so much. Those are not my words, but those of one of the anonymous millions who stood outside this Church and made up the Great Funeral that became our country’s Great March to freedom.

Without him, I wouldn’t be here, the President of this great and proud country. Without him, some of you here would not enjoy the dignity of serving in a Government believed in by the people and respected by the world. Without him, no one could write freely, nor even think without fear. Without him we would all still be sitting in that darkness from which only courage and faith could rescue us. And he gave us that courage and taught us that faith.

Some of us would be fugitives, but most would have struck a separate and shameful peace with the powers in this country.

What he did, what he suffered, and what he achieved by his death, makes it impossible to call anyone else in living memory a hero. I can say this without immodesty or fear of contradiction. Because with our own eyes, we have all seen him rise from his seat on China Airlines Flight 811 and resolutely walk to his death because he knew that this, finally, would be the dictatorship’s fatal mistake.

I hope that people don’t forget that. But if they do, the loss is theirs. For with the loss of that sense of obligation to Ninoy’s memory, they lose their identity with the Philippines as it stands now in the eyes of the world: a nation of courage, of impossible achievements made possible by the unbelievable sacrifice of one man who recreated a nation in shame into a race of heroes.

If they forget Ninoy, it doesn’t matter. For his memory will live on in the best of us, in those of us who model our lives after his ideals and his sacrifice, in those of us who are Filipinos as the world understands that name today.

His death has one more consequence. It puts a special value on our freedom and privileges. Each abuse we take of our liberties, each piece of official corruption, is a mockery of what he died for, a waste of the life he gave. For we wouldn’t be free, nor would those of us who are public officials be in office, had he not given his life. Remember that when you libel your neighbor, or when you, as a public official, put your hand in the public till or shake down a businessman in the course of an investigation.

Beyond the intrinsic value that our rights and liberties have, and beyond the inherent quality of trust of public offices, Ninoy’s death has given them all a special value. He bought them for us with his life.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].