A MARIAN PRAYER

Mahal na Birheng Maria, Ina ng Diyos, pinupuri ka namin at dinarangal. Ikaw ang Reynang ina ng langit at lupa, ang aming tagapagtanggol at kanlungan. Sa iyong walang kapantay na kababaang-loob, tinanggap mo ang kalooban ng Diyos at naging Ina ng Manunubos. 

We implore your intercession for our nation, the Philippines. Pray for us, beloved Mother, that we may be guided by wisdom, strengthened by faith, and united in love. Intercede for our leaders, that they may govern with justice, compassion, and integrity. 

Ipanalangin mo kami sa aming mga pagsubok at pangangailangan. Gabayan mo ang aming mga puso upang maging karapat-dapat sa iyong pagmamahal. Nawa’y maghari ang kapayapaan, katarungan, at pag-asa sa aming bansa. 

Grant us your blessings, Mary, and protect us from all harm. May your grace shine upon our land, and may we always remain under your loving mantle. Amen.

The following is the full text of prayer delivered by President Aquino during the Marian Year closing rites on August 14, 1988, at the University of Santo Tomas.

For many years, Filipinos have held to the dream of total and lasting peace. At the start of the Marian Year, we resolved to recollect how that dream began. It was a hope first conceived in Mary’s womb, in the Person of Jesus Christ, God’s only Son and His Prince of Peace. As the vessel for that Infant Christ, Mary carried in her womb the original message of peace: God’s offer of love, reconciliation and the salvation of all men. That gospel has overflowed the vessel of its birth and reached, through Christ and His Spirit, all men of every race and generation.

Today the Marian Year ends, but the message of peace remains with all Filipinos. May we take to heart the first commandments embodied in that message. The first is that we love our God with all our hearts, and with all our souls and with all our minds just as Filipinos loved, believed and turned to Him in our years of greatest fear and helplessness. Second, may each and every Filipino love his brother Filipino as he loves himself, and as Christ loved us all.

Those, as Christ said, are His first requirements if we are to follow and please Him. And as the angel sang as Mary cradled the Savior in her arms: “… on earth, peace to men on whom His favor rests.”

With one heart and mind with Mary, may we lift our petitions as a people to her son Jesus Christ:

May all Filipinos indeed love one another, forgive each other and give to each other as Christ loved, forgave and gave Himself for us.

May all Filipinos remember that our land, our resources, our opportunities and our very lives are not our own, but are given to us as stewardship to fulfill, protect and nurture and not to corrupt or destroy, to share with the many and not to withhold for the few, and to be offered back to Him who in turn promises to bless us abundantly.

May we offer up into His care, the plight of our powerless, poor and suffering. As Mary sang with conviction in her Magnificat, He lifts up the humble and fills the hungry with good things.

From the end of the Marian year onward, may Mary’s Son, Jesus Christ, dwell also within us and work powerfully through us to bring widespread peace and prosperity to our land.

With Mary, and in Jesus’ name, we pray, amen.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].