Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the National Federation of Sugar Planters

[Released on March 21, 1988]

THE FILIPINO CONSUMER: A SOURCE OF STRENGTH

President Aquino reads the handwriting on the wall for the sugar industry which dicates long-run economic policies. She admonishes the sugar cane planters to look inwards for a stable source of renewed strength for the sugar industry. That strength is the Filipino consumer.

I am honored to address this Convention. As you know, our family has been engaged in sugar for many decades, and so the problems and opportunities of the industry are not unfamiliar to me.

The theme you have chosen is indeed appropriate: “Philippine Agriculture at the Crossroads: Challenge and Response.” It shows your full awareness of the real state of the industry, and more importantly, of its realistic prospects.

Those prospects have markedly improved, largely as a result of the problems that have been solved. We dismantled the monopolies in both sugar and coconut, injected the spirit of enterprise and innovation into these industries, and radically improved the purchasing power of the countryside.

Consider that on the eve of EDSA, domestic sugar production was 1.5 million metric tons; consumption was 800,000 metric tons. Today, production is 1.2 million metric tons, but consumption has skyrocketed to 1.3 million metric tons, a shortfall of 100,000 metric tons. Which is the reason for the importation I have authorized.

The price of sugar on the eve of the Revolution was P200.00 per picul, today it is P550.00.

While the increase is reason for your rejoicing, it is also ground for caution. We may price sugar out of the domestic market, unless the price is stabilized at an acceptable level. Industrial users may be forced to switch to corn sweeteners or other artificial substitutes. This is already the trend abroad. And once the switch is made, a reversion is near to impossible. Beyond that, we have a responsibility to protect the Filipino household consumer. For these reasons, we have imported sugar.

The importation shall be done by the government, to assure that the consumers are protected. Such profits as may accrue from the transactions shall be channeled back to the industry, for the benefit both of the producers and workers.

Many of the industry’s ills have been addressed. Certain fundamental problems remain.

In the U.S., per capita demand for natural sugar has declined from 90 lbs. per person in 1975 to 60 lbs. in 1985. The U.S. market has turned increasingly to “caloric sweeteners.”

Not only are we taking a beating from the competition, the competition has decided to make it hard for us to even enter their markets. The developed countries continue to subsidize their sugar producers and build protectionist walls around them. They then dump their excess production, in the world market. The blow is felt hardest by the Philippines, Brazil and the Caribbean countries, whose exports have been thus undercut by this combination of subsidy, exclusion and dumping.

We in the Philippines had to turn to the U.S. quota with its preferential prices.

The U.S. has been, historically, the most important market for Philippine sugar, but even that market has contracted radically. The quota for 1982, for example, was 1.2 million tons. In 1987, it was 106,000 tons.

We have worked hard to increase our share of the U.S. quota. Our friends in Washington have been helpful. But we realize that such help as we have gotten is temporary, that the handwriting on the wall is writ in stone. There is only so much that friendship can do; economic realities will dictate the long-run policies.

These externalities have forced us to look inwards for a stable source of renewed strength for the sugar industry. And we have found it. That strength, it is clear to us all, is the Filipino consumer. It is a source we have overlooked in the past. The Philippines, despite being a major sugar producing country, has one of the lowest per capital consumption of sugar.

Whatever the critics say, the country is experiencing a marked increase in purchasing power, especially in the countryside. Soft drinks, fruit juices, and other heavily sugar-based products have been selling very well. It appears that any measure that serves to increase rural purchasing power can only redound to the tremendous profit of the sugar and other industries.

Yet the industry remains essentially what it has long been: moribund – heavily in debt, direly in need of new capital, and the most prominent target for social criticism because of the abject poverty of its workers – largely the result of the refusal of many planters to pay just, not to say, legal wages. Meanwhile, there are signs that the former profligacy that characterized the planters is creeping back. Justly or unjustly, I will not say, but those are the facts.

While the industry has undoubtedly experienced “a rebirth”, there is no question either that there must be an end to sugar as we have known it.

The glory days of a special U.S. market for Philippine sugar are over. The U.S. will increasingly scale down its quota system, until it finally does away with it, and opens its market to free world competition. While the gradual elimination of the quota is a threat, equally its substitution with an open market is the opportunity we have long needed. But we must prepare for it.

Philippine sugar, as it is today, is in no position to exploit that opportunity when it strikes. The costs of our inefficiencies will simply price us out of the contest. The sugar boom we have been experiencing may be our last chance to prepare ourselves for the coming challenge.

Several steps must be taken.

The first, there must be a renewed and greater effort at diversification. This must start now, for the process of shifting crops will stabilize only three to four years from the time it is started. The abnormal rise in sugar prices may tempt you to delay diversification indefinitely. Let us not repeat our mistakes.

The main effort of diversification must be yours, the private sector’s. Government’s role can only be supportive through research, credit and infrastructure.

The modernization of the industry must be undertaken immediately, both in its industrial and agricultural components. On the industrial side, we shall need more efficient and cost-effective milling methods and technologies. Thailand and Australia may serve as models. On the agricultural side, we should turn to higher-yielding varieties suitable to local conditions, more rational land-use, and more rational methods of harvesting in order to increase yield per hectare. We are all familiar with this, and know that the secret is better wages and better working conditions for the sugar worker for them to adopt the more productive system. Workers need not burn the cane crops in order to increase their tonnage, and thereby increase their wages. They can be motivated to gather the trash as fuel for the mill’s boilers. These methods will increase yields and lower the cost of milling.

I realize that there is yet another disturbing issue confronting the sugar industry today. And that is agrarian reform.

I can understand your unhappiness with the very idea of agrarian reform. The mere thought of giving up land that generations of your families have worked is a painful experience. More so now when prices are the highest ever in history, since the War. There is nothing more wrenching than nostalgia and profits.

But it is not just parting with the land you have grown to love but of bidding farewell to a way of life. But the nation’s circumstances dictate that we look beyond self-interest to national preservation. There are 58 million Filipinos, most of whom are desperately poor and have no means to improve themselves or secure a better life for their children. We have one of the highest population densities in the world: 193 persons per square kilometer of land. Each day that passes increases the general misery and air of hopelessness of the vast majority of our countrymen.

The answer, I have said, is higher incomes through higher productivity. This can also come from the dispersed ownership of land. For what is needed to exploit the full potential of agriculture is the motivation to work better, to plan longer and wiser, and to produce more – things one cannot expect from a mere transient on the land.

The people want land, so they can stand with dignity and work with the assurance that the sweat of their brows and the labor of their hands will enure chiefly to themselves and their children.

The passing of the large estates is long overdue. Size as a precondition of wealth is an idea that belongs to an age long dead. The modern age demands efficiency instead. We have barely tapped its potential for generating greater wealth for the old entrepreneurs of sugar, and of other industries that equally demand modernization. We can get more and better out of less, given an openness to science and a spirit of cooperation with government. More importantly, it is time the planters moved on to more profitable and more challenging ventures.

I have viewed the deliberations in Congress on the CARP with mixed reactions. I know that agrarian reform must be well thought out, so that we do not accomplish a mere subdivision of the present miseries on the land. Undoubtedly, a gradual and phased implementation of agrarian reform would be ideal, in order to accomplish its aims without its pitfalls. Yet what is at stake here is not just an economic program, but an article of faith in the responsiveness of democracy to the wants of the people. Circumspection is needed, but so is speed.

Let me say also, that whatever law finally issues from this long drawn-out process, it shall be the law. And I, as President, shall enforce it – to the letter and in the spirit of sharing the fruits of progress with all our people.

And yet we need not wait on the law to do our part. Voluntary land reform, for which the law provides, will underscore the basic commitment to country that we all share, farmers, planters and government. The opportunity beckons to preempt history and make it ourselves by implementing reforms attuned both to reality and to the demands of justice.

I want you to join me in making this program a success. I need you for that, you have the experience and the love of country for it. I know you will be with me and with all our people to make it work. Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : 7 November 1987 – 30 May 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].