Opening Statement of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines To the RP-Japan Heads of Government Marketing

[Released on December 16, 1987]

GREATER ACCESS TO JAPANESE MARKETS

The bond of Philippine-Japan friendship and cooperation is stronger than it has ever been. The President notes that Japan’s remarkable progress devolved on her the equal responsibility to use her tremendous economic resources to bring a greater measure of progress and stability to the developing world. At the same time, she admits that the Philippines’ contribution would depend largely on its swift economic recovery.

I am very pleased that this dialogue between us has taken place so soon after my state visit to your beautiful country just a year ago.

As we have had occasion to say time and again, the significance of this visit by Your Excellency, Prime Minister Takeshita, has not escaped us and is deeply appreciated.

The meeting which Your Excellency had with me and with the other ASEAN heads of government yesterday was a successful one, despite its brevity, and gives us reason to be confident that our meeting today will prove equally fruitful for our two countries.

Your Excellency, my state visit to Japan started a process of broadening and deepening our bilateral relations. Considerable progress has been achieved, especially during the visit of the high-level economic and technical cooperation mission, and during the first Philippine-Japan subministerial meeting. These consultations produced mutual understanding on many issues, an understanding and an appreciation of our needs and your country’s capabilities to assist us. To be sure, those capabilities are less than divine as you pointed out yesterday. But Japan’s prosperity is more than normal, and it has been the work of man. Moreover a firm common determination to exhaust all possible means seems to have been achieved. This augurs well of subsequent subministerial meetings next year. I am glad that we are having these talks so that we can consider even more comprehensively certain bilateral issues, and strengthen further our relations.

Much has indeed been achieved, yet much more needs to be done. But this much can be already be said, that the bond of Philippine-Japan friendship and cooperation is stronger than it has ever been.

We observed yesterday that Japan’s remarkable progress devolved on her the equal responsibility to use her tremendous economic resources to bring a greater measure of progress, and therefore stability, to the developing world. Japan’s announcement of its major program for recycling its surpluses to the developing world is her most recent acknowledgment of this responsibility.

The Philippines, despite its trials and its difficulties, has never faltered in its own contribution to the security, peace and stability of Southeast Asia and the Asia-Pacific region in general. These are areas that are as vital to Japan’s own security and continued progress as they are to the countries that are located there.

Therefore, in the spirit of our mutual recognition of each other’s critical interests in this area of the world, we call upon Japan to bend her great economic power to support the economic development of the region, particularly that of the Philippines.

Our country’s capability to contribute even more meaningfully to the common security and stability depends on its swift economic recovery from the waste and mismanagement of the past government. I need not detail what happened to our economy, nor the enormity of the debt we inherited.

At the core of the Philippine plan of recovery, which is also the core of our economic agenda, is the need to increase exports to, and investments from, Japan. Japan must improve access to her markets and increase the flow of investment into our economy. We have every confidence that she will exert her utmost in these areas.

A great deal of improvement is needed in these areas. Our exports to Japan are far below the level of the early Eighties. At the same time, Japan’s direct investments in the Philippines dropped from $61 Million in 1985 to $26 Million. This at a time when Japan’s investments in the rest of the developing world showed a marked increase.

I have repeatedly stressed that our country aims to recover, as yours did, by increasing its economic activities through a dynamic private sector. Hence, the need to meet the capital requirements of the sector, and the need for much more access to Japanese markets.

To meet capital requirements, we are pleased to reiterate our appreciation for the initiative represented by the ASEAN-Japan Development Fund to promote private ventures.

Market access now appears more probable with Japan’s announced intention to open her markets more widely to the rest of the world.

We invite cooperation to improve the international competitiveness of our export products, through such measures as the development of a comprehensive Philippine export promotion plan, and the implementation in the Philippines of the New Aid Plan put forward by Japan to promote Asian export industries.

There are many more areas for increased Philippine-Japan cooperation, which I urge the officials of our two countries to consult on immediately. These include the revitalization of our industrial base, tourism development, the development of export processing zones that could host Japanese manufacturers, and the Philippine Government’s industry dispersal program.

These and other like measures will promote the long-term economic recovery of our country, but many of our requirements are urgent. We need to buy time, through measures for immediate relief, so these programs can beat fruit. Immediate external financing is imperative to give the necessary impetus to our economy and to lift in some measure the crushing burden of poverty on our people. Japan has the capability and the will, and the leadership, to help.

We need sustained and higher levels of assistance to support the implementation of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. I should like at this point to reiterate our appreciation for the conclusion this year of the Calaca II Special Yen Loan and the Economic Recovery Loan from the Export-Import Bank of Japan. We are also grateful for the 14th Annual OECF Yen Credit Package on which both of us have exchanged notes just this morning. We are encouraged at the effort of your government to make it possible to disburse against the commodity loan component of this package before the end of this year.

Now that the size of the 14th Yen Credit approximates the level of OECF loans being provided to other ASEAN countries, we look forward to swifter negotiations and progressively greater amounts in subsequent packages. Time is of the essence, our needs press ever harder on our scarce resources. We cannot afford the delays encountered in past annual programs. Consequently, we hope to develop the 15th and 16th Yen Credit Packages as soon as possible, with a larger component of commodity loans.

Most urgently, measures are needed to alleviate the impact of the Yen’s appreciation that negates the concessionality of Yen loans, and increases the burden they were meant to lighten.

On the related issue of currency risk, allow me to suggest that the solution does not require a godlike ability to anticipate and provide against it, but the human will to mobilize the resources Japan has to compensate for it.

Furthermore, to limit our debt, we need to have more recourse to better quality, non-debt assistance. Grants should be increased so that they will account for a larger component of our bilateral official development assistance flows.

A very special area of concern is agrarian reform. I wish to convey to Your Excellency the readiness of our officials to immediately discuss with their Japanese counterparts the details of a broad-based Japanese assistance for the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program, on which so much of the success of our recovery program, and our political stability, depends. This, we hope, can be supported by accelerating the 16th Yen Package.

The Japanese people are aware of my deep concern for Filipino workers in Japan, and I am glad that our respective officials have started to institutionalize consultations for their protection and welfare.

I hope that Japan can east its immigration rules and liberalize its labor market, particularly where there may be a need for more workers. The dedication and industry of Filipino workers is widely-known; they have proved as valuable to their host, as to their native country. And they deserve respect and dignity.

We are also prepared, Your Excellency, to work for greater cooperation in the educational, social and cultural fields. We can learn a great deal from the educational system that produced that Japanese economic miracle. I expressed my desire for more extensive cultural exchanges between our countries at your alma mater and mine the Waseda University.

I shall conclude, Your Excellency, by reaffirming my country’s commitment to increased bilateral cooperation with Japan and by expressing my profound appreciation for your initiatives in increasing Japan’s assistance to the Philippines. We shall work together, with equal dedication, to preserve the great friendship that our meeting celebrates today.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library