Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the Central Bank

[Delivered in Davao City, May 23, 1986]

AN EXPERIENCE IN GOVERNMENT BY CONSULTATION

President Aquino explains that her call for a ceasefire during which negotiations with insurgents will take place, is a cease-fire-in-place. Troops will not return to the barracks to leave a free zone where insurgents can operate with impunity. Since insurgent leaders are presumed to have complete control over their men in the field, any gross violation of the ceasefire will be taken as a deliberate act and a signal of failure of negotiations and resumption of hostilities.

President Aquino also announced that local elections will be held as soon as possible after the ratification of the new constitution.

I try always to keep my word and therefore I am circumspect in making commitments. But I made a commitment to visit you again. I pledged to govern by consultation. I said that in God’s appointed time we shall be free again. Now we are. And I am here, your President, come to consult with you on the problems of this region as you see them and to work out with you the solutions you feel are the best and that you can bear.

I said that I believe in the power of prayer to work miracles. It has. For we prayed not for freedom, but for the strength to persevere in the fight for it without hate or rancor until freedom came without doing violence to our call for reconciliation. And we found the strength and the courage to face down a dictatorship. We prayed for wisdom in leadership even as we committed ourselves to genuine democratic government. And the miracle has happened. No sooner was democracy restored than the people of this region, taking the event at face value, assumed their own leadership as befits a democracy and convened to arrive at an understanding of their problems and work out the appropriate solutions in the proud spirit of self-reliance and people power that had carried the country through to freedom. Our prayers are answered in part: we have a democracy in its full sense and dignity in this region.

What am I saying? That we pray to God and then we work so that deliverance from our tribulations will come through our efforts and singularly to our honor.

The struggle of the Filipinos down the centuries has not been for independence, democracy and progress but for the dignity they confer upon the race that wins and keeps all three. We rejected the economic security of continued colonial servitude when we demanded independence in the midst of the ruins of World War II. We might have had an easier time of it if we had swallowed our pride and delayed. We rejected the irresponsible condition of citizenship in a dictatorship that offered to assume all the power and all the responsibility for our lives. We have occasionally strayed from the path of democratic pride that is native to us but inevitably we have returned to it. I applaud the people and the natural leadership of Davao for taking the leading step in this direction.

You, the people of Davao and Eastern Mindanao, farmers and workers, businessmen and professionals, teachers and students, churchpeople and urban poor have opened your hearts and minds. The experience has been enriching and leaves me so encouraged. The task of governance cannot be the task of one person or a few people if it is to be done well. We as a people made a revolution together. Am I not right to expect therefore that we as a people must now consolidate the gains of that revolution and work together to make it work for each one of us? You are the first to meet that expectation. You have truly earned the right to call this government your own and a true democracy. I therefore commend Minister Ramon Mitra for vindicating this right by appointing a deputy minister for agriculture and food particularly for Mindanao. I shall ask my Cabinet to consider similar appointments in other pertinent ministries. I want nothing to stand between the Presidency and areas that have shown such political maturity in the appreciation of their problems.

The single deterrent to recovery and progress in Mindanao you are telling me is the peace and order problem. The problem encompasses not only the insurgency but, chiefly, common criminality abetted by warlords and even the military.

With regard to the insurgency, I have said that I shall call for a ceasefire for a definite and inextendible period during which I hope negotiations to take place that will result in an honorable and lasting peace that will address the legitimate demands of the insurgents without detracting from the security of the people, the stability of their new democracy or the honor of the New Armed Forces. This will be a ceasefire-in-place so that the armed forces shall be positioned to ward off any threats to the security of the people during the period of negotiations. Let me make myself clear on this point. There will be no ceasefire with return of the troops to the barracks that will leave the insurgents a free zone within which to operate with impunity. I shall assume that the insurgent leadership exercises complete control over their men in the field so that any gross violation of the ceasefire will be taken by my government as a deliberate act and a signal of the failure of negotiations and the resumption of hostilities. I am still waiting for the top leadership of the Communists to respond.

While I am considering the time when to call for a general ceasefire, taking the cue from this consultation I shall consult with the Minister of Defense on the feasibility of a regional ceasefire immediately for a period of 60 days during which regional leaders can establish contact with the insurgents in a particular region and negotiate, if not for the end of insurgent activity then for a longer truce during which greater trust might develop between the insurgent leadership and ranks and the government. A trust that can be the foundation of a permanent peace.

I met with 168 rebel returnees at the Carmelite convent this morning. I was struck by the extreme youth of these former insurgents and their obvious bravery and acute sense of justice. It is tragic that such youth and virtue have been wasted in fighting that could be harnessed for the greater good of our country. I assured them of their safety and declared General Magno personally responsible to me in that regard.

Knowing that poverty is a main cause of insurgency and that even the weary insurgent must believe he can have a start before he will consider returning to civil life, I shall consider the feasibility of an arms exchange program. Not cash for guns, but guns for rehabilitation and skills training to permit a smooth reintegration into society.

In this regard, I have learned here that there are 33,000 hectares of military reservations which could be used for land reform and rehabilitation.

All human rights abuses, whether committed by the Armed Forces or the Communists will be prosecuted equally vigorously. For, on a par with basic material needs, is the hunger for justice. Although I hope that with this new Beginning we have achieved, forgiveness will figure greatly when we calculate a better future for ourselves.

Because the peace and order problem is chiefly one of common criminality, I direct the Minister of Defense and the Chief of Staff to prepare and immediately implement a disarmament campaign against the warlords in the countryside and the criminal syndicates in the cities. I cannot believe that the main force of the Republic cannot eradicate this problem with dispatch. I do not want the warlords around to distort the democratic process that will take place soon after the ratification of a new Constitution.

Since criminality is a police problem, to which a police force that is not directly responsible to the community is a main contributor, I shall consider, in consultation with the Chief of Staff, devolving the authority over police forces back on to the local communities they serve. I shall test this proposition first in Metro Manila. I will not accept as an assumption that the CHDF are a necessary component of rural security in Mindanao and expect the Chief of Staff to submit to me a justification for its continued existence.

You raised the issue of political stability as it is affected by the insecurity of third level civil servants. You should know that, on my directive, the Civil Service Commission has already issued guidelines regarding these civil servants. We are allowed greater discretion in the retention or relief of civil servants on the first and second level who occupy positions of trust and confidence. I shall refer the matter of the Civil Service Commission for restudy and a report to me within 30 days from today.

Local elections will be held as soon as possible after the ratification of the new Constitution. I shall urge the members of the Constitutional Commission, whose full complement I shall have appointed this Sunday, to complete the drafting of a new constitution within three months.

On the issue of the appointments of OICs, we have tried to carefully evaluate all nominees. I ask you now to give them a chance to prove themselves. I have heard unreasonable comments about their lack of experience. I beg you to consider that if they had too much experience they would have been the men of Marcos, who has in power for the past 20 years. I had no experience. If I had had experience it would have been in Marcos politics and I would not have led you to freedom.

Just the same, I encourage those who feel aggrieved over the OIC process to bring your cases to my attention and these will be acted upon with dispatch.

I am in the process of fulfilling my pledge to dismantle the coconut monopoly. While the PCGG is working to unearth the anomalies and unravel the complex structure of that body, we shall reconstitute the various boards of the major instruments of the monopoly to restore public confidence in this major sector of our agricultural economy. These bodies are nowhere representative of the coconut farmers or industry. The elections in the Cocofed were rigged. The officers were elected in a manner repugnant to our new democratic ethic. I shall protect the coconut farmers from any scheme that stifles their enterprise or steals their rightful share of a major sector of our economy.

I have heard other more specific issues and have not had time to consider the solutions you propose. I shall seriously consider your proposals and respond to them as soon as I can.

Although we have not made decisions on all the issues you have raised with me, I think a great deal has been achieved already, not least the successful experiment at consultative government that has taken place here.

I beg you to recall that we fought the dictatorship, first and foremost, for democracy and its mature exercise is what you have demonstrated here today. The campaign and the revolution made me proud to be a Filipino. What I have seen here today has made me proud to be your President.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].