Family Farm School August 8, 1988

NEW APPROACH TO FARM EDUCATION

President Aquino feels honored to participate in the launching of a family farm school project which is the first of its kind in Asia. She congratulates the pioneers of this family farm school and expresses the hope that more of this kind can be established in the near future.

I am happy to be here to participate in the launching of a family farm school project which is the first of its kind in Asia It happens to be an innovative approach to farm education that is fully consistent with the spirit of our Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program. I take note of the support given to this project by landowners who are being asked to sell a significant portion of their landholdings by CARP.

It is our commitment to the common good of our people that unites us. All of us are being asked to sacrifice for the greater welfare of the society we are trying to rebuild and strengthen. We have to put in a lot of our time, talent and resources particularly during the decade of nationalism ahead of us. We can make our economy develop and our nation recover if we think less of our own narrow interests and do more for others, especially the underprivileged and the disadvantaged.

Each one of us must try and reach out to those of our fellow citizens in dire need of opportunities to be opened up to them. Each individual, each institution can find the most appropriate and effective way to help as many of our people to realize their dream: for acquiring skills and knowledge; for getting access to the chance of earning a decent living; for having many pathways opened for their self-expression and self-fulfillment.

The private citizens behind this family farm school have to be commended for their initiative and their contribution. I also wish to commend the local authorities — particularly the government of the province of Batangas and of Lipa City for their support to this private initiative. I would also like to cite the Development Bank of the Philippines for its outreach programs which enable it to work for development in close collaboration with cooperatives, family farm schools, institutes for small entrepreneurs as well as with local officials in all regions of the country.

The road to development is a long one. History tells us that it is often not smooth. We therefore have to join hands and work together as a team, with that spirit of unity born out of genuine concern and service for our communities. Private volunteer organizations must take many initiatives such as this family farm school in Lipa City. Non-government organizations must strike a meaningful relationship with government institutions and with local governments to undertake projects that truly promote area and regional development following a cohesive and consistent framework.

Finally, the partnership between local and foreign private volunteer organizations is welcome for as long as the projects they jointly promote have true and lasting developmental impact in many of our local communities.

Congratulations to all those who helped to pioneer this family farm school. May you have more of these projects in the months and years ahead in many other communities in the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library