NINOY'S LEGACY

Ang alaala ni Senador Benigno “Ninoy” Aquino Jr. ay patuloy na nagsisilbing inspirasyon sa bawat Pilipino. Ang kanyang tapang, prinsipyo, at pagmamahal sa bayan ay hindi malilimutan. Siya ay isang simbolo ng demokrasya at kalayaan, at ang kanyang sakripisyo ay nagbigay daan sa pagbabago at pag-asa para sa ating bansa.

Bilang isang lider, ipinaglaban ni Ninoy ang karapatan ng mga mahihirap at inaapi. He consistently spoke truth to power, even in the face of adversity. Ang kanyang paninindigan ay nagpakita ng kanyang dedikasyon sa paglilingkod sa sambayanan.

Ang kanyang pagbabalik sa Pilipinas noong 1983, despite knowing the risks, ay isang testamento sa kanyang commitment sa pagpapalaya sa ating bansa mula sa diktadura. His assassination became a catalyst for the People Power Revolution, which ultimately restored democracy in the Philippines.

Ngayon, sa paggunita sa kanyang buhay at sakripisyo, patuloy nating pairalin ang mga aral na kanyang iniwan. Let us all strive to embody his values of courage, integrity, and love of country. Ang kanyang legacy ay mananatili sa puso ng bawat Pilipino, bilang isang paalala na ang pagbabago ay posible sa pamamagitan ng pagkakaisa at pagtitiyaga.

By Ninoy Aquino’s death, he gave a new life and added new force to the Filipino people’s longing for liberation. As he predicted, Marcos had to step down and thereby make it possible for the Filipinos to lay the basis for national unity.

The Asia Society will always be close to my heart. It was the first major organization to give my husband, Ninoy, a forum when he was in exile. Early this year, in its desire to provide Americans with an accurate basis to assess and understand important events in Asia, the society also sent to the Philippines a very distinguished study group. It came out with an authoritative report on the February elections and on the events leading to the departure of the dictator.

When Ninoy Aquino came here as a politician in exile, he spoke to you of convictions that we both shared. Those convictions did not die with him. I treasure them because they are his legacy not only to the Filipino people but also to me personally.

The strong convictions that the Filipino people and I have should not surprise you. They are the same ones Ninoy Aquino had already articulated before you.

He spoke to you about the right to elect the officials of the peopled choice in free, orderly and honest elections. Only when this right is respected can there be a peaceful transition of power. And any tyrant who makes a mockery of this rightful exercise of freedom would suffer the consequences of his arrogance. This is the path the country took and events have vindicated both Ninoy and his people.

This vindication did not come without pain and sacrifice. As fate would have it, his challenge to again willingly face death in a freedom struggle was taken only too literally by a government that refused to heed the voice of conscience and moderation. By his death, he gave new life and added new force to my people’s longing for liberation. Thus, as he predicted, Marcos had to step down and thereby make it possible for us to lay the basis for national unity.

He came here six years ago to express to you how much he dreaded the prospect of mothers weeping over their sons being sacrificed at the altar of revolution. Because he placed the highest value on human life, he did not relish the prospect of Filipinos dying senselessly in a revolution where everyone suffers because in the end, there can be no true victors, since the cost in human lives is unaffordable and even the apparent victors end up inheriting a graveyard.

The mantle of leadership of the Filipino people has fallen on my shoulders. In moments of loneliness, under pressure, I find solace in Ninoy’s faith in the Filipino. I draw comfort and confidence from his assurance that I am leading a great people: one that he died for, one that I must live and work for!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].