Ang papel ng panlalawigang prensa ay napakahalaga sa pagpapalaganap ng impormasyon sa mga mamamayan, lalo na sa mga lugar na malayo sa sentro ng gobyerno. Sila ang nagsisilbing tinig ng mga komunidad, naglalathala ng mga balita at isyu na direktang nakaaapekto sa buhay ng mga tao. Through responsible journalism, the provincial press contributes significantly to good governance and accountability.   

Bukod pa rito, ang mga pahayagan sa probinsya ay may mahalagang papel sa paghubog ng opinyon ng publiko at pagtataguyod ng civic engagement. They provide a platform for discussion and debate on important social and political issues. Ang kanilang kakayahang maghatid ng lokal na balita ay nagbibigay-daan sa mga mamamayan na maging mulat sa mga pangyayari sa kanilang paligid at makilahok sa mga proseso ng pagdedesisyon.

Gayunpaman, ang panlalawigang prensa ay nahaharap din sa iba't ibang hamon, tulad ng kakulangan sa resources, political pressures, at threats to press freedom. Despite these challenges, they continue to fulfill their vital role in a democratic society. Kailangan ang patuloy na suporta at proteksyon para sa mga mamamahayag sa probinsya upang matiyak na patuloy silang makapaglingkod sa publiko nang walang takot at pananakot.

President Aquino cites the special role of the provincial press to influence the hearts and minds of people in the countryside. She advises the press to always give the total picture and to verify their facts.

Once more, the Philippine press is the freest in Asia. But this bit of praise so often heard from foreigners implies a need to temper this new freedom with yet more discipline and responsibility. For to achieve balance in reporting, to deserve an honored place in a democracy, the press must resist control by external forces with special interests. But it must also exercise the greatest self-control to protect its awn interest and special mission. That mission is to give the public the fairest, most accurate, and most comprehensive reportage possible on all events that count. This is the public’s bottom-line for the press. This is what people in a free society demand and you must supply.

Sensational reporting, like junk food, gives readers the illusion of being filled but gives them no real nourishment. For our people to grow into a true democracy, you must give them more balanced and substantial fare.

Before me today is one of the most potent forces in our society. I refer to you, the provincial press, who wield a weapon no less potent than the sword. The provincial press specially has the capability to influence the hearts and minds, and therefore determine the actions of our people in the countryside. And you are called to exercise that influence at a critical time when our people in the rural areas choose to either drop the plow and pick up a gun or hold on to the plow and work for the second harvest of progress to complement the first of freedom that he enjoys.

You, too, can protect our people in the countryside, protect them against the lies and illusions of the enemies of freedom. You can choose to play up the noise and propaganda of the few, or stand up for the plain truth and the common good. You can work exclusively for the short-term interests of your publications or commit yourselves to the larger and enduring interests of our nation.

I ask you to honor the freedoms allowed in our new democracy by sticking to the highest standards of your noble craft and profession.

When reporting on people or events, check your facts, and then check them again. And always give the total picture. For everytime a personality or institution comes under attack from your typewriters, the effect can be as real as bullets aimed at the heart or a bomb exploding in a public place.

Especially in the provinces, where communications are tenuous, I ask you to use every available space to enlighten our people on the issues. There is much they have yet to know about the new constitution and the upcoming plebiscite, the counter-insurgency campaign, and the peace talks on which so much of our hope of progress depends.

Finally I ask that your publications be open and nonpartisan forums for public views, so that Filipinos even in remote areas can be heard and read, so that they will feel that our new democracy offers many channels for its many voices. I ask that you use media’s tremendous power to build up rather than to tear down, to create rather than to destroy.

We in the government have expectations of the provincial press as high as you have of us. May we continue to be fair to each other, and work together towards the progress of our nation and the good of all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].