PROMISES KEPT

The President, in her return visit to Tawi-Tawi, asks that the government focus on developing livelihood opportunities for the people and urges to use effectively and efficiently all the resources that we have to demonstrate to our people that this government can and will make things happen.

My dear countrymen.

Peace be upon you.

Peace be with you.

I have come back to report that what I had promised I have delivered.

In February last year, I made two promises. I pledged that this government would take the necessary steps to extend meaningful autonomy to Mindanao. Today, both the Senate and the House of Representatives have passed on third reading their respective bills formulating an organic act for an autonomous region in Mindanao. The people of Tawi-Tawi will have the chance to decide whether to join this autonomous region or not.

The Senate and the House will still need to meet in a conference committee to reconcile their two versions of the Organic Act. I have constituted a cabinet level liaison committee to work with Congress on this crucial issue.

The task of charting a course towards autonomy has been complex and controversial. The attention we have focused on the issue of autonomy reflects our concern and commitment to address a political problem that has imperiled peace in our country. Mindanao is a national concern that deserves the full involvement of our leaders.

It will take the collective wisdom of our legislators to insure the passage of an organic act that upholds our constitutional commitments, addresses the aspirations of our people, specially those from Mindanao, and provides for an administrative framework more conducive to the effective delivery of services. The organic act must be consistent with the constitution, acceptable to our people and workable in practice.

The last criterion connects to the second promise I made last February. I reported to you then the message coming from the most depressed areas in Mindanao. The people in these communities were not unaware of political issues. But a more urgent concern was their lack of basic services.

A new structure of government such as the Organic Act will create is not sufficient. That new structure must also improve upon the government’s ability to meet the basic needs of our people. I remain convinced that we shall find it difficult to attain the peace and stability we seek if we are not able to improve the conditions in which our people live.

I promised you last year that the government would take the necessary steps to reduce the burden borne by the poorest among our people. We have taken in the last 15 months some measurable steps towards this end.

Last year, Bongao could get water from their faucets for only one to two hours a day. The Bongao water system I inaugurated today can now deliver potable water to 700 households the whole day, and to an additional 300 by year end. In addition, over a hundred artesian wells and five water catchment tanks have been constructed over the last year to provide water to other municipalities.

The upgrading and expansion of Sanga-sanga runway now makes Tawi-Tawi’s air connection to the rest of the country less dependent on the uncertainties of the weather. It will now be easier for the government to monitor the progress of projects on Tawi-Tawi.

When I came in February last year, TAWELCO could only provide power for four hours during the day. Several months before my arrival, power service had been increased to eight (8) hours. Today, I switched on TAWELCO’S 24-hour service in fulfillment of my promise made during my last visit here. I direct NPC President Ernesto Aboitiz and NEA Administrator Rodrigo Cabrera to ensure regular 24-hour power service from this day on.

Many of you know the problems that hampered the implementation of our projects here. But you also know that we have persevered and with the help of your governor, your mayor and your other local officials, we have prevailed.

I hope that my return today serves to demonstrate some fundamental points about the thrust of my government. First, the priority given to Tawi-Tawi reflects an exercise in affirmative action. If we have given special attention to Tawi-Tawi, it is because Tawi-Tawi has been isolated and ignored for so long. We are in part compensating for this neglect.

Second, my return visit underlines my commitment to “follow through.” This is a message I want clearly communicated to the bureaucracy. We do not have all the resources that we need. But the resources that we do have, we must use effectively and efficiently. Our task is not to produce plans. Our task is to deliver the goods and the services. We must demonstrate to our people that this government can and will make things happen.

Apparently, this message has already reached some of our countrymen and persuaded them of our good faith. Since July 1988, over 750 rebels have decided to abandon the armed struggle and rejoin the mainstream of society.

This year, I have asked that the government focus on developing livelihood opportunities for our people. For Tawi-Tawi, I have directed key line agencies to work with the provincial government in developing the seaweed industry. Already, Tawi-Tawi accounts for almost 85 percent of the total Philippine seaweed production. I have asked Secretary Dominguez of the Department of Agriculture to allocate initially P1.0M to assist seaweed growers in the various municipalities of Tawi-Tawi and to take the lead in establishing a seaweed processing facility to produce alkali-treated seaweeds for domestic and foreign markets.

The DA will also identify the areas ideal for seaweed growing. Together with the Southern Philippines Development Authority, it will train and organize seaweed growers and assist them in securing loans. The Development Bank of the Philippines will provide financing to the processing center which will be operated by a cooperative to be organized by the DA. The Department of Trade and Industry will assist in strengthening the domestic and foreign markets of the seaweeds.

Outside of the seaweed industry, as explained by Secretary Dominguez, the Department of Agriculture will initially make available through its lead program some P1.32 million for projects in such areas as cassava production, goat raising, and fish and marine products processing.

The Department of Trade and Industry will also assist Tawi-Tawi in exploring opportunities in the pandan mats and shellcraft industry. P1.5M from the National Livelihood Support Fund will be made available through PBSP through NGOs and PVOs to finance micro enterprises in the province.

To provide additional livelihood opportunities, I would like to mention the Mag-aaral Saka-unlaran Project of the Department of Agrarian Reform and the Tawi-Tawi Agricultural College. With this project, we expect to see a good number of our local agricultural graduates become direct beneficiaries of three (3) hectare farmlots each which they will eventually own under the CARP. The selected agricultural graduates can transform the allocated 3 hectare farmlots into model demonstration farms and transfer new farming technologies to their communities.

To ensure continued development of the province, the Philippine Ports Authority has allocated P2.5M for the rehabilitation of the concrete pier of the Bongao Commercial Port and P10.0M for the improvement of the Sitangkai Port.

The initiatives I have announced today provide some opportunities, open some doors for the people of Tawi-Tawi. It will take the effort, enterprise, and the vigilance of the people to make government programs succeed.

We know that resources invested by government have not always reached the intended beneficiaries, or produced the desired benefits. You yourselves must be vigilant that the limited and precious resources government is able to mobilize are not stolen or squandered away. The people must become full partners of government in the pursuit of development and peace. I am confident that the people of Tawi-Tawi will measure up to this responsibility.

Now, I would like to introduce to you the members of the cabinet and other government officials who have accompanied me:

Secretary Sonny Dominguez Secretary Philip Juico Secretary Joe Concepcion Cabinet Secretary Ping de Jesus Presidential Adviser on Rural Development Secretary Edilberto de Jesus Undersecretary Ben Diokno of the Department of Budget and Management Undersecretary Mina Gabor of the Department of Tourism Undersecretary Felix Bautista of the Office of the Press Secretary Undersecretary Eddie Ermita of the Department of National Defense President Ernie Aboitiz of NPC Administrator Rod Cabrera of NEA The New Administrator of LWUA Ric Quebral

And of course, Senator Nina Rasul and your Congressman Al Bandon.

In closing, I want to thank all of you for the warm welcome you have given me and I hope we will all continue to work together to bring about the continued development of your beautiful province.

In shallah.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].