THANKS BE TO GOD

The President proclaims her faith in the Almighty, thanking Him for the help and guidance He has bestowed upon her and the Filipino nation.

In the past months, in times of danger and crisis, we have prayed for our Lord’s mercy, intervention, blessing and grace. Despite our failings, He has always answered. As the Prophets would marvel: The Lord’s loving kindnesses indeed never cease; His compassions never fail; they are new every morning. . .

I would like to take this opportunity therefore, to thank our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our saviour and our strength, our guide and the true leader of our nation. His compassions, throughout our bondage, our struggle, our attainment of freedom, and our battle to keep and give it meaning, have been new every morning. As we suffered, He called to us: Come to me, all of you who are heavily laden, and I will give you rest. And we found inner peace through our new resolve, and marched away from slavery with the enemy on every side; He assured us that if He was with us, no one could prevail against us. And now, as we work and aspire, as we grope for answers and reach for our goals, as we battle the enemy without – and within ourselves – the promise is there unwavering: Seek ye first His kingdom and righteousness, and all things will be added unto you.

And even in our uncertain seeking, He assures us that those who are earnest in their search shall find, and doors shall be opened; for where we are weak, He is strong.

And so, once again, may we give thanks to Christ our Lord.

We thank him for being there when we called in our distress.

We thank Him for holding us up when we were tired or faltered.

We thank Him for reaching out and snatching us from the edge of the precipice and setting us down in triumph and freedom.

We thank Him for His mercy on Filipinos.

And we thank Him for the opportunity to gather together in prayer this morning; and for the pleasure of His company. For Christ has promised that wherever two or three are gathered in His name, there will He be also.

Let us take this opportunity to count our blessings, even as we dare to ask for more. But let us never forget to Whom the credit should go. And in Whom we should trust.

As Paul the Apostle wrote to the proud Corinthians: But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise, as He chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong . . . so that no one may boast before Him. For it is from God alone that we have life through Christ Jesus who made us acceptable to God . . . Therefore, as it is written: Let him who boasts, boast in the Lord.

May we therefore take pride this morning in the greatness of our God, the God of our Victory and our Freedom. I know we each carry our burdens and face our individual trials as we work for the renewal of our land and our people. But we might take heart in these lines from a contemporary song of praise written to describe Christ, our Lord and Honored Guest of this morning’s gathering: If He carried the weight of the world upon His shoulders, I know, dear brothers and sisters, that He will carry you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library