Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines Before the economic organizations

[Delivered on November 12, 1986]

DISCOVERING BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES IN THE PHILIPPINES

The February election and the subsequent People Power revolution laid the groundwork for the stability of the Philippines. Now the new government has the opportunity to alleviate poverty and realize the potential of the country for growth and prosperity. President Aquino, therefore, challenges the Japanese business community to invest in the country, saying that opportunities outweigh the risks.

To a Japanese businessman the Philippines must represent at this point risk and opportunity. Risk because you remain concerned about political stability; opportunity should outweigh risk. Let me begin by saying risk is a passing phenomenon and, in this case, the perception of risk is far out of proportion with the situation of real stability that has been achieved. The election in February and the subsequent People Power revolution that enforced my victory as President firmly laid the groundwork for stability. Remember that the backbone of that revolution was the business class. Call them unlikely revolutionaries. It was not done to overturn society but to restore the democracy that is the only true and viable political expression of Philippine society. All we did was kick out a small group who had twisted a once strong economy to their own ends, and in doing so destroyed all the components of a liberal capitalist economy – a free market system, a liberal framework for investment, the rule of law, and labor/management relations oriented toward the shared aim of both sectors for progress and equity.

What we have done in the Philippines since February is give business back to the businessmen. Before I turn to the dramatic results that this economic revolution has already achieved, let me say a few words more about stability. Our revolution has earned us a flattering amount of attention from the world’s press, including that in Japan. Indeed although we are a much smaller, less powerful country than you, with far less of a global role, our internal political quarrels are much better known and more fully exposed to the rest of the world.

It is a surprise for a modest country like ours to find our cabinet disagreements are front page news across the world. But nevertheless it is true that we have had these growing pains as we return to full democracy. Although I came to power with the massive support of the people, I have been anxious to govern by consensus whenever possible. There has been no violent assault on the old power structure. Rather, wherever we can we have absorbed it into the new democracy. Inevitably some have found it more difficult than others to settle down under the democratic yoke. For it is a yoke to operate in a democracy, where it is not the naked power of the player but the popular vote that decides the outcome. Laws, rules and a heightened sense of civic duty mark democratic politics even more than the freedom and license which attract so much attention. There is no more arbitrary government in the Philippines. There is now the rule of law. There is no more government by the gun, just government by the ballot.

Not only has this created a much easier and more straightforward environment for outsiders to do business in, it has also created a stable future for our country. We now have the draft of a new Constitution which will be presented for ratification in a popular referendum in early February next year. The day before I left for Tokyo I launched the vote Yes campaign. I hope and believe there will be an overwhelming majority in favor. If it is approved, congressional and local elections will follow a few months later. So we are well on the road to a full recovery of our democracy. We do not take too much notice of the anguished complaints of those who do not relish their political chances under a democracy.

As for the economy itself, despite the damaging cloud of political instability that has hung over it, all the vital signsare good. We have a new standby agreement with the IMF that provides $508 million to finance our economic recovery program, which it has fully endorsed. The IMF program is based on assumption of a 5.5% growth in our economy next year. My ministers are currently at work on a long-term rescheduling of our burdensome foreign debt. We have also concluded loans with the World Bank and Asian Development Bank. And, going by the past record of Japanese concern for the welfare of the Filipino people, the Japanese Government will be generous in its bilateral assistance.

The special efforts made by donors in this time of need to help us in repairing the economic devastation we inherited is a measure, I believe, of the confidence our friends around the world have in my government. It has also eased our budgetary crisis and enabled us to begin the task of putting our economy back in order.

The support we enjoy from both the private and public sectors internationally shows up in such indicators as the appreciation of the pesos against the dollar. More important perhaps, given the dollar’s weakness this year, is the surge in the level of international reserves. From a record low of $911 million in February, it has increased to $1.64 billion by June. There has also been a dramatic slowing in the average inflation rate from 35.1% in the first seven months of last year to 1.9% over the same period in 1986.

We have been assisted by the lower oil price, a recent rise in coconut prices and other fortunate economic events. More important though is that with a government in Manila that enjoys international and domestic confidence in the honesty and discipline of its management everything becomes possible. Once more the great economic chances that were ours are in sight again. We see again the opportunity of banishing poverty and realizing the great potential of our country for growth and prosperity.

And obviously one of our greatest ambitions must be a fuller partnership with Japan and other countries in the Pacific Basin. As you cast around for lower cost manufacturing centers from which to compete in the markets of the other advanced economies of the world, you will inevitably examine the Philippines. Our special relationship with one of the most important of the Pacific rim countries, the United States, as well as our advantage of a cost-efficient workforce favor us. So does our openness to foreign investment. Our new constitution creates a framework in this area whose details still have to be worked out by Congress once it is elected. Nevertheless I can already say that what is falling into place is a liberal code that welcomes foreign investment.

It has to be this way. Even those Filipinos who do not share the private enterprise enthusiasm of my government admit that the shortage of domestic capital for new investment obliges the Philippines to look outside for new investment funds. As we set about our task of private sector led growth and development there will be many opportunities for cooperation with Japanese business. The opportunity of the Philippines beckons our neighbors. And may I conclude by saying: You are welcome.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].