TRIBUTE TO OUR FALLEN HEROES

The President honors the members of the Presidential Security Group who died defending Malacañang and the presidential family from a treacherous attack by rebel soldiers. She also pays tribute to the other officers and men who quelled the bloody coup attempt.

Imitation is the greatest tribute. The fallen heroes of yesterday are honored today by those we shall bury beside them:

Cpl. Rolando S. Salamero, 699090, Marines. PFC Ireneo A. Gaddingan, 724808, Army. Sgt. Oscar Arevalo, 617009, Constabulary. Sgt. Samuel Santos, 644146, Marines. Airman First Class Janayto S. Sunio, 707539, Air Force.

Civilian Agent Joseph Galleta threw himself between my son and the bullets intended to kill him. He was seriously wounded.

All these men are from the Presidential Security Group that repulsed a treacherous and cowardly attack on the lives of the President and her children by rebel military forces. The aim of the rebels was clearly to kill the President and her family. The size and ruthlessness of the attack, the treachery that marked it, the brutality of the rebels who fired on civilians, and the timing – when a significant portion of the Presidential Security had been deployed in three provinces for my Region 3 Consultation – prove beyond a doubt their murderous intentions. But the PSG was prepared. Col. Voltaire Gazmin had earlier received intelligence of the coup and readied his forces. I had made the right choice of officer to lead the Palace guards. The PSG fought with courage and the ferocity of tigers. They threw themselves into a counter-attack that stunned and turned back the rebels, who fled to the short-lived safety of Camp Aguinaldo.

On the first anniversary of this special force I said: The Armed Forces as a whole are the shield and sword of the Republic, but the Presidential Security Group is the armor protecting the Heart of the Republic. The PSG has well deserved that tribute, my gratitude and that of our people.

To that roll of honored dead we add the names of Marine Pfc. Pablito Baladad, whose blood was the first drawn in the assault on Aguinaldo, and Police Corporal Eduardo Esguerra. Scores more were wounded in the Armed Forces and Police that held fast to their loyalty to the Republic and to their honor as Filipinos. I hope I will be forgiven for not mentioning all their names for I have yet to receive the total list. In that roll, we must include the many unarmed and innocent civilians who were mercilessly slaughtered by the rebel forces for expressing their support for democracy and President Aquino.

But the living who fought did equal honor as the dead to the qualities of our race: to the valor and idealism of the Filipino:

I refer to the composite police and Special Action Forces led by Police General Alfredo Lim and other police officers like General Cruz, General San Diego, Major Dula Torre, Major Maganto, Major Barbers, Major Dimaaliw and Major Sonny Razon. Poorly armed and outnumbered policemen and police trainees relieved the siege of Channel 4 laid by crack rebel troops, and went on swiftly to attack the other rebel-held television stations. This action draws belated recognition to the bravery and skill of our police forces.

Take care of your Marines and they will take care of you. The Marines certainly have. Commandant Biazon’s Marines came early to reinforce the ranks of the PSG in the event of a second attack. Under the command of Col. Emmanuel Teodocio and Lt. Col Braulio Balbas, the Marines threw themselves with their famous energy and courage into the fight to liberate Camp Aguinaldo.

True to his word that he would stamp out the rebels, Lt. Col. Rene Dado of the Philippine Army threw his men into the fight, and together with the Constabulary under Col. Cesar Nazareno, relieved the siege of the AFP General Headquarters, which had been defended by a small force led by Generals Ermita and Montaño. General Sotelo and a small group denied the Air Force to the rebels, although they had been betrayed by the second in command. Sotelo’s group held out until General Protacio relieved them.

Again I beg the indulgence of the many officers I have not mentioned and of the great majority of the AFP who joined in defeating those who seek to bring shame and contempt to the Armed Forces.

Throughout the land, officers and men stood by their oath to the Commander-in-Chief and held their forces and regions fast to the colors and the Constitution of the Republic.

Chief of Staff General Fidel Ramos led and directed, with his Deputy, General Rene de Villa, this great effort to preserve democracy.

For the past 18 months, I and General Ramos have crushed every threat to this Government and our democracy. Last Friday taught them their most bitter lesson. And we shall teach them again, if they want it.

These traitors and murderers of unarmed civilians have been called idealistic. Let not idealism be used to cover the darkest crimes and ambitions of men whose actions only show their hatred of democracy and their contempt for the lives of their people. For one of the most important elements of idealism is truth. One cannot be idealistic and a liar.

The rebels call themselves nationalistic. They dishonor that name. They dishonor the word. But if nationalism means to put our country over all others, patriotism means putting our country over ourselves.

Last Friday showed that in our country today, there are still more patriots than cowards.

Last Friday’s valiant action also brings us closer to our dream of military unity. I had thought that the spirit of reconciliation would close the fissures in the Armed Forces. But now I see, that only a common cause, a common danger, and a common fight for the right can forge an iron bond of unity in the Armed Forces.

First in peace, first in war, the Armed Forces and their Commander-in-Chief stand here and say to the heroes buried in this sacred field: We have kept the faith.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].