Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the ASEAN Summit Meeting

[ Released on December 15, 1987 ]

FRIENDSHIP AND A SENSE OF COMMUNITY

Friendship and a strong desire for community brought the ASEAN members together. These are the over-riding aims of ASEAN. These friendship and community find expression in a proud commitment to strive harder for the attainment of ASEAN goals.

I was touched by Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew’s remark yesterday that he had overruled the decision of his security advisers not to attend the Summit and the information regarding President Soeharto’s resolve to show support to the Philippines. In the spirit of ASEAN, the other leaders had also decided to brave the risks and show solidarity with the Philippines. In the spirit of Prime Minister Lee’s comments last night about the religious character of our Revolution, I would rejoin by saying: No greater love, indeed, has a man than to lay down his life for a friend. I thank the leaders of ASEAN for this moving demonstration of solidarity.

As I had occasion to remark on my return from my ASEAN visits last year, the aims of ASEAN were already attained at her foundation. For it was friendship that brought us together in the first place; a strong desire for community among nations that might as well have progressed separately. And yet it is friendship and community that are the overriding aims of ASEAN. No necessity compelled our hands to join in the difficult pursuit of the vision that inspires all our labors: the vision of the ASEAN states living in peace, amity and concord, and working together for their common progress and prosperity.

This friendship and sense of community have borne fruit in a mutual regard for each other’s safety and stability on many occasions in the past. Our common stand on the Kampuchean crisis being one of the most notable.

Today that friendship and community find expression in a proud commitment to strive harder for the attainment of ASEAN goals, and in concrete measures of greater economic cooperation.

We have signed today the Manila Declaration of 1987. The Declaration reaffirms the principles of our Association and sets forth the decisions arrived at in this Summit. It charts the direction we are determined to take to bring a more progressive, prosperous, and cohesive ASEAN to the 21st century.

The Declaration affirms our solidarity in the face of the dangers to the stability and peace of our region, particularly our persistent search for an enduring solution to the Kampuchean problem.

Our economic ministers have entered into agreements intended to liberalize trade among our countries through the improvement of the preferential treatment that we extend to one another’s products, and through other measures to lower the barriers to intra-ASEAN trade.

We have revised our agreement on joint ventures in order to accelerate such investments and encourage them to come from in, rather than from outside the region. Furthermore, to encourage such investments, our countries have signed an agreement for the promotion and protection of intra-ASEAN investments.

In addition, we have directed our governments to adopt measures to strengthen our cooperation in transportation and communications, agriculture and forestry, banking and finance.

The general aim of these measures is our common progress and the great improvement in the lives of all our peoples. For in their hands and in their abiding faith in the meaningfulness of ASEAN lies our countries’ continuing commitment to the ASEAN dream. To that end, the Manila Declaration expresses our common determination to involve our peoples in a broader range of ASEAN cooperative endeavors in order to strengthen and enrich the fabric of the Association. If anything has stood out in this meeting of ASEAN heads of government it is precisely this strong emphasis we have placed on the role of the private sector in the activities of ASEAN.

It is the direct linkage between the work we do in ASEAN and the difference it will make in the lives of our peoples that has made my experience of participating in and presiding over this Meeting so rewarding and enriching. I thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library