Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Citizens Military Training

[Released on July 20, 1986]

CADETS AND CADETTES FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION

President Aquino announces that youth undertaking citizen military training may be pressed into service as poll watchers to protect the vote. This will be part of a move to get CMT cadets more involved in core values and institutions of the new democracy.

This gathering today exemplifies the determination of our youth, particularly those undertaking the citizen military training, to be more deeply involved in the enormous task of national reconstruction, a task that includes the militant protection of the democracy we restored at great cost and sacrifice. It underscores our determination never again to lose our rights and liberties and our honor as a free nation.

Citizen military training was the vision of our founding fathers. The first act of the Philippine Commonwealth government was to enact the National Defense Act, or Commonwealth Act No. 1, which provided for the establishment of the Reserve Officers Training Corps in qualified colleges and universities throughout the country. History testifies to the wisdom of that vision. It was the supreme sacrifice of our national reservists that upset the time-table of the Japanese imperial forces to conquer our country. The national reservists played an equally important and distinguished role in the subsequent liberation of our country, making that liberation not only a gift of American forces but a victory of Filipino patriotism as well.

Since 1976, when the Metropolitan Citizen Military Training Command, or MCMTC, was activated, the Armed Forces has pursued citizen military training with more vigor. But the objectives of this program cannot be the work of the AFP alone. It needs an equally strong commitment from our school administrators and of course from the studentry. These commitments have apparently been made. In spite of the additional cost that citizen military training involves to the schools and especially to our already financially hard-pressed students, the response to the call for CMT training has been encouraging. Records show that MCMTC attendance has been increasing at the rate of 5% per semester. At present, attendance and passing rate in CMT training averages around 45% out of the total enrollment. This is a definite improvement over the 20-25% in the past. During this semester, MCMTC is again expected to handle the training of 150,000 CMT cadets and cadettes in the various colleges and universities in Metro Manila and 110,000 cadets and cadettes in the various high schools.

The growing recognition by the youth of their responsibilities in the area of national security and development will be encouraged by the government. Although the CMT program has been revitalized in concept and in substance, much remains to be done, particularly to make it more interesting and relevant. While it is true that CMT training is essentially military in character, it must go hand in hand with the cultivation of the talents and virtues that give meaning to military commitment.

Knowing how to fight is important, but is no guarantee of success unless there is an even more profound understanding and appreciation of the values for which one is called to fight. Those values not only gives us compelling reasons for supreme sacrifices but, more importantly, they should establish the tenor of any struggle in which we are called to engage ourselves. We must fight with honor. The way we fight to protect what we claim to be our cherished values must do honor and not violence to those values. The manner of the struggle must already be a victory, a fitting testimony to the moral supremacy of our cause. This is the new spirit of our armed forces. It is a spirit imbibed from the distinguished manner by which our people regained their liberties. It is the spirit of justice, compassion, concern, moderation, and reconciliation. That spirit must now be imparted to our youth so that the achievements of this generation, achievements honored by all the world, are passed on without diminution to the next generation. Our Revolution will be eternal. It will be lived by each generation in turn. That is my commitment and my vow.

The present thrust of the MCMTC reflects this new spirit. Even as I called upon the New Armed Forces to repel threats to our new democracy, not only by moving to destroy its enemies but more importantly to build in the hearts of men, so now it appears that the youth involved in citizen military training have branched out from the bare essentials of military training to social upliftment.

I am happy to note that CMT cadets and cadettes who constitute more than a fourth of the college student population in Metro Manila have been mobilized to combat the proliferation of illegal drugs and marijuana in school campuses. Drug abuse is an enemy more insidious than those that offer overt threats to national security. It strikes deep at the physical foundations and the moral fiber of our national strength.

Another service assistance program of MCMTC is its registration volunteers program which is implemented in all universities and colleges in Metro Manila. This program calls for CMT cadets to lead student volunteers in assisting students during enrollment. The program has proved especially helpful to students coming from the provinces.

In order to further expand the community and social involvement of CMT cadets, MCMTC has organized its ‘Damayan Organization’. The organization will allow the involvement of the cadets in disaster, rescue, relief, and rehabilitation operations now carried out mainly by the organic elements of the command.

I see a wider involvement for CMT cadets in the core values and institutions of our new democracy. The heart of democracy is the electoral process. That process has been trashed time and again in our country. I cannot remember a time when it was not, even before the dictatorship. We must never allow it to happen again. Our people put their lives on the line during the last elections to underscore the supreme value that elections must have in a vibrant and real democracy. Because elections must be held everywhere in the country, even in the most remote barrios, the work of assuring their integrity is one that can be carried out only by great numbers of committed souls. People must be there at the polling places to watch and step into protect the ballot. The job calls for discipline, perseverance, stamina and courage. These are military virtues. Our people spontaneously displayed them. We want to make sure they are always present in every election. I am therefore suggesting that the AFP give serious consideration to the extensive use of the cadets and cadettes in this noble work; a work that puts the citizen intimately in touch with the core of democracy. We shall have the first elections under a new charter very soon.

The world stood rapt with wonder at how we regained our freedom. I want the world in the same condition when we show how we have used the freedom.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].