Beyond Compromise

The President congratulates the LAWASIA Human Rights Standing Committee for organizing a seminar on a vital subject that confronts many governments today – human rights. The President deeply shares the cause for which LAWASIA stands and the ideals that continue to be its spiritual inspiration.

At the outset, let me congratulate the LAWASIA Human Rights Standing Committee for organizing a seminar on a vital subject that confronts many governments today.

Human rights advocacy, particularly in Asia and the Pacific now stands at a most challenging threshold – the threshold of decisive influence over the human rights policies of governments in the Asian region.

The challenge is, indeed, awesome. But history leaves us no choice but to respond with our deeply held ideals, our firmest commitment and with our noblest efforts. Because our peoples will never abdicate their birthright to freedom and human dignity, nor their yearnings for just and human societies. And we owe it to our peoples as much as to ourselves to bring life to that birthright.

The memory of one of our most revered nationalists, the late Sen. Jose W. Diokno, inspires us all today. For it was he who hurled the challenge for the creation of a Standing Committee on Human Rights in LAWASIA. You have brought his challenge into the realm of dynamic reality.

The LAWASIA’s Standing Committee on Human Rights is now the heart of your movement’s unrelenting struggle to exact full reverence to human rights among the peoples of our region. It is our pride that our Chief Justice Marcelo B. Fernan was its Chairman for many years.

Building from that challenge, you are now close to realizing a greater goal — the establishment of an Asian Commission on Human Rights which promises to be a decisive force for positive change in the human rights policies of governments in Asia.

Needless to say, I deeply share the cause for which LAWASIA stands and the ideals that continue to be your spiritual inspiration. I say this not because my late husband Ninoy and I suffered greatly from a tyrant’s arrogant disregard of human rights; but because of a firm conviction that no government and no man can ever deny from any human being the right to live a life of dignity, justice and freedom.

My administration’s position for the promotion and protection of human rights is beyond compromise. Among my first acts upon my assumption to the Presidency was the creation of Presidential Committee on Human Rights.

This Presidential Committee has since been transformed into a constitutional body called the Commission on Human Rights by virtue of Art. XIII, Sec. 17 of the 1987 Constitution. Under this same constitutional provision, measures for the preservation, safeguarding, defense and advancement of human rights have been institutionalized.

I take pride in the inclusion of Art XIII in the 1987 Constitution, specifically in the arena of Social Justice and Human Rights. For it earned for the Philippines the singular distinction of being one of the few nations of the world that enshrines in its fundamental law the supreme duty of the state to protect and advance the frontiers of human rights.

I wish you every success in your seminar. And may your stay in this country be exceedingly pleasant and immensely fruitful.

Thank you and good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].