Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On working towards full democracy

[ Delivered on January 16, 1987 ]

WORKING TOWARDS FULL DEMOCRACY

After 300 days, the Aquino administration gets a new mandate to continue its task of restoring democracy with the ratification of the 1986 Constitution, which not only provides the bases for democracy but also the measures to preserve it. The charter strives for peace and unity with the cultural minorities in Mindanao and the Cordilleras; for the Communist insurgents, it has prepared programs for their assimilation into democratic society.

Labor and private enterprise are given a boost through the Community and Employment Development Program, while lower prices for input and infrastructure support provides for agricultural development.

Education and social services, long neglected but which now enjoy high priority, have been given the means to contribute to the task of national reconstruction through increased budgets.

In the First 100 days, I reported to you the gains of the Revolution. Now more than 300 days have passed since the victory of the people and my assumption to power. Another report is in order.

I have been going around the country campaigning for the new Constitution that I promised would be ready within last year so that we should have a full blown democracy in the new year.

I said that democracy is safe with the proposed Constitution. I was being modest. It is more than safe; it is ensured, strengthened, and amplified in the new charter.

The 1935 Constitution gave us the basics of democracy. The 1973 Constitution and the political order it attempted to legitimize showed us that the basics are not enough. The 1986 Constitution, born of the fight against the tyranny installed by the 1973 Constitution, gives us the basics of democracy and a careful enumeration of the rights, liberties, and even the policies that must be pursued to prevent another tyranny. The new charter is long; it had better be. Despite the best intentions, the finest minds, the bravest politicians, the most vigilant editors, fascism stole a march on us, destroyed our liberties, despoiled our nation, and enslaved us to debt and poverty. This charter therefore enumerates all the abuses of the regime we destroyed and strictly provides against their repetition.

But as we came to power, so have we kept it: peacefully and with the highest regard for the rights and liberties of each and every Filipino, even of those who, unregenerate, to this day plot to bring us back under the yoke of the tyranny and corruption.

The ratification of the new charter sets the stage for two things we must get really started on: the operation of a genuine democracy and the start of the economic recovery of our country.

The new charter will give us Congressional elections in May. While my desire to have truly representative government throughout the land has fixed the date for local elections at August 24, 1987.

I would have preferred to hold them sooner. But the Commission on Elections, to whose opinion the Chief Executive must defer, has argued strongly against it. And I agree. The coming electoral exercises will be the first we shall hold in freedom. They will also be the last for some time to come. Let them therefore be the best in living memory. In this concurring opinion with the Comelec I also reflect the general opinion of the country that simply wants, with equal intensity, a date fixed and the surety of good elections.

But even as we prepared the ground for a vigorous and enduring democracy, we have worked hard to bring about the peace in which to enjoy its blessings.

We have forged an agreement for continued cessation of hostilities in Mindanao with the MNLF, while we work out the basis for a longer-lasting peace among the communities of Mindanao. We are also trying to get the other Muslim factions to join in this effort. The going has been rough, but then the problem is not an easy one.

We have met with greater success in the Cordilleras, and are working with the people of that region to combine the special virtues of their distinctive way of life with the imperatives of economic development and social justice.

We have forged a truce with the national leadership of the Communist insurgency and have opened the way for the insurgents to come down from the hills and rejoin their countrymen in building a new country in the context of a true democracy. We have proceeded not just with talk, but with well funded programs to facilitate their return to democratic community.

To make that community one worth defending, we have instituted sweeping reforms in its system of justice. We have appointed men of unquestioned integrity and competence to the highest courts of the land and enshrined their independence in the Freedom Constitution and institutionalized it in the new charter.

We have made earnest efforts to recover what was stolen from our people by the previous regime. The methods have not always been pleasant, but the injustice we seek to correct, as you know, is enormous.

We are in the process of restoring to labor the rights and dignity commensurate with its contribution to national progress, even as we have cleared away the obstacles which prevent private enterprise from making the contributions it alone can make. And to both sectors we shall give the boost they sorely need through the Community and Employment Development Program, for which we have allocated P8 billion for 1987. In this program, by the way, we seek the help of our citizens to monitor its progress and honest implementation. This participation of private citizens in community projects will create truly responsive local governments.

The basis of our economy is agriculture. Past neglect left in it ruins and the rural sector, to which most Filipinos belong, in the direst poverty. The CEDP program seeks to ameliorate this condition, while our agricultural policies will try to revive our agriculture through lower prices for inputs and more infrastructure support.

In tandem with this, is the effort to equitably redistribute through agrarian reform measures the means and the fruits of agricultural development. If we have not proceeded with the speed that some would like, it is because I will not frustrate our farmers by giving them a mere hope on paper, but a truly effective program of agrarian reform that will give them both land and the means to be make it productive.

We believe in the virtues of self-reliance but believe equally that the people must be given the strength to maintain it. And so we have, along with the programs outlined above, focused this year’s budget on education so that the tremendous potential of the Filipino for productive work can be trained and disciplined. The education budget reflects this in its greater size and in the higher compensation we have given our teachers. Again, to strengthen our people for future self-reliance, we have increased social services to make up for the neglect of the past in this area, to heal the wounds that this neglect inflicted on our people, especially the children. We have added P9 billion to the social services budget.

These and other measures too long to relate, and which Budget Minister Romulo and Social Services Minister Mita Pardo de Tavera will amplify, have produced unmistakable signs that the bleeding from the wounds of the past have stopped and that our economy is recovering some measure of vigor. I believe we are ready to make a success of the Medium-Term Development Plan that we have adopted after wide consultations with our people.

We have endeavored to move with as much speed as prudence will allow, so that we do not build in haste and regret at leisure. This is the work of foundation and therefore critical. Everything that follows will take its character from it. And I take pride in saying we accomplished all these in the first minutes of the morning, and against those who sought to return us to the night. The spirit of my message this evening is summed up in the words of Saint Paul, which I address to those who still pine for the past and to those who hesitate to give their share to the future:

“The hour has come for you to wake up from your slumbers because our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed. The night is nearly over; the day is almost here. So let us put aside the deeds of darkness and put on the armor of light.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library