Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Air Force Day Founding Anniversary

[Delivered on July 1, 1989]

OUTDO YOURSELF AIR FORCE

The Air Force plays a critical role both in war and in peace: as a major support to ground units battling against enemies of the state and as transporter of medicine, relief goods, and medical workers to disaster-stricken areas here and overseas. With a new fleet of jet aircraft and helicopters, and with a renewed sense of duty, the Air Force is expected to outdo itself.

Men and women of the Air Force, today is a landmark in your history. This is the first time we celebrate this day as your founding anniversary. I signed Proclamation No. 397 on April 3, 1989, changing your May 2nd anniversary date to July 1st in keeping with the nationalist spirit of our Armed Forces. On this day, in 1947, the Air Force attained the status of a distinct service command of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

There is yet another reason to celebrate. Today we welcome 45 graduates of the Philippine Air Force Flying School into the PAF. Now you are one with the pride of our skies. You are to enter an unbroken tradition of heroism from the action taken by Captain Jesus Villamor and his men in 1941 in meeting the Japanese foe to the noble decision of Colonel Sotelo and his men in joining the struggle against the dictatorship. Rest assured, there will be no shortage of opportunities for heroism in the future.

We are engaged in a bitter struggle that will decide whether Filipinos shall live free or die, whether what our people have built by sacrifice these past three years shall be the spoils of our enemies’ victories or the foundation of a future of freedom, justice, and progress for our children.

Let me impress upon you the critical nature of your role in the present war against the insurgency. The air support you provide to our ground forces have oftentimes spelled victory or defeat. The timely arrival of the Air Force has been known to turn a massacre of our boys into a rout of the enemy. The Air Force has logged 642 flying hours in 592 sorties in combat operations to support our ground units.

Men of the Air Force, I salute your accomplishments.

Yet the work of the Air Force is not confined to combat. First in war, first in peace, the Air Force has been in the forefront of relief missions not only in calamity-struck areas of our country but even in foreign lands. Last year alone, you flew 22,129 hours on disaster relief operations, transported 35,000 pounds of medicine to Bangladesh, and airlifted over 6,000 military and civilian patients to medical aid centers. You repatriated 97 Filipino workers from Singapore. You have shown that the Filipino need not wait upon war to declare himself totally for country.

We note your distinguished performance against the backdrop of the Air Force’s urgent need to modernize. The Air Force must be strengthened for the challenges still before us. To that end, we are upgrading the weapons systems of the Air Force with the purchase of a new fleet of jet aircraft and helicopters. We are assured of the first delivery sometime at the end of this year.

We must be able to reach those who threaten and kill the innocent – the elderly and children regardless – wherever they cower in malice and fear. The arms of the Republic must be able to reach everywhere to protect all its people and punish and repel all their enemies, domestic and foreign.

In congratulating the Air Force for its performance, I say also, “Outdo Yourself Air Force.” We expect more from you next year, with the advent of new weaponry and the renewed sense of duty that we celebrate today.

Thank you and Good day.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].