NURTURING A FRIENDSHIP

Japan serves both as an inspiration and example to the Filipino people not only because of its economic progress and military might but also because it has demonstrated what a nation can achieve through hard work, courage, and pride in ones culture and heritage.

President Aquino describes Filipino-Japanese friendship as one that is geopolitical, socio-economic, and personal. It can be as intimate as the one between her husband Ninoy and his Japanese friends; it can be the supportive relationship between neighboring countries with a common goal of preserving democracy in their region; it can also be a learning relationship between a more developed country and a struggling one. She gives credit to the Philippine-Japan Friendship Society for keeping that friendship alive.

Through the years, despite profound differences in culture, climate, and our historical relationship, including our tragic encounter in the last war, Filipinos have sought to reach out in friendship to the Japanese, and the Japanese to Filipinos.

Ambassador Jose Laurel III, the President of the Philippines-Japan Society observes that in 1898, our national hero Jose Rizal visited Japan and predicted that close contact and fruitful cooperation might be forged between the land of the setting and that of the rising sun. Laurel notes that initial overtures of friendship were made to the Japanese by General Emilio Aguinaldo in the same year. For Japan, besting the West at its own game of economic progress and military might, had become an inspiration to Asian peoples seeking dignity and independence.

I personally can attest to the depth of friendship and understanding that is possible between Japanese and Filipinos. My husband, Ninoy, in the last years of his life, was cut off from his country and alienated from his countrymen by the terror inspired by a tyrannical government. Yet he found hospitable reception and a warm and unguarded welcome in the homes of the Japanese. Though he stood outside the mainstream of Philippine-Japan diplomacy and politics, he was not treated as an outcast, but rather as one who embodied an aspect of the Filipino spirit and stood for its aspiration for freedom. My husband, in turn, saw in Japanese traditions of honor and courage the prophecy of his fate. And when he gave his life in willing sacrifice, the Japanese took his memory into their hearts with some of the fierce devotion they have shown their own heroes.

The sincerity of this friendship of the Japanese and Ninoy was best demonstrated to me right after Ninoy’s death. I, and for that matter, the Filipino people, got our first comprehensive account of the assassination from Japanese media. The painstakingly thorough investigation by Japanese television was not merely excellent reportage. It was a caring and sympathetic gesture by friends outraged by Ninoy’s murder.

Of course, the warmest display of friendship I have yet experienced from the Japanese was during my state visit last November. I felt as affectionately and enthusiastically received in Tokyo as I was in our key cities during the campaign. And at Waseda University I got a delightful and unexpected re-experience of people power. I, of course, do not just share such a personal statement as a haiku with just anyone. Yet I found a strong desire to share my poetry with the Japanese people, in the person of their Emperor. And, of course, when I met him, I found not a symbol of a country, but a caring and sensitive person I would wish to keep always as a friend.

After my visit to Japan, I was convinced that the friendship between Japanese and Filipinos thrives on several levels. It is geopolitical; it is socio-economic; and it is also personal. It can be as intimate and relaxed as it was between Ninoy and his Japanese contacts, who later became my very supportive friends. It can be regionally significant: a supportive relationship between two democratic societies working to preserve freedom in Asia. The strategic locations of our two countries makes us each other’s defenders, protectors and economic allies. The friendship can also be an earnest and nurturing one: between an elder and developed civilization and a young and growing country.

In fact, we recognize that Japan is to us a “Sensei” — a teacher and inspiration to a struggling country such as ours. The Japanese have demonstrated to us what we can become by working hard, taking pride in our culture and identity, and believing we can be the equal of any nation. From the Japanese code of courage, we applied to ourselves the dictum that success or, at any rate, nobility, crowns the gesture of throwing caution to the winds and advancing fearlessly towards our goal. In our case, the goal of freedom.

In turn, I would like to think that the Japanese, witnessing this living out on a national scale of the code that animated their heroes, will be inspired to a renewed commitment to the virtues that bind us now: courage, a sense of community in the face of danger, a sense of fraternity in the pursuit of a common and noble goal.

Friendships, I find, either grow stale and cold through the years, or acquire depth and nuance with the passage of time. I believe the bond between Filipinos and Japanese shows signs of being the latter. We have transcended and forgotten the transgressions of war. We have kept our ties despite the political and economic strains of recent years. We are becoming less two races apart, and more two nations sharing a commitment to peace and freedom in Asia.

The Philippines-Japan Society deserves a good part of the credit for sustaining this bond through thick and thin, all these years. State visits, such as what we Presidents make, are too complicated a device to use too often. The friendship between our countries is best maintained by organizations such as yours, and by the individuals you honor today. You have helped to bring two peoples, already closely intertwined by history and geography, even closer together. This you have done by forging the day-to-day contacts, pursuing civic, educational and cultural projects that make ours the down-to-earth relationship that is the essence of a mutually enriching friendship.

Keep up the good work.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library