Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On the MILF-Christian Consultations

[Released on October 20, 1986]

IN SEARCH OF PEACE IN MINDANAO

Continuing her quest for peace in the South, the President declares that those who call her weak should not put to the test her commitment to democracy. She is willing to go to any lengths for peace, with no concern for her safety; her fate she leaves to God.

The President also announces that to encourage wider consultations, she will appoint a Commission for Peace and Development in the autonomous region.

In everything I do or say, I am the President of all our people.

I went south personally to reestablish on a firmer footing the uneasy peace that has obtained in Mindanao. I went there hoping to find in one Muslim leader, and later on, in others, the same desire for peace as I have, the same admission that we cannot hope to recover and make progress unless our people are assured of peace.

That meeting was meant to be just the beginning. The beginning of a round of consultations in the areas where Muslims and Christians co-exist so as to bring them together in a common effort to uplift their communities and establish the material foundation of their political and spiritual growth. The intention is to orient the policies of government in your areas in the direction you think best. No one can presume to know this better than you. That is the character of this government, the nature of a true democracy.

This is an open government. Open to ideas and making every effort to be sensitive to the feelings of the people. It is neither in the character nor the spirit of this government to make any decisions behind the backs of the people affected. I speak for this government, and I hope, in so speaking, that my words also reflect the sentiments of those with whom it deals. If this is not the case, then I have been misunderstood. So let me make it clear.

Whatever political arrangements or structure must be made to accommodate the ways of life and beliefs of the diverse people of Mindanao, one principle will never be compromised: we shall have democracy across the length and breadth of our land. Any changes from the general structure of government and laws that special circumstances may dictate for certain areas of our country must bear the stamp of popular approval obtained through democratic means. We took our stand on democracy in the last elections in the face of intimidation and violence, although we were unarmed. Is it conceivable we shall not stand by democracy now that we have the armed might of the Republic in our hands?

There are some who say that it was neither prudent, in terms of personal safety, nor becoming, in the light of my high office, to go anywhere for peace, as I have done. With prudence regarding my safety, I have no concern. I leave my fate to God. You who are Muslims should appreciate this more than others. With regard to the dignity of my high office, let me say that a higher dignity is found in the good use of the Presidency to bring peace to our land than by standing on protocol. And to those who fear that my willingness to go to any lengths for peace will be construed as weakness, let me say: Let those who want, so construe it. It does not bother me to be spoken of as weak by the ignorant, but let them not make the mistake of putting me to the test: to the test of my commitment to democracy and to the safety and well-being of my people.

Rest assured therefore that any provision against paramilitary protection of the public safety will be respected only after adequate provision is made for the safety of all communities by other means, even if it takes a larger military establishment to do it. We must, in principle, yield to the public clamor for more responsible guardians of public order than the CHDFs have proved to be, but we will never compromise on the safety of our people, and the protection of their rights and liberties. It is unfortunate that the bad elements in these forces have brought a general discredit to the concept of community-based defense forces. But the over-all aim of community protection against subversion and terrorism remains our first priority and the paramount and exclusive duty and prerogative of the national government.

Again, let me repeat. This is a government of the people, pledged to lead them only in the direction they point. It is a government by consultation. The discussions today were animated, to say the least, and this is good for it shows that the idea is taken seriously. We, the government, are, of course, serious about it.

We therefore encourage that wider consultations be held following this, consultations that should involve all groups and sectors.

We shall appoint a Commission for Peace and Development, to be composed of people from the autonomous region and to report directly to me. It is this Commission that will review the problems brought up in the consultations and the solutions proposed, and recommend these to me. Their mandate will cover all issues regarding the peace and order situation in the autonomous regions.

Pending its recommendations, we have held in abeyance any further appointments or replacements of officials in the Regional Autonomous Governments in Regions 9 and 12 after the people have been consulted and I have studied the matter with Minister Pimentel.

We shall continue to disagree on many points. This is the price we must pay for freedom. This is also the chief advantage of a democracy, that we have the benefit of the widest spectrum of views on our many problems. But this diversity must have a center to hold it together. That center is our common conviction that all we do and say in all sincerity must always be for the good of our one and only country, the singular object of our total loyalty.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August 8 – December 31, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].