Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At a special meeting with friends of the Philippines

[Delivered on September 22, 1986]

AN OPEN ECONOMY

The Philippines has a strategic vision of what it must do in order to build a strong national economy over the long term. In the same way it runs an open government, the Aquino Administration opts for a more open economy – one that welcomes any legitimate investor, regardless of nationality, provided he shares the Filipino’s interest in developing the Philippine economy.

My friends, I wish to thank all of you for accepting my invitation to come to this special meeting of friends of the Philippines.

I had already talked about the past and about the many problems we inherited from the previous administration. I have also given an indication of the solutions we are trying to implement to resolve our many problems. But I want you to know that we cannot limit ourselves to simply putting out fires from the past. We must also have a strategic vision of what we must do in order to build a strong Philippine economy over the long-term.

In trying to formulate such a strategy, we in the Philippines have found out it is not enough to secure peace in the labor front. We also have to put in place all the necessary infrastructure at standards of efficiency that modern business demands. Our telephones must work. Our electricity must be available and affordable. All public utilities must be kept in proper working order.

Allow me to tell you, however, that based on our experience, it is not only the technical aspects of economic policy that determine the business environment in the Philippines. It is also the sincerity of the government itself, and the integrity of government leadership. I know we have to win your respect and keep our credibility. I can only assure you that we are trying our very best.

Please do not doubt the commitment of my administration to a program of reforms that will make our investment climate favorable to private business. We are committed to a strong, independent financial system, freed from the abuses of the past. We want to speed up our privatization program. We are putting back market rules. We are removing unnecessary regulations that only stifle and strangle business initiative. We are liberalizing all aspects of our economy, not only because it is good for us, but also because we are fully convinced it will attract the investors we want.

I am running an open government, one that is open to the wishes, aspirations and advice of my people. I would like a more open economy also, one that welcomes any legitimate investor, regardless of nationality, provided he shares our interest in quickly developing the Philippine economy.

It is in an open economy that investors best thrive. It is there that you can be of most help.

Your help can come not only in the equity funds you are trying to raise for investment in the Philippines. Your help can count the most if you can come and interact with us.

We can openly tell you what our problems are, what we are trying to do about them, what our progress is, and what our difficulties are as we travel up the path of growth and development. But we recognize there are other views, other perceptions, other suggestions we can listen to with profit.

Your advice will be welcome; but also your understanding and support. As friends of the Philippines, in a spirit of candor, you can tell us what we can do to further improve the conditions under which business thrives and investments flow in. You can help monitor the consistency between our words and deeds; and you can tell your friends as well as your respective constituencies of our problems, our programs and of the business opportunities we have to offer.

I deeply appreciate the efforts you are making to bring equity funds into the Philippines. But I am even more appreciative of the openness you have shown towards our offer of friendship.

In closing, let me emphasize that we would like the Philippine economy to work, and that I want you and your friends and constituents to work very closely with us.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Democracy by the ways of democracy : speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino, official visit to the United States of America, September 15-24, 1986 . Manila : [Office of the President of the Philippines].