MANILA POLICE, MANILA’S FINEST

The Manila Police Organization has well deserved the honor of being called “Manila’s Finest”. It has proved that democracy can protect itself quite well if its guardians have just two basic qualities: loyalty and courage. The President said that an anniversary is not only a time for celebration but for reflection as well on the many members of the Manila Police who gave their lives to deserve its distinction as first among the forces of law and order.

First of all, I would like to extend to our guests and to all our Filipino countrymen my heartfelt greetings of a Happy New Year.

And to the personnel of the Manila Police, I wish to join you and the people of Manila in celebrating the 88th anniversary of the establishment of your department.

The Manila Police organization has held fast to the honor of being called “Manila’s Finest.” It has well deserved that honor, particularly in the period of General Alfredo Lim’s forceful leadership.

It has discharged with distinction the traditional police role of maintaining peace and order in the capital city. It has added to that distinction by playing a signal role in the defense of democracy and in the stunning defeat of its enemies. It has proved, by its vigorous enforcement of the laws, its relentless suppression of political anarchy and plain criminality, that democracy can protect itself quite well if its guardians have just two basic qualities: loyalty and courage.

These qualities the Manila Police has in abundance, I am grateful to say.

As the oldest police organization the Manila Police is expected to provide the role model for police organizations throughout the rest of the country.

Its efforts to cleanse its ranks and impose internal discipline must have shown it that this is the more difficult and challenging task, a task as old as the first question of political science: Who will guard the guardians, who will police the police?

The Manila Police has been very conscious of the importance of this task, for on it depends the continuing faith of our communities in the primacy of law and order and in the usefulness of government.

I am pleased to note that the Manila Police has pursued relentlessly the cleansing of its ranks. Our communities need not fear that the continuing purge initiated by General Lim will reduce the forces committed to law order. By winnowing out all but the best, this process can only have a multiplier effect on the efficiency of the organization that will remain. Anyway, the pride of the Western Police District is not in its numbers but in its quality.

An anniversary is a time for celebration, especially when it marks the 88th year of an organization that is almost as old as Philippine independence. Yet it is also a time for bereaved reflection on the many members of the Manila Police who gave their lives so that it might continue to deserve its distinction as first among the forces of law and order. We honor them this morning by calling attention to that distinction, which is owed in no small part to their final sacrifices.

We take this occasion also to thank the many civic and barangay organizations whose cooperation enchance greatly the effectiveness of police forces. We take note also of the support extended by the Metro Manila Commission headed by Governor Elfren Cruz. I am particularly pleased at the help extended by media, which the Manila Police formally acknowledge this morning.

On the suggestion of General Lim, I would like to make special mention of the tremendous contributions of the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce, whose president is honored this morning. I am referring to the forty-one (41) brand new mobile patrol cars the Federation has donated to the Western Police District.

We are in a new year, on the threshold of the decade that will decide whether we shall realize the full potential of our country or settle for less. The past year was one of great progress, of many achievements that I think should be acknowledged. Yet, unquestionably, much remains to be done, particularly in the peace and order situation. I am determined that we shall make significant inroads into that problem this year. To that end, I want to relieve our police forces of many of the stumbling blocks that prevent them from doing a good job.

Take, for instance, the multitude of agencies authorized to investigate police abuses, such as the PC JAGO, the police court martial, the PC Inspector General, the CIS, the Provost Marshall, the Regional Staff Judge Advocate, the Regional Inspector General, the Regional Intelligence and Operation Unit, not to mention the Napolcom and the NBI. While law enforcement agents who violate the law deserve specially to be punished, the many more who adhere faithfully to their duties do not deserve such harassment.

To that end, and in recognition of the civilian character of the police forces, I shall initiate as a priority administration bill the amendment of PD 1850 reverting to civilian courts the prosecution of criminal complaints against policemen. Administrative complaints shall be the exclusive jurisdiction of the National Police Commission. The bill shall further provide that the Adjudication Board shall include a member from the National Police Commission, another from the Department of Justice, and a third from the civilian police organization.

To equalize opportunities for career advancement, we are studying the feasibility of a One-Year course for non-officer policemen that will graduate them as police lieutenants on a par with graduates of the Two-Year Philippine National Police Academy Bachelor Course.

I have instructed the National Housing Authority to accelerate its studies for more housing for police forces. In particular, I have instructed the NHA Director and the General Manager of the GSIS to immediately look into the possibility of a housing project for the Western Police District.

Several other proposals are under study, such as automatic job placement in government; and a four-year college scholar for at least one child or a chance to enter the PNPA under preferential admission rules.

I am directing the Department of Budget and the INP Director General to study the conversion into cash value of accumulated sick and vacation leave credits of policemen, even before their retirement, and to be paid on a yearly basis.

As the police command tasked to maintain law and order in the capital city, where the seat of government is located, I cannot over-stress the importance of your role. Nor can I exaggerate how well you have discharged it, particularly in helping to quell the last and gravest threat to democracy. As you are Manila’s Finest, that day when you stormed and took Channel 4 and other rebel redoubts was your finest hour. Let it not be the last of such moments in the long and — I have no doubt — equally distinguished period that lies ahead for you.

I thank you for your service. The government commends you most highly for your professionalism. The people of Manila thank you for your sacrifices. Our nation honors you for your loyalty and courage, for your commitment to its safety and its freedom.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].