A MOTHER’S DEED

President Aquino cites her complementary roles as mother and President. She advises mothers on ways to bring up their children to become responsible, industrious and moral citizens.

Thank you for this honor. I have received many awards and citations this past year, but this is special. For before I became President, I was a wife first and a mother. When I lost my husband, motherhood was the role left me that gave my life most meaning and direction.

I am your President now, but I have not stopped being a mother, and I never will, for I am responsible to God for my children. It is my duty to ensure that in their thoughts, actions and Faith, they remain His children first.

What has changed, now that I have taken over the highest office in the land, is that I feel my brood has increased. For I now feel responsible for the entire family of Filipinos. I have been placed in a position of authority and leadership, and I know I am looked up to for guidance and encouragement, for discipline and direction, for hope and strength. My attitudes and actions, whether on a spiritual, moral, political or personal level are no longer exclusively my own.

If I had been an ordinary person, I would have confronted immediately the repeated challenges hurled at me, for my patience is not as long as people credit me for. But I no longer belong to myself. I cannot indulge my temper without considering its effect on the lives of my people. I belong to all Filipinos who gave greatly of themselves to put me in office, so as to give life to their aspirations and dreams.

In the midst of such pressure, I find comfort still. For God is always there, giving me the strength to bear it.

But still I need your help and support. I speak specially to all Filipinos who, like myself, have children to raise, protect and guide. We must always remember the great importance, the sacredness even, of our God-given roles. We are responsible for the new generations of Filipinos that we have brought into this world. It is left to us to mold the values and beliefs and actions of those who will assume, or determine, the leadership of this nation after we are gone.

It is the amount of love and attention, teaching and discipline that we give our young ones, that will decide if this country will enter a new age of enlightenment and peace or plunge again into darkness and violence. As the wisdom of Solomon tells us: “Train a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not turn from it.”

Let us complete what we have started in this present age of renewal and transformation, through our children.

Let us teach them the value of respect: respect for themselves, for their parents, for all legitimate authority and the laws of the land, for the laws and teachings given to all countries and generations by a just and loving God.

Let us teach them the value of industry and perseverance, the connection between their ambitions and desires and the work of their minds and hands. Let us not allow them to stand on the sidelines, but urge them to involve themselves in situations where they might improve their lives and those of others.

Let us teach them the necessity for discipline and restraint, that the actions and excesses of the few will produce a harmful consequence on the many; that time, resources and opportunities are precious and should never be squandered.

Let us give them a sense of morality and decency; a concern and regard for those who have less in life and a desire to correct the inequity of this condition. Let us imbue them with a sense of the dignity of all Filipinos regardless of social status, profession or appearance.

Let us teach them to believe that the ways of peace are best, but the surrender of principles is always ignoble and to be avoided at all cost. That the way of democracy, though not without its flaws, is the best, most humane, and most enlightened system of government yet devised by men. And that we should accept no other form of government whatever the price to be paid.

Let us teach our children to recognize what is of real value: that a stable and tranquil land, a society where all people work, achieve, learn and share; that a home where love prevails, are the things that are priceless and lasting. And that for these things and their preservation, we must not shirk from making the last sacrifice; remembering the words of the woman of Sparta as her son went off to the wars: Return with your shield, my son, or on it.

Let us all, as mothers, be worthy of our children by giving them a sense of their worth. And as citizens, let us deserve our God-given mandate to start anew and restore our land, by breeding citizens worthy of the dream.

Let us not neglect our children. They are not only our treasure, but also the treasure of our nation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library