WHAT PRICE FREEDOM?

President Aquino does not believe that the death of young men can justify even such noble cause as the attainment of freedom.

She feels that the men who have died for freedom could have been alive today and could be contributing more for the good of the world if only nations resorted to peaceful means in achieving their goals.

She is proud that at least here in the Philippines we have tried to have freedom through peaceful means, and we achieved it.

Others might be tempted to declaim, on an occasion like this, that an enduring friendship between two nations had flowered on the graves of these young men. I cannot. I have seen death at first hand and it cannot justify anything in my eyes. Even the attainment of freedom cannot justify the lives that had to be sacrificed for it. That many have had to die, like these young men, so that others might be free is not an argument for mortal sacrifices but an added condemnation of the unjust governments that made them necessary.

Looking at the rolling lawn around us, studded with crosses and stars of David, I don’t see the price that had to be paid for a priceless freedom, but the loss of young men who might have been given us a better world than we have had since the end of the Second World War.

What I see here is not so much the glory of a nation but the tragedy of a world that will not let the ways of peace prevail. At least here in the Philippines we tried.

Perhaps our success will not be duplicated anywhere else in the world. Already political thinkers are looking for reasons to say that the success of non-violent struggle is unique to our time, place and race. These could be the same people who told us, during the dictatorship, that Filipinos are neither suited nor inclined to democracy. We proved them wrong, at least to the extent of showing that the Filipino was prepared without arms or hate, to lay down his or her life in peace for democracy. We also proved wrong the premise that you need violence to dislodge a violent dictatorship, that you simply cannot unravel it like a woman unravels a ball of yarn, patiently and relentlessly. You will never know what can be done until you’ve tried. Considering the alternative, I cannot see why the attempt has not been made more often.

But, for all my deep aversion to violence, I honor places like this, where the brave dead lie, as symbols of that second fatherland of courage to which Americans like these, and Filipinos like Ninoy, are united without the distinctions of nationality and political creed. I pay to them the respect that is due the willing sacrifice of the brave and express to them the gratitude of the nation they helped to liberate.

With the sad reluctance I share with the loved ones they left behind, I repeat the words that make children ardent for some desperate glory:

Sweet and fitting it is to die for one's country.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].