Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Napolcom

[Released on September 8, 1988]

A NATIONAL POLICE FORCE

President Aquino impresses upon the members of the NAPOLCOM her determination to push through the unification of the constabulary and police into a national police force dedicated singlemindedly to bringing law, order, and security to our communities. She touches on a bill detailing the character of this national police force, the hierarchy of command, the scope of jurisdiction, the manner of interacting with local authorities.

I am told that this is only the second time a Chief Executive addresses the National Police Commission in its 22 years of existence. I am also told that very shortly after the last President was your guest speaker, Napolcom’s first chairman lost his job. Let me assure you, nothing like that will happen. Yet, undoubtedly, important changes are in store for the Napolcom – for the forces of order throughout the country.

These changes cannot be resisted for they have the compelling force of the Constitution behind them. On the contrary, they should be welcomed, for they will address the shortcomings of the present national police system which keep it from meeting its great objectives.

The first duty of the State is law and order. This priority ranks higher than social amelioration, human development, cultural attainment, and whatever else one can think of. This may sound unduly harsh, but only the ignorant will deny it.

As the Constitution states in the Declaration of Principles, the “prime duty of Government is to serve and protect the people,” and the “maintenance of peace and order, the protection of life, liberty and property, and the promotion of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings of democracy.”

Without law and order, our lives would be nasty, brutish and short; none of the things that make life worth living would be possible.

Economic progress beyond a hand-to-mouth existence would be impossible without a comprehensive order to assure everyone of at least his right, and that of his family, to life, followed immediately by his right to work undisturbed and keep the compensation of his labor – his right to the property he sweats to acquire. These are the most basic demands of human beings everywhere. They are so basic, hardly anyone thinks of them until they are lost or gravely threatened. The State itself hardly gives them any regard, concentrating instead on improving the lives it protects from harm. The only time the State remembers its minimal function – the protection of life and property – is when their violation reaches such proportions that the public puts on the pressure.

The pressure is on us.

No question about it. The demands I get are increasingly less for the good life, for social justice, and other important aspirations, as for the basic requirement that the State do to every man its basic duty: keep him and his family secure from physical harm, his property rights respected, and his community a safe and decent place to live and work in.

The tragedy in this country is that this very function is so divided and confused, that the State quite frequently fails to perform it.

In recognition of this terrible shortcoming, the Constitution has mandated the coming together and fusion of all the forces of order into one national police force. A unification to assure coordination; a clarification of hierarchy and duty to pinpoint responsibility.

The Constitution provides:

“The State shall establish and maintain one police force, which shall be national in scope and civilian in character; to be administered and controlled by a national police commission. The authority of local executives over the police units in their jurisdiction shall be provided by law.”

It was therefore with a great deal of surprise that I listened to complaints from both parties to the police function, the PC and the INP, about the implementation of this provision. Both sides had essentially one and only one complaint: who would run the show. Yet both sides agreed, that the show was being badly run; that the confusion of functions and roles had seriously hampered the State’s first duty of protection. The discussions between both essential partners – who should be working as one, with one and the same name and uniform – took on the accents of a labor-management dispute.

Well, let me make this clear. The task of policing the community, of securing lives and property, of laying down that modicum of order without which we cannot call our society civilized, is not a job: It is a duty and a calling.

It is all sacrifice, and its chief reward is only that which anyone who goes into public service should expect: the largely private satisfaction that one did his part for his country. No one cares what you gave up in private life to serve in public office. Public service, in addition to being a public trust, is its own and principal reward. There is always the private sector one can go back to.

It is therefore with great eagerness that I accepted this invitation to attend and to talk on your 22nd anniversary. I just had to layout before you my thoughts, my determination to push through the unification of the constabulary and police into one national police force dedicated singlemindedly to bringing law, order, and security to our communities.

A bill detailing the character of this national police force, the hierarchy of command, the scope of jurisdiction, the manner of interacting with local authorities has been introduced in Congress, with my certification. And only yesterday, I repeated my urging to Congress to pass that bill so we can get on with its much needed implementation.

I expect, and know I will get, from the police and its chiefs the cooperation and dedication needed to make the law succeed. I expect the same from the constabulary and its officers. Both organizations were in the forefront of the defense of government and democracy around this time last year, again at EDSA. A sense of embarrassment at how short the forces of order have fallen in the popular expectation, as well as a sense of patriotism on both your parts, assure me that that cooperation will be forthcoming. We shall soon cease to mark constabulary and police anniversaries separately and start proudly to celebrate the achievements of the National Police Force together. I would like to congratulate you on your 22nd and perhaps last anniversary as the National Police Commission, and wish the police and the constabulary every success on the coming rebirth of the national police. Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1988). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : June – December 1988 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].