Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the ASEAN Conference

[Delivered on June 23, 1986]

NEW ASEAN STRATEGY: PROVISION FOR MIRACLES

The seeming indifference of the rich countries to our economic situation should have motivated ASEAN countries to look into the potential of the Region for other ways to achieve sustained progress, President Aquino tells ASEAN foreign ministers at their meeting in Manila. It it time to re-examine the ASEAN position, she says. While ASEAN has handled several international crises admirably, it has not done much in the field of economic cooperation and progress.

On behalf of the new government and the people of the Philippines, I wish to extend my warmest welcome to the Foreign Ministers and Delegates attending the 19th ASEAN Ministerial Meeting.

I have been looking forward to this occasion because it is my first opportunity to reaffirm the commitment of the Philippines to ASEAN.

Through our collective efforts, ASEAN has gained recognition as one or the more successful regional organizations in the world. This is clearly shown by the keen interest I that the rest of the world has shown in developing ties with us. However, lest we be led to believe that ours is a total success story, let me remind you that we still share problems which remain unresolved and threaten to frustrate the tremendous promise of this region. These problems equally threaten to render meaningless our continued association. Even as we meet today, we face the same obstacles to peace and progress which we have signally endeavored to overcome.

The continuing occupation of Kampuchea and the irresolution of the issues that prevent a unified and viable government in that sad country, threaten the balance of power in our region, cast a dark shadow on the world’s perception of its stability, and constrain the progress that could realize the full promise of the Region. Rather than be the vortex of instability, ASEAN should be the stabilizing factor in what, I suppose, is the unavoidable competition of great powers. If ASEAN could stand tall as an example of a regional force for reason in international relations, humanity in political order, and progress in its economies, it could exercise a salutary influence over the rest of the world.

The economic picture likewise has not been as rosy as it used to be. Of course, it never was for the Philippines under the previous government. ASEAN’s trade performance in recent years has become more and more dismal. The global recession that hit the developed countries has wrought havoc on our export-oriented economies. To reduce their trade deficit, our industrialized partners – have restricted access of our exports to their markets. Contracting demand for manufactured goods forced foreign companies to scale down their operations and recall their investments from our shores. The world glut in oil, sugar, metal and semi-processed goods has depressed our primary and secondary industries. All these factors combined to stunt the economic growth of the Region for the past several years.

It is lamentable that, despite our experience, we continue to look outwards from the Region for the revival of its progress and the fulfillment of its promise. My own country is learning the hard way that strength must be built first from within. First, among the vast majority of our people locked in poverty and a retrogressive agriculture. Then, to the second circle of increasingly capital-intensive industries. And then outwards to the rest of the world. I should like the next stage to be within the ASEAN, among the nations that have a common security interest with us, and that should have, by virtue of proximity and colonial experience, many points of economic interest. This is how ASEAN should have evolved: by native self-reliance, expanding to regional interdependence until we had collectively achieved a level of strength sufficient to take on the vagaries of the international developed economy.

It is not malevolence that moves the developed economies to act in derogation of our interests, but their own survival, charity begins at home. Let us take that message to heart. The seeming indifference of the rich countries to our economic situation should have been motivation enough for ASEAN countries to take the initiative in looking into the potential of the Region for alternative paths to sustained progress.

After 19 years of existence, ASEAN should already be evaluating the impact of regional economic cooperation instead of endlessly discussing how to get it off the ground.

Distinguished Delegates, it is time to re-examine our present position, consider how far short of ASEAN’s goals we have fallen, and renew more firmly our commitment to achieve those goals. ASEAN is not without achievements. It handled several international crises admirably, crisis of the kind that plunged Western countries into war. But we were established for economic cooperation and progress. What we have accomplished in these last respects is more kindly left unmentioned. I think the time is well past for talking.

I look forward to the summit meeting that will be held in Manila next year. This will be an opportunity for me to meet all my distinguished counterparts in ASEAN. It should also be the occasion when ASEAN makes the hard and fast decisions to reach the objectives of its creation. The only way I can explain the delay and hesitations of the past is that they are rooted in fear of failure. But why should it be so? Who would have thought that the Filipinos would succeed in restoring democracy by boycotting beverages and newspapers, calling out a military revolt that numbered a handful, and strolling along an avenue-but in the millions? A miracle? Yes, indeed, as I believe all faiths that hold sway over the hearts of ASEAN peoples make provisions for miracles.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1986). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : March 22 – August 5, 198 6. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].