Statement of President Corazon C. Aquino: On her departure in Manila

[Released on November 4, 1989]

SEEKING SUPPORT FROM FRIENDS

President Aquino is leaving for state visits to Canada and the United States. There, she will stress the economic and political progress the Philippines has achieved, and she will seek more support for the work ahead. Her enthusiasm is not dampened by the demonstration of Marcos loyalists on the eve of her departure which to President Aquino is a failed people power. For the President avers that “People Power is not a political technique, it is a selfless action for a moral purpose”.

For the next eight days, I shall be on state visits to Canada and the United States.

It will be the first state visit of a Philippine president to Canada. From November 4 to 7, I will visit Vancouver, Toronto, and the capital city of Ottawa. I shall meet with trade and business leaders of Canada as well as with the Filipino communities.

I shall seek from Canada increased trade and investments for the Philippines and discuss with the Canadian Prime Minister not only bilateral matters but also international and multilateral issues of common concern to us.

From November 8 to 11, I shall be in the United States.

In New York, I shall launch the First Philippine Fund to generate investments in Philippine equities from US-based investors – American, European, and Asian.

I shall meet with President Bush, in Washington, D.C., and we shall take up bilateral issues of trade and investments, as well as debt relief, and the Philippine Assistance Program. I shall also meet with the leaders of the US Congress and address Filipino communities.

I shall go to Dallas to promote Philippine-made products. I shall bid goodbye to the Filipino community in Los Angeles on my departure for home.

It is our aim to project the progress of the Philippines in the past three years– in the economy as well as in politics – and explain to the Canadian and US leaderships the challenges we still face.

In my first visit to the United States, I spoke of the promising beginning we had made, of the difficulties ahead, and of our determination to succeed.

Now I shall seek greater support from friends for the work that yet remains, so that the freedom we have won shall be truly meaningful to us all

I depart, as always, with confidence that the safety of the government is assured in the care of the people. Yesterday’s loyalist demonstration does not diminish that confidence. Most of the demonstrators had left before dawn, except for around 300 who insisted on staying on, leaving the police no alternative but to disperse them.

The events this morning underscore an important truth: people power is not a political technique, it is a selfless action for a moral purpose. It springs from a heritage of faith and freedom and will rise to the occasion only when these supreme values are threatened.

I call on all the people, regardless of their politics, to join us in a firm resolve to work for those goals that all of us must share as Filipinos: the progress of the economy, the upliftment of the people, and the heightened respect of the international community for our country.

Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].