Toast of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines In Honor of Mr. Stephen Solarz

[Delivered in Malacañang, April 1, 1989]

LA FAYETTE OF OUR REVOLUTION

Although there are different views and opinions from the US Congress regarding the Multilateral Aid Initiative for the Philippines, the President gives credit to Mr. Solarz’s leadership for bringing them together in support of a Philippine aid plan.

We are pleased to welcome again our country’s true and most constant friend.

Mr. Stephen Solarz comes to brief us on the latest developments in the Multilateral Aid Initiative – America’s concrete expression of support for the ideals we proclaim as the animating spirit of our two democracies.

Reports of the latest developments preceded Mr. Solarz. We have viewed the tape of the subcommittee proceedings on the Philippine assistance plan chaired by him.

The views there expressed were a complete education, not least about America’s view of the world and the place of the Philippines in its international priorities. We listened carefully and came away with a greater appreciation of our friends than with deprecation for the smaller views that others hold of our country and our efforts.

The thrust of the proceedings did not escape us. Largely through Mr. Solarz’s efforts, a bi-partisan consensus is forming in the US Congress for a multilateral aid initiative for the Philippines. To what extent, when, and how it will materialize remains unsettled.

Speaker of the House James Wright gave me a yellow rose of Texas at the US Congress. He proved the sincerity of his tribute to our revolution by speaking up for the multilateral initiative. Indeed, the United States spends hundreds of billions in vain to arrest the narrowing safety of its nuclear shield when it might go forward at much less expense, and extend more amply and surely the influence of its beneficent example.

Senator Dole applauded my home run at the US Congress but thought I was bit overpaid for it. He obviously hasn’t followed professional baseball carefully. I was happy to see that he has changed his mind after visiting the Philippines and seeing for himself the parity of our exertions with the challenges we face, and the disparity of the material means available to us.

These and other distinguished men and women in the US Congress and in the Executive concluded individually that such an initiative is critical to the continuing freedom of one side of the Pacific and to common safety of both. Yet we must credit Mr. Solarz’s leadership for bringing them together in support of a Philippine aid plan.

The subcommittee hearing showed at least that the United States understands the problems and the peril of democracy in our country.

No one pleaded ignorance of the broad outlines of the challenges we face; a few expressed doubts about the utility of helping overcome them.

We too understand the problems the United States faces with its deficit; the paucity of its means in relation to its aim of helping the Philippines, and the ranking of that aim among America’s geopolitical priorities. The experience is not new. When pressed by La Fayette to go on the offensive because the French court was impatient with the slow progress of American arms, Washington gave what has become a stock reply these days: “We must consult our means rather than our wishes.”

It was a bad time for America.

Long on debts, short on supplies, plagued by the uncertain loyalty of its troops, its currency devaluating – the young American democracy had only its foreign friends to depend on, even for forces in the battlefield.

We have not gone that far in our requests for help. So I think it goes a little far to say that we regard America as a dairy cow and that we are asking her to pay us for the privilege of taking her for a ride, as one US Congressman put it. May we assure you that Filipinos wouldn’t dream of taking a cow for a ride. And milk is not popular with Filipinos.

To those who still fault the pace of our recovery and progress, we say, “We must consult our means and not our wishes.” Agrarian reform must wait on the resources that will make it more than just the equal division of property rights to a miserable existence on the land.

The contribution the US proposes to make, while small in relation to the total assistance required, is critical, for it sends a signal to the rest of the world. We hope that signal is sent. Needless to say a change of heart would send another signal to these countries – and still another message to our own people.

The success of this first small step towards a fully-fledged aid plan is not certain. Yet, it is never too early to express our country’s gratitude and affection for one who has stayed by her in the struggle that is far from over. You have always known this, Mr. Solarz, and so have stayed the course with us, unlike so many whom we remember gratefully as having stayed only for the celebration of our freedom.

You know that we can’t achieve our goal of a free and prosperous country with one stroke, but by a long sustained effort, using every resource that comes to hand, putting every shoulder to the wheel, and hoping but not stopping to wait for others to add their strength to our own. But we shall always pause from our exertions to enjoy the fresh wind of sincere friendship that comes from America in you.

I want to thank you most specially for defending the memory of the Filipino soldiers and partisans who gave their lives so that both our countries might be free. Throughout the Pacific, only two nations can honestly erect monuments to freedom out of the gravestones of their heroes – Americans and Filipinos. Let no one forget that. We are not as rich as those whom America more readily defends these days, but we are not poor in heroes for democracy even at this late date.

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast to the good health and success of Pres. George Bush and of our country’s truest friend – Stephen Solarz. Now more than ever, the La Fayette of  our Revolution.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].