Toast of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines In honor of Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan

PEACE THROUGH PROGRESS AND PROSPERITY

The President wishes the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan, and his lovely wife, Khunying Boonwen Choonhavan, long life, greater success and happiness. She hopes for a stronger friendship and cooperation with Thailand, and a long and happy reign to His Royal Majesty, King Bhumiphol, the spirit and guiding light of their country’s progress and prosperity.

We are honored by the visit of the Prime Minister of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan. The Prime Minister, I learned, is also the Defense Minister. In the past, he was Minister of Industry twice in the periods that we associate with the remarkable progress of Thailand which has made her a model for the populous, agro-industrial nations of Asia. He is the first prime minister in twelve years to serve as an elected member of parliament. His cabinet, largely composed of members of parliament, has been hailed as a new step in the development of democracy in the Kingdom of Thailand.

We can say of him that he has one hand on the helm; another, prudently, on the sword of his nation; and his shoulder, farsightedly, to the wheel of the economy.

The remarkable things that one could say, and learn, from Prime Minister Chatichai do not stop there.

In the progress and prosperity that Thailand has achieved under a succession of wise and dedicated ministers in the inspiring service of His Majesty King Bhumiphol, Prime Minister Chatichai has seen the key to enduring peace in an embattled peninsula.

The way to peace lies in removing the roots of instability and war: underdevelopment and poverty, and the suspicion and aggressiveness they foster in countries that see themselves as too weak to assume the posture of peace.

Prime Minister Chatichai has extended Thailand’s hand of cooperation to the militant nations of Indochina; offering to turn, in his words, a zone of war into a zone of peace through the shared progress and prosperity of the nations whom fate has thrown together in that peninsula. If the gesture was totally unexpected coming from a country continuously under threat, the responses have been equally astonishing and hopeful from Thailand’s “ideologically different” brothers in the area.

In the fraternal spirit in which the offer was made, so, it seems, has it been accepted. The Philippines and other Southeast Asian nations in the Pacific have good reason to hope that the tremendous energies that went into the fiercest war in recent memory will be directed with happier effect towards the progress and amity of all who must share the common destiny of this region.

Peace, it is said, is breaking out all over. Prime Minister Chatichai is making sure that this placid epidemic does not subside. He is feeding the fever through the region-wide replication of Thai progress.

The task that Prime Minister Chatichai has set himself is enormous, and he has proved himself equal to the task. Yet for his daring vision alone, he has our highest respect and admiration.

Many great and unprecedented things are taking place in Southeast Asia and the Pacific, things having to do with the materialization of the economic and political potential of the Region — for the further progress of its economies and the fuller enjoyment of freedom among all its peoples. But two achievements stand out for their similarity: both are conquests of fear — fear of one’s own weakness, fear of one’s perceived enemies. These fears fed the tragedies from which they arose and assured their endless repetition.

One of these victories over fear took place on a stretch of highway in the Philippines. The other in the hand of friendship and cooperation extended by a brave and wise man to his country’s long perceived enemies.

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast to the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan, a major architect of the Asian peace and progress to which we all aspire, and to his lovely wife, Khunying Boonnien Choonhavan: long life, greater successes and happiness.

To the friendship and cooperation of our two countries — may they grow stronger and wider.

And to His Royal Majesty, King Bhumiphol, the spirit and guiding light of Thailand’s progress and prosperity, a long and happy reign in the affectionate regard of his grateful people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].