Toast of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines At the State Dinner in honor of Honorable Richard Lugar, Senator of the United States of America

[Delivered at the State Dining Hall, January 7, 1989]

A FRIEND OF DEMOCRACY

The President commends US Senator Richard Lugar as a committed man who led the group of US Congressional Observers to the Philippine Snap Election. Their presence, according to her, influenced significantly the final outcome of the events that led to the restoration of Philippine democracy.

In relation to the events that led to the restoration of Philippine democracy, we have praised the realists who saw at the last hour the situation for what it was and wisely acted accordingly. When people, Church and army united behind my victory, nothing could undo it. The most practical counsel was to accept it; the most dangerous folly to resist it.

To those who doubted our determination to vindicate our victory at the polls by a revolution in the streets, I made it clear that they were inviting the long-term displeasure of the next government for the short-term pleasure of the foredoomed incumbent.

Yet still we commend those who read the obvious and came down finally on the side of right and freedom. For it is always difficult to change old ways of thinking for the new, untried, and uncertain.

But the highest praise must go to those who see the future not as it must unfold, given the naked balance of forces, but as it must be given one’s commitment to a certain vision of political freedom and human dignity.

Among such committed men is US Senator Richard Lugar, whose presence honors us and brings back vividly the selflessness of those days that now seem so remote from the ways of the present.

Senator Lugar, as we all know, led the group of US Congressional observers to the Philippine SNAP Election. As a foreigner, Senator Lugar will admit to only the passive role of observer of those fateful events. I think we are mature enough to acknowledge that Senator Lugar and his group did more than observe; they influenced significantly the final outcome.

Senator Lugar and his group did not agree to come and watch just any election that the dictatorship would stage. Their critical contribution started even before the SNAP Election when they laid down clear guidelines for a fair election.

Those guidelines became the watchwords of the Philippine struggle: NAMFREL accreditation, opposition representation in the COMELEC, recognition as Dominant Opposition Party, equal access to media, neutrality of the Armed Forces, a quick count by the COMELEC and NAMFREL, and the presence of international observers.

Given those conditions, the future was set for the restoration of Philippine democracy by elections. For all the people wanted was a chance to be heard, and their call would sound clearly for change.

By the same token, the violation of those conditions would hasten, rather than delay, the restoration of Philippine democracy – by a revolution. For all the people needed was a last straw to break the back of their patience.

Senator Lugar denounced the violations in the strongest terms. Yet if his statements were initially ignored by his government, they gave us the greatest encouragement here at home. He showed us a face of America we had started to despair of.

Somehow he managed to get himself invited to virtually every TV news program. He hammered on the message that for the US to back the dictatorship, in the face of its frauds, would be to march with a false and fallen friend into a foreign policy disaster. The truth of his message must have spoken for itself, for I am told that Senator Lugar can be as flat a speaker as I am reputed to be. Yet his message hit home and America officially came down on the side of freedom.

Senator Lugar served his country well by his actions in those days. Without him, there would be no Philippine-US relations to speak of by now. For, against the official line, Senator Lugar came right out and said that the preponderance of fraud was by the dictatorship. This mollified the national rage over the allegation that the people had committed fraud to match the fraud the dictatorship had perpetrated on them. Senator Lugar’s words assured us that truth held an honorable place in the American pantheon of values.

Three years down the road from that fateful, almost fatal, turning point in Philippine-US relations and I believe that we shall need Americans like Richard Lugar as those relations evolve and adapt themselves to the emerging realities of our country, the region, and the Pacific as a whole.

We need men with the intellectual clarity to see things here for what they are: unavoidable and not always neat stages in a people’s sense of nationhood coming finally to completion; and the sincere attempts of a developing nation to overcome its condition, and rise to the full height of its aspirations of material progress, social justice, and genuine sovereignty.

We need Americans of his faith that so long as our two countries share the same vision and practice of democracy, we shall always be friends and useful allies, genuinely concerned for the common safety yet understanding and respectful of each other’s unique approaches towards that common end.

Senator Lugar is described in a short biography as “not a man of passion.” That is good. For passion is dangerous to long-term relationships, for which the best ingredients are reason, mutual respect, commonality of fundamental values, and the steady trust of tested friendships, such as the friendship of Senator Lugar and our country.

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast:

To Senator Lugar and his wife, the best of health and continued success in all their endeavors.

To President Reagan, the American people, and the American vision of liberty and justice for all. Long may they live and prosper.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].