Toast of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines In Honor of Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita

SPECIAL FRIEND BRINGS HOPE

The President is grateful for the critical role of His Excellency, Noboru Takeshita in shaping a new order in Asia. As the Philippines rose from economic and democratic devastation brought by the last regime, the clearest and most encouraging, answer came from Japan in the form of concrete measures of economic relief under His Excellency’s tenure. For this, the country is deeply grateful.

It is a great pleasure for me to welcome Your Excellency and Mrs. Noboru Takeshita once again. We in the Philippines consider you to be a good and true friend – sympathetic to us in our present situation and most helpful in the search for solutions to our problems.

As heads of our respective Governments, we have met on two different occasions in the past, first at the ASEAN Summit Meeting in December 1987 in Manila and then during the state funeral of His Majesty Emperor Showa last February in Tokyo. During those meetings I was impressed by your warm sincerity as a neighbor and a staunch ally.

Your present visit in the region provides another proof of the importance and high regard you attach to the countries of ASEAN as Japan’s partners in the search for political stability and economic progress in this part of the world. During your tenure as Prime Minister you have always paid sympathetic attention to ASEAN concerns and problems. For this we are extremely grateful.

Because of our long history as neighbors, the relations between the Philippines and Japan have always been close. We have shared the same ideals of democracy, peace and freedom as members of the Free World. We subscribe to the same political and economic principles in our search for prosperity and the well-being of our respective peoples. We bear true faith and allegiance to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.

Since I assumed office, the Japanese Government has shown strong support for my Administration in the urgent task of restoring democratic institutions, rehabilitating our economy and promoting economic growth. The generous assistance that Japan has extended during the past three years has been invaluable in enabling us to achieve the progress that we have so far made. During Your Excellency’s tenure, the level and scope of Japanese assistance have steadily increased.

Your Excellency will be best remembered by the Filipino people for your enthusiastic response from the very start of the Multilateral Aid Initiative proposed in early 1988 to promote economic growth and strengthen democracy in the Philippines. We are highly appreciative of your unwavering support for the Philippines expressed on many occasions – during the G–7 Summit Meeting in Toronto in mid-1988, at your last conference with President Reagan in Washington in January of this year, at your first meeting with President Bush last February, and at our meeting in Tokyo.

To highlight your support, Japan has kindly offered to host an enlarged Consultative Group meeting on MAI and the Philippine Assistance Program in Tokyo. During your meetings with President Reagan and more recently with President Bush, the necessity of launching PAP this year was stressed. The meeting in Tokyo will serve as the forum for this project which is of paramount importance to the Filipino people.

I will not deal with the details of PAP tonight. Suffice it for me to say that it offers a unique opportunity for the Philippines to unshackle itself from the bonds of poverty and join the long march towards progress and development. PAP will trigger a social and economic process that should enable us to share in the rich promise of a coming Age of the Pacific, as we stand on the threshold of the 21st century. And it is, therefore, the fondest hope of our people that this Program be launched at the soonest possible time.

We are thus deeply pleased and honored to welcome Your Excellency, Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita. For you have led in the shaping of a new order in Asia and of a new role for Japan in the world.

And closer to home, you have with singular attention focused on the cause of Philippine recovery and progress in the great councils of economic powers. As we looked for a sympathetic response to the necessity for economic relief to assure the survival of Philippine democracy, we found the clearest and most encouraging answer from Japan.

Through personal efforts and supportive policies, Your Excellency has applied Japan’s enormous influence to initiate the significant and concrete measures of economic relief for the Philippines. Your action showed a rare perception of the linkage between the material well-being of peoples and the harmony of nations, the prospect of enduring peace and continued progress throughout the world.

May I now express our deepest appreciation to Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, whom history will mark as the first of the leaders of the new Japan, and whom we shall gratefully remember for all time as a special friend of our country.

Ladies and Gentlemen, may I ask you to join me in a toast to the continued good health, long life and happiness of His Majesty the Emperor of Japan. Mabuhay!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].