Vin D’Honneur Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Independence Day ‘87

[Delivered on June 12, 1987]

SALUTE TO THE FILIPINO PEOPLE

Taking pride in the country’s independence and democracy, the President salutes the Filipinos, a people so poor yet so proud and jealous of their freedom.

Today we celebrate the 89th anniversary of Philippine Independence with double pride: pride in our independence; pride in our democracy. We were Asia’s oldest republic, and its first democracy, in the old style. We are today the world’s first democracy, in the new style – of People Power.

We were the first Asian nation to win its freedom by means of war, and the first to restore its freedom by the ways of peace. No other nation has shown a richer repertoire of political action.

One year ago, we gathered here to celebrate the 88th anniversary of Philippine Independence, and the first quarter of its democratic restoration. Since then the Filipino people have outdone themselves repeatedly. Against every prediction that they would fail to uphold the democracy they so wondrously restored, the Filipino people came through for democracy again, and again, and again.

Against rightwing coups and leftwing terrorists, in the plebiscite, and in the recent elections, they gave one astonishing demonstration after another of their deep sense of responsibility and commitment to democracy – as if to underscore what the rest of the world had refused to believe, that a people so poor could be so proud and jealous of their freedom.

We celebrate independence today just a few weeks from the convening of Congress, the act that will complete the shining circle of our political achievements. We have here the elected Senators and Representatives of that distinguished body.

We have here the proud achievement of our people: the judicial wisdom, the legislative will and the executive power of a democratic State – wisely divided by the Constitution, but here united by a common resolve to prove ourselves worthy of the sacrifices of our people.

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast: To the Filipino People and the outstanding democratic example they have set before the world. May we, their leaders, always prove worthy of their trust.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1987). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : April – October 198 7. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].