Vin D’Honneur Speech of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines On Philippine Independence Day

[Delivered on June 12, 1989]

We celebrate the 91st anniversary of Philippine Independence in a different light than last year’s. Then it seemed that peace was breaking out all over. That the divisions among the great powers had healed along the lines of a shared concern for the common survival in the nuclear age. And that warring states had seen the folly of wasting more in lives and treasure than they would ever acquire in victory.

The compassionate road to freedom first mapped out in this country three years ago seemed capable of limitless extension. The gentle flame of our example ignited similar freedom movements in other countries, where freedom made major strides. And if freedom has yet to reach its final goal in all the countries concerned, one could still say that the process was irreversible.

Irreversible because, freedom once tasted, cannot be forgotten. And because, at a certain point, a contagion of courage can never be contained.

It seemed last year that the world was becoming a common country, as governments reached avidly for peace and peoples marched resolutely towards freedom. In such a world, the measure of nationalist distrust that is indispensable to a nation’s safety must yield to an unguarded optimism about the possibilities of international cooperation and sharing.

Recent events prove that the declared aspirations of statesmen, the declared policies of great powers, even the noble dreams of men of good will must yield before realities. The reality of powers, institutions, and forces long established by history. And of the inability of men to see except through the prism of their fears.

Recent events teach us that we must fall back upon true nationalism as the first strategy for the national safety and for international order. That we must indeed, as I said last year, burn with a forward ambition to be strong at home before we trust our national security and economic progress to forces abroad.

So last year I said, let us make a start in true nationalism. Let government and people join in winning a more meaningful independence – of states from external influence; of people from fear, poverty and injustice.

In so doing, we are not turning our backs on the goals of international security, stability, cooperation, and friendship but rather contributing more meaningfully to those goals.

There are only two superpowers and their desistance from destroying each other and the rest of the world along with themselves is sufficient to establish the peace. But for the multitude of small powers, our best contribution to international peace and security is the political stability of our societies and the material progress and well-being of our peoples.

The enduring pact of international concord and peace will not be written on paper by the leaders of great powers but in the hearts of men satisfied with the country that they, and no one else, has built in freedom and dignity.

By looking each to his own country’s safety and to his own people’s progress, we can all look forward with more assurance to a world of enduring peace.

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in a toast:

To the progress of each of our countries so that together we can achieve peace in the world.

To my countrymen, I would like to propose a special toast. Let us toast those whose defiance in the face of certain defeat, and whose courage in the face of death must remind us of the degree of commitment necessary to achieve the goal we have set: a strong and truly independent Philippines. We had a measure of it once when we struggled to be free. We must have it yet again to be strong as a nation. Mabuhay!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : January – July 1989. [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].