Welcome Address of Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino President of the Philippines During the Taiwan Trade and Investment Mission of the Philippines

[Released on September 14, 1989]

ALTERNATIVE SITE FOR INVESTMENTS

President Aquino invites Taiwanese companies and delegates to explore alternative sites on regional industrial centers based on their specific needs and preferences. Specifically, she suggests that they take a close look at Bataan province or several sites in the northern portion of the province which could be converted into industrial estates.

First of all, let me welcome you to the Philippines. I wish to thank you for organizing this investment and trade mission and for making the Philippines a part of your itinerary.

I am pleased to note that more and more Taiwanese businessmen are investing in the country. This is the fifth group of Taiwanese investors that we have received so far this year, and I hope that this mission and other missions still to come will be very fruitful and productive.

As a manifestation of Taiwanese confidence in the Philippines as an investment opportunity area and alternative location for oversea expansion plans, our records suggest that there has been a surge of investments from Taiwan over the past three years since the start of my administration. In fact, Taiwan has become the top foreign investor in the country this year.

In 1986, Taiwanese equity investments in the Philippines approved by our Board of Investments amounted to a mere US$354 thousand or one-half of one percent of the total foreign investments that came into the Philippines. In 1987, this increased 25-fold to US$9 million to make up 5.4 percent of our total foreign investments. Last year, Taiwanese investments jumped 12 times to reach US$109.3 million representing 23 percent of our total foreign investments. And in the first seven months of this year alone, Taiwanese investments at US$ 124 million already surpassed the amount generated for the whole of 1988 and accounted for again some 23 percent of our total foreign equity investments.

This year, we hope to be able to generate US$1 billion in total project costs of investments from Taiwan — or 50 percent higher than the actual level generated last year.

The Philippines, through Trade and Industry Secretary Jose Concepcion, has made a suggestion for some Taiwanese businessmen to consider developing Port Irene-45 minutes away by plane from Taiwan — as an industrial site for their companies to locate in and serve as manufacturing base from which to export products for their world markets, particularly in products covered by US-GSP privileges which the Philippines enjoys.

This was made in 1987. My understanding is that today, this suggestion is still being considered, while some companies have expressed some reservation regarding the ability of the existing infrastructure to meet the immediate needs of industries locating in the area in the short term.

In view of this, I would like to invite the Taiwanese companies to explore alternative sites or regional industrial centers — based on their specific needs and preferences. May I therefore suggest that you take a close look at Bataan province; either within the Bataan Export Processing Zone in Mariveles, which can immediately accept new industries or several suitable sites in the northern portion of the province which could be converted into industrial estates.

Other alternatives in the provinces abound, Leyte, where abundant power is available from the island’s geothermal fields, Cagayan de Oro — a gateway city of the South. Or General Santos City – also in the South — which will be Mindanao’s agri-industrial center in the near future.

With the various industrial sectors represented here today, I am sure that there will be many exciting possibilities and opportunities that you can discuss with your Filipino counterparts in your respective workshops.

Once again, I thank you for coming to the Philippines and I hope this investment and trade mission will be a successful one.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Aquino, C. C. (1989). Speeches of President Corazon C. Aquino : August – December 1989 . [Manila : Office of the President of the Philippines].