MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 628

WHEREAS, it is the position of this Administration that the youth constitutes a critical dimension in the development effort;

WHEREAS, for this reason, the young people in the government as well as outside the government have been co-opted in the implementation of development projects as well as in the political process;

WHEREAS, in the public service, every effort has been exerted – through the Civil Service Commission – to train and develop the young people so that they might be better able to cope with new and more challenging responsibilities posed by the evolving society;

WHEREAS, the Future Leaders Training Program sponsored by the Civil Service Commission and the National Defense of the Philippines is one of these continuing programs;

WHEREAS, now that we are graduating the first batch of trainees, it is necessary that they be provided with a new challenge, especially those who have proved themselves as future leaders, which shall act as incentive towards more effective performance;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. The upper 50% of the graduates of the First Future Leaders Programs who have proved exemplary in both academic and non-academic pursuits shall each be assigned to a Career Executive Service Officer, if from Manila, and to the regional director if from the region, to be given an opportunity to be rotated to serve with the different regional directors to expose them to the different government programs.

2. If, after six months of special assignment, it is determined by the Career Executive Officer, concurred in by the Civil Service Commission and the National Defense College of the Philippines, that the BUKLOD member has provided outstanding service, said Buklod member shall be entitled to a merit increase on accordance with guideline established for the purpose.

3. All heads of departments and offices concerned shall make provision for the further career development of these young people.

This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia