MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1080

WHEREAS, the continuing accelerated development program of the country and the rapid urbanization growth continue to aggravate the already complex transportation problems;

WHEREAS, there is the continuing urgent need for trained personnel and professionals in transportation and traffic planning, management and engineering;

WHEREAS, there is further need to strengthen the role of the Transport Training Center, created by virtue of Letter of Instructions No. 428, dated 12 July 1976, to effect the development of transportation and traffic academic and research expertise, and to train Filipino transportation and traffic professionals and experts; and

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Transportation and Communications, by Executive Order No. 546, dated 23 July 1979, is the primary policy-making, planning, administrative, coordinating, implementing, and regulating agency of the government, in the development and regulation of a dependable and coordinated network of transportation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct as follows:

1. The Minister of Transportation and Communications, by virtue of his functions with respect to transportation development, and the President of the University of the Philippines System, shall continue to jointly manage, operate and develop the Transport Training Center within the Campus of the University of the Philippines System, with the long term view of upgrading the academic and research capabilities of the Transport Training Center.

2. The Ministry of Transportation and Communications shall include in its budget, the yearly operational expenses of the Transport Training Center, commencing for the Calendar Year 1982. The Center, under present institutional and financial arrangements, shall continue to operate as a special unit of the University of the Philippines System, with its operational expenses, for the Calendar Year 1981, to come from the budgetary outlays of the Ministry of Public Highways;

3. An Advisory Committee of the Transport Training Center shall replace the Steering Committee, created under Presidential Letter of Instructions No. 428, to be chaired by the Minister of Transportations and Communications, and to draw six (6) additional members, one member each from the following agencies:

Ministry of Transportation and Communications Ministry of Public Highways Ministry of Public Works National Economic and Development Authority University of the Philippines System Constabulary Highway Patrol Group

The Advisory Committee shall continue to promulgate rules and regulations as guidance to management, shall enunciate such other policies deemed necessary for the effective and successful operation of the Training Center, and shall plan the development of the Training Center into a regular unit of the University of the Philippines System; and

4. All agencies concerned shall continue to assist, in every way possible, and shall closely coordinate and take such measures as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes and intent of these instructions.

Presidential Letter of Instructions No. 428 dated 12 July 1976 is hereby superseded. All Executive Orders, Letters of Instruction and Rules and Regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions herein, are hereby also deemed superseded and/or modified accordingly.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia