MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 624

The Secretary, Department of Public Works, Transportation & Communications

The Secretary, Department of Local Government and Community Development

The Secretary, Department of National Defense

The Secretary, Department of Health

The Secretary, Department of Tourism

The Secretary, Department of Agrarian Reform

The Secretary, Department of Labor

Commissioner, National Pollution Control Commission

The Chairman, Human Settlements Commission

General Manager, National Housing Authority

General Manager, Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System

The Governor, Metropolitan Manila Commission

The President, Katipunan ng mga Barangay sa Kalakhang Maynila

In accordance with Presidential Decree No. 1096 which adopted a uniform building code and in pursuance of the creation of the Plan Enforcement and Regulation Center (PERC) under the Metropolitan Manila Area, I hereby order the following:

1. The Secretary of the DPWTC shall see to it that the PERC be provided with technical supervision and guidance in the implementation of the National Building Code in Metropolitan Manila Area. The DPWTC shall detail with PERC an overall MMA Building Official who shall be responsible for processing the plans and specifications of building and structures of metro significance and for recommending to the Executive Secretary the issuance of building/structure clearance. He shall direct the NHA, CAA, MWSS, NPCC and other agencies under it, as may be necessary, to assign required personnel to coordinate with PERC.

2. The Secretary of DLGCD shall see to it that all government officials in MMA extend their cooperation and assistance to the PERC in the enforcement of PD 1096. The DLGCD shall coordinate with PERC on any construction and/or community development projects in Metro Manila which the former may undertake.

3. The Secretary of National Defense shall direct the Protective Agencies (Police and Fire) to detail manpower to the PERC who will assist and process plans regarding fire safety measures and assist in the enforcement thereof.

4. The Secretary of Health shall be responsible for providing full assistance to PERC in the implementation of PD 1096, in terms of manpower technical support.

5. The Secretary of Tourism shall be responsible for coordinating with the PERC concerning tourism-oriented development projects in Metro Manila.

6. The Secretary of Agrarian Reform shall be responsible for coordinating with the PERC concerning construction/development projects in Metro Manila, particularly on former agricultural lands within Metro Manila Area.

7. The Secretary of Labor shall be responsible for the proper administration of PD 1096 concerning labor aspects particularly the safety and protection of manpower resources.

8. The Commissioner of the National Pollution Control Commission shall assist the PERC in the proper enforcement of anti-pollution measures in all land and building development, and shall detail the necessary staff as required by the PERC.

9. The Chairman of the Human Settlements Commission shall detail an adequate and qualified personnel with PERC who will process locational plans and recommend issuance of clearance wherever possible.

10. The General Manager of the National Housing Authority shall detail technical personnel as may be required for assignment to the PERC to assist in the issuance of Building Permits for Residential Condominiums, Land Development and Housing projects.

11. The General Manager of the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage Systems shall detail necessary technical staff to assist the PERC in the effective enforcement of PD 1096.

12. The Governor of the Metropolitan Manila Commission shall be responsible for the proper administration and efficient enforcement of Presidential Decree No. 1096 within Metropolitan Manila Area. The Metropolitan Manila Commission shall, as necessary, employ and maintain sufficient and technically capable staff to man the Plan Enforcement and Regulation Center (PERC) in the said enforcement of PD 1096. The Governor of the Metropolitan Manila Commission, through the Executive Secretary, shall supervise the personnel of the PERC. As such, the MMC shall be responsible for all operating and incidental expenses to be incurred by the PERC relative to the administration and enforcement of the said PD including honoraria and allowances for consultants and employees detailed to PERC from the different involved government agencies. The MMC, thru PERC, shall administer the collection of building permit fees through the local building officials and retain an amount not exceeding 20% thereof to be used for the operating expenses of the different local Building Officers of Metropolitan Manila and the PERC.

13. All Barangay Captains/Chairmen in the Metropolitan Manila Area are hereby deputized to report and monitor the strict implementation of the Building Code in his/her respective Barangay in coordination with the Metropolitan Manila Commission Plan Enforcement and Regulation Center.

All of the above agencies are directed to assist the PERC in implementing an effective and standardized system for land development building/structure, permits issuance in MMA; in facilitating the processing of applications for land development and building permits and projects in Metro Manila; and in coordinating and integrating all essential services in MMA as far as building/structure permits are concerned. Each agency is required to submit proposed guidelines for the proper administration of PERC to the Executive Secretary, MMC, at the soonest possible time.

This Letter of Instructions takes effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy Seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia