MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1420

Whereas, the Constitutional right of access to official records, and to documents and papers pertaining to official acts, transactions, or decisions is not absolute;

Whereas, it has come to my attention that certain vital, confidential and sensitive data and information have been disclosed to unauthorized persons or the general public;

Whereas, such disclosures have been prejudicial to the general welfare, public interest, or national security;

Whereas, there is a need to strictly enforce Memorandum Circular No. 78 dated August 14, 1964; and

Whereas, the Government of the Philippines needs to protect the confidentiality necessary to carry out its responsibilities in international relations and national defense and in implementing the national economic recovery program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by power vested in me by the Constitution of the Philippines, do hereby declare and direct the following:

1. All Ministers and Directors/Heads/Chiefs of Bureaus/Offices/Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations are hereby prohibited from disclosing the unauthorized persons, the media or the general public top secret, secret, confidential or restricted matters as defined in Memorandum Circular No. 78 dated August 14, 1964 under their custody or control, the release of which will be clearly prejudicial to the public interest or national security or will adversely affect the economic recovery program of the country.

2. Such top secret, secret, confidential and restricted matters shall not be disclosed or released to unauthorized persons or the general public and shall not be published or caused to be published without prior clearance from the Office of the President.

3. All Ministers and Directors/Heads/Chiefs of Bureaus/Offices/Government Owned or Controlled Corporations are hereby enjoined to enforce this Letter of Instructions and Memorandum Circular No. 78 in their respective ministries, bureaus, officers or corporations.

4. All persons responsible for unauthorized disclosures or release of top secret, secret, confidential or restricted matters in violation of this Letter of Instructions and Memorandum Circular No. 78 shall be subject to disciplinary action or prosecution under the Revised Penal Code and other applicable laws.

For strict compliance.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of September, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia