LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 374

TO : The Secretary of National Defense

1. Documented reports submitted to my office disclosed that MESSRS. FREDERICK G. WEBBER, R. JOHN R. WEBBER, JACK D.F. WEBBER, LEONCIO FONACIER, CARLOS ANICETA, ATTY. PABLO BACOD and MRS. ERLINDA DELFINO and/or their associates have swindled and/or fraudulently manipulated the dissipation of the amount of TWENTY FOUR MILLION PESOS (₱24,000,000.00), more or less, representing the funds which have been collected from investors in the MAKATI GOLF AND COUNTRY CLUB, INCORPORATED.

2. In view of the foregoing, and in order to prevent further widespread prejudice to public interest, you are hereby directed to take the following actions:

a. Sequester or cause the sequestration of all the properties, assets, books of accounts and other pertinent records of the above-named FREDERICK G. WEBBER, R. JOHN R. WEBBER, JACK D.F. WEBBER, LEONCIO FONACIER, CARLOS ANICETA, ATTY. PABLO BACOD, MRS. ERLINDA DELFINO and their families and other persons against whom there is evidence of having participated in the aforesaid swindling/fraudulent manipulation, as well as those of the firms, companies and corporations affiliated or associated with, related to, or owned or controlled by, the above-named persons, as follows, but not limited to:

Makati Golf and Country Club, Inc.; International Yacht and Tourist Club, Inc.; Peninsula Natural Resources Corporation; Empire Hotel, Inc.; Tropical Philippines Sales Inc.; Webber Factors Corporation; Town and Country Tours, Inc.; Ultimate Group Marketing, Inc./United Group Marketing Corporation; Webber Marketing Specialists, Inc.; Webber Consolidated Industries, Inc.; Worldwide Group Factors, Inc.; Filipino Waling-Waling Productions, Inc.; International Group Sales, Inc.; Hongkong Transfer & Register Corporation; Simaron Security & Investigation Agency, Inc.

As used herein, the terms “sequester” or “sequestration” shall mean the seizure of assets, real or personal, wherever situated, belonging to the aforenamed corporations, in order to prevent the utilization, transfer, conveyance or disposition of the same for purposes inimical to public interest/security or when necessary to protect the interest of the Government or any of its instrumentalities. It shall include the taking over and assumptions of the management, control and operation of all such assets seized and the exercise of such corporate acts befitting an owner or owners of said corporations under the corporation law only, however, when necessary or warranted to carry out the objectives of this Letter of Instructions for the benefit of said corporations or the innocent stockholders and creditors and to answer for the claims of all those who suffered financial losses as a result of the aforecited swindling and fraudulent manipulations.

b. Cause the immediate arrest, detention and investigation of the above-named persons and prosecute them before the military tribunal as the evidence may warrant.

c. See to it that in carrying out these Instructions, reasonable means are employed and that injury to persons and property are avoided.

d. Make the necessary coordination on this matter with the proper Government or private agencies.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia