MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 402

WHEREAS, it is the policy of government to accelerate the municipal fisheries program throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the administration espouses and supports the Isdang Bayan concept in fishing;

WHEREAS, priority consideration is to be given Mindanao rebels who have returned to the fold of the law;

WHEREAS, a promise has been made to turn the Municipality of Alicia, Zamboanga del Sur into a model town;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines do hereby order the following:

1. The DNR and the DA shall jointly supervise the planning and implementation of the municipal fisheries program in the Municipality of Alicia, and the eventual expansion of the program to other parts of Mindanao.

2. The DLGCD and the BFAR shall organize samahang nayons and seldas among fishermen, conjunction with the efforts of DNR and DA.

3. The PNB, the DBP, the PAB, the ACA, and the NFAC, under the coordination of the CB and in consultation with DA and DNR shall work for the integration of all municipal fisheries financing with the end in view of granting loans to seldas and samahang nayons for larger fishing vessels, and report to me within 30 days of this LOI.

4. The SPDA and the SOWESCOM provide logistical support to government and private entities who are involved in the planning and implementation of the municipal fisheries program in their region.

5. The DBP, in consultation with DNR and DA, grant working capital loans to fish brokers, who participate in the program.

6. The BFAR assign fisheries extension workers, study seriously the establishment of ice plants in Alicia and other strategic places, and report to me within 90 days of this LOI.

7. The SOWESCOM investigate the progress of the development projects in Alicia and report to me within 15 days of this LOI.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of May, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia