Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1317

ESTABLISHING A LIVELIHOOD AND EMPLOYMENT CENTER IN NEGROS OCCIDENTAL

TO: The Minister of Labor and Employment

WHEREAS, pursuant to LOI 1209 and Executive Order No. 779, the headquarters of Regional Office No. VI of the Ministry of Labor and Employment was transferred from Iloilo City to Bacolod City;

WHEREAS, there is a need to upgrade the MOLE Regional Office to a Livelihood and Employment Center to implement a livelihood program for sugar workers within the framework of the KKK and to provide alternative skills for those who may be displaced as a result of the implementation of the mechanization program in the sugar industry;

WHEREAS, there is available an amount of P4 million deposited with the Republic Planters’ Bank as a special fund of the Ministry of Labor and Employment;

WHEREAS, this special fund is the accumulation of social amelioration benefits unclaimed by workers for more than two years which under Article 129 of the Labor Code and LOI 854 shall be used exclusively for the administration and enforcement of labor laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct:

1. The establishment of a Livelihood and Employment Center in the MOLE Regional Office in Bacolod City which shall develop a livelihood program for sugar workers within the framework of the KKK and to organize training programs in coordination with the concerned agencies for sugar workers who might be displaced as a result of the mechanization of the sugar industry; and

2. The withdrawal of the amount of P4 million for the establishment of the Center from the special fund deposited with the Republic Planters’ Bank pursuant to Article 129 of the Labor Code of the Philippines and LOI 854 on the basis of the joint signatures of the Minister of Labor and Employment and the Chairman of the Commission on Audit in accordance with the applicable accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Done in the City of Manila this 1st day of May in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Three.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia