MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 583

DIRECTING PREPARATION FOR THE REGIONAL PREPARATORY MEETING ON CRIME PREVENTION AND THE TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC REGION

WHEREAS, on May 23 – 27, 1978, the Philippine Government will host the Regional Preparatory Meeting on Crime Prevention and the Treatment of Offenders for Asia and the Pacific Region in connection with the Sixth United Nations Congress on the same subject to be held in Sydney, Australia, sometime in 1980;

WHEREAS, the aforesaid Regional Preparatory Meeting will be a rare opportunity for the Republic of the Philippines to demonstrate her capability to manage affairs of international importance and, at the same time, to make it serve as a medium for exhibiting to the world the over-all national progress and development attained under the New Society;

WHEREAS, this important international gathering must be successfully managed and accomplished which needs thorough preparation, if the same is to enhance the image and reputation of the Philippine locally and abroad;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the law and the Constitution, do hereby direct the following:

1. The National Police Commission, Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police and the National Bureau of Investigation are designated action agencies of the Philippine Government to oversee and insure the success of the Regional Preparatory Meeting on Crime Prevention and the Treatment of Offenders for Asia and the Pacific Region that will be hosted by the Philippines.

2. All other Philippine Government departments, bureaus, agencies and offices, whether national, regional or local, including state colleges and universities, as well as government-owned and/or controlled corporations, shall support and contribute to the efforts of the Philippine Government as host of the Regional Preparatory Meeting on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders.

3. The support herein called for may also be in terms of personnel, technical know-how and other resources and facilities as may be needed by the National Police Commission, the Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police and the National Bureau of Investigation as action agencies.

4. All preparations shall be oriented toward the success of the occasion so as to project a good image and generate a favorable reputation for the Philippines in the eyes of the participants in the said Regional Preparatory Meeting.   cdasia

5. The Philippine International Convention Center is hereby designated as site of the aforesaid Regional Preparatory Meeting and is reserved for the purpose on May 22–28, 1978.

6. The action agencies shall jointly prepare and prescribe the implementing plans, rules and regulations for carrying out this Letter of Instructions.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia