MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 966

CONCERNING RESTORATION PROJECTS IN INTRAMUROS

WHEREAS, the Ayuntamiento and Intendencia buildings are two of the most historical structures in Intramuros still in government hands;

WHEREAS, the restoration effort of public buildings in Intramuros needs to be fully coordinated and implemented observing the highest historical and architectural standards;

WHEREAS, the Intramuros Administration was created by P.D. No. 1616 and assigned the responsibility of overseeing the development of Intramuros and the restoration of certain areas therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. The Ayuntamiento and Intendencia buildings in Intramuros shall be restored, as much as possible to conform to their appearance during the Spanish Regime. The Intramuros Administration (hereinafter referred to as “Administration”) shall be responsible for the overall guidance and direction of the restoration effort and as such shall approve the restoration plan and architectural drawings and oversee the restoration work.

2. The construction of both buildings shall be undertaken by the Intramuros Administration through competitive bidding among at least three reputable firms with proven experience in restoration work. The Ministry of Public Works shall provide assistance during the bidding and in construction supervision.

3. The surviving architectural/building components of the Intendencia and Ayuntamiento buildings, including grilles, balusters, ironwork, adobe stones, piedra china, and other reusable components shall be removed by the Intramuros Administration for safekeeping and for later reinstallation or use.

4. The architectural plans of the Intendencia building, directed to be prepared by the MPW under LOI No. 812, shall be subject to review and final approval of the Administration.

5. The Administration shall immediately research on surviving records/plans of the original Ayuntamiento and on the extant ruins and on this basis shall prepare architectural plans and drawings that shall constitute the plan of restoration. It is hereby authorized to contract with professional architects for the purpose.

6. The interiors of the Ayuntamiento shall be restored as much as possible to their original condition, with particular attention to the Marble Hall, the staircase and vestibule, the former Session Hall of the Supreme Court and the former offices of the Governors-General. The main rooms shall be used for public purposes by the national government. The subsidiary rooms shall be used by the Administration as its principal offices and by other agencies of the government as may be authorized by the President upon recommendation of the Administration.

7. The Intendencia building shall be used to house the Spanish Records Division of the National Archives and such other offices as may be approved by the President upon recommendation of the Administration.

8. The administration of land and structures/ruins thereon at the site of the Intendencia and Ayuntamiento buildings shall be transferred to the Administration.

9. The functions of the Ad Hoc Restoration Committee for Intramuros created by LOI No. 733 dated August 28, 1978 are hereby transferred to the Intramuros Administration.

10. The Minister of the Budget shall release the funds needed for construction work, as may be approved by the President on the joint recommendation of the Minister of Public Works and the Action Officer of the Administration.

11. The provisions of LOI No. 733 directing the restoration of certain areas in Intramuros and of LOI No. 812 directing the restoration of the Intendencia building are hereby amended to conform with this Letter of Instruction.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of December, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia