MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1027

The countryside development policy of the Philippine Government focuses on the improvement of the quality of rural life in remote communities. This is especially true with the Imelda Settlement Project in Hinunangan, a newly-opened public land proclaimed for resettlement, in Southern Leyte which is assisted by the German Government.

In order to attain the social and economic well-being for the rural inhabitants in the Imelda Settlement Project concerted efforts between and among different government agencies must be closely coordinated in the process of development. To ensure success, there is hereby created a machinery for implementation:

A. An Inter-Agency Project Coordinating Committee (IPCC) at the national level. The members shall have the rank of at least a Bureau Director or its equivalent and shall be composed of representatives from these agencies:

The IPCC shall have the following functions:

– review and approve the annual work plan of the project; – review and recommend budgetary appropriations required to implement the project; – decide particular responsibilities of the participating agencies mentioned above and resolve inter-agency problems of cooperation; and – such other functions as may be expedient for the successful implementation of the project.

B. Regional Advisory Committee (RAC). This Committee shall be composed of the representatives (Regional Directors) of the participating agencies involved in the implementation of the Imelda Settlement Project, the local Project Manager and the Provincial Governor of Southern Leyte. The Chairman of the RAC shall be the Provincial Governor of Southern Leyte. The functions of the RAC are as follows:

– identify particular responsibilities of the participating agencies and resolve inter-agency cooperation problems; – ensure effective coordination among the participating agencies in the regional level in the planning and implementation of the project; – supervise the implementation on the regional level; – ensure incorporation in the regional annual budget of the respective agency as “Key Budgetary Inclusion” the budgetary requirements of the project components planned for implementation by the Local Project Management (LPM) in the annual work and financial plans.

C. A Central Project Management (CPM) to be composed of personnel from agencies concerned appointed by the Minister of Agrarian Reform. The functions of the CPM are as follows:

– review annual work and financial plans for the project; – elaborate the budgetary appropriations required for the implementation of the project; – monitor project implementation at all levels and supervise the coordination between participating agencies; – review and supplement semi-annual progress report submitted by LPM and submit them to KFW and IPCC; and – report to IPCC the progress of the project.

D. A Local Project Management (LPM) in the project level. The LPM shall be manned by qualified personnel from MAR and certain participating agencies. The Project Manager, who is appointed by the MAR, shall be in charge of day-to-day management of the project in the settlement area without having to refer to the head office. The LPM shall have the following functions:

– prepare an overall draft plan for the whole implementation period of the project; – prepare a detailed annual work plan for the project; – prepare an annual financial plan in accordance with the work plan; – implement the approved annual work plan; and – monitor and evaluate the implementation of the project and submit semi-annual progress reports at the CPM and RAC.

The participating agencies shall incorporate in their respective annual budgets the funds required by the programs and/or projects in the approved development plan for the Imelda Settlement Project.

The payment of allowances/honoraria to various committee members and agency personnel assigned to the project out of projects funds is hereby authorized, subject to the government accounting and auditing regulations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia