MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1060

WHEREAS, the Presidential Committee for Rehabilitation and Development of Southern Philippines created under MO No. 697 has identified a number of projects with high economic value, social productivity and ecological/energy significance in Region XII and elsewhere in Southern Philippines;

WHEREAS, these projects, now referred to as Project “Ranaw” (Maranaw for Lake), have for their goals the generation of more income and employment to the people, environmental, tourism and energy development, and increase of production and productivity in the Lake Lanao watershed area; and

WHEREAS, in order to maximize the potentials of the programs and projects there is the need to provide adequate organizational and resources support to Project “Ranaw” in line with the revitalized program thrusts and strategies of the Government in Southern Philippines.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby direct as follows:

1. Without prejudice to the subsequent listing and/or identification of related projects by the PCRDSP under Project “Ranaw”, the attached list of the projects (indicating also the participating agencies as well as their tasks) shall be considered as priority under the PCRDSP program insofar as the Lake Lanao/Agus watershed influence area is a concerned;

2. In the identification, mobilization and management of projects, the following policies, terms of reference and guidelines shall be observed as much as possible;

a) The agency or units thereof listed first shall be the lead agency and is authorized to call on concerned agencies or instrumentalities of Government (whether national or local) for data, assistance and linkages.

b) The lead agency shall principally contribute/appropriate the necessary funds as per project requirement. The participating/involved agencies shall provide funds in a secondary role. All funds shall be chargeable to the agency/office’s current budget and/or obligated allotments, balances or savings and other sources. In cases where additional funds are needed, special budgets shall be submitted to the President of the Philippines thru the PCRDSP.

c) A project management team shall be organized immediately from amongst the represented agencies to be headed/coordinated by the identified lead agency.

d) The views, recommendations and/or participation of the private capital, management, industrial, civic and other sectors shall be considered in all aspects of the projects insofar as these are deemed beneficial to said projects.

3. The Executive Committee of the PCRDSP shall determine the project timetables in consultation with involved agencies.

4. The sum of One Million Pesos (P1,000,000.00) is hereby authorized to be released to the PCRDSP through the Southern Philippines Development Authority from the Special Activities Fund which shall be used principally as support fund for project pre-operating and monitoring activities.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of September in the year year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Reference: Implementing Instructions/Schedules for Project “Ranao”, PCRDSP

Source : CDAsia