MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 645

WHEREAS, the Cabinet Committee on Divestment of Private Landholdings of U.S. Citizens and Entities constituted under Letter of Instructions No. 307 dated August 21, 1975 has completed its evaluation of land divestment proposals of U.S. citizens and entities submitted to the Government on or before May 27, 1975 and granted the requisite approval for finalization or implementation of said divestment schemes;

WHEREAS, sufficient time has been granted to U.S. citizens and entities to finalize the divestment programs pertaining to their landholdings as a consequence of the expiration of the Parity Agreement on July 3, 1974, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and other pertinent laws; and

WHEREAS, appropriate action should now be taken by the Government to uphold the constitutional provisions limiting the ownership of land to Filipino citizens, or to corporations or entities at least 60% of the capital of which is owned by Filipino citizens;

NOW, THEREFORE, the Solicitor General is hereby directed:

1. To institute appropriate proceedings against U.S. citizens or entities which continue to hold land in violation of the Constitution and other pertinent laws limiting landholdings to Filipino citizens or to entities at least 60% of the capital of which is owned by Filipino citizens.

2. To act all matters pertaining to divestment of U.S. citizens and entities heretofore within the jurisdiction of the Cabinet Committee on Land Divestment of Private Landholdings of U.S. Citizens and Entities constituted under Letter of Instructions No. 307 dated August 21, 1975.

3. To grant clearance for the registration of lands constituting conjugal partnership property where one of the spouses is an American citizen, upon the dissolution of such conjugal partnership.

4. To act on such other matters pertaining to land divestment of U.S. citizens and entities as may be necessary to implement the expiration of the rights of U.S. citizens and entities under the Parity Agreement, on July 3, 1974, as provided in Article XVII, Section XI, of the Constitution.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia