MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1053

To ensure a continuous and sufficient supply of trucks and of diesel engines to the transport services sector while at the same time supporting the Progressive Truck Manufacturing Program (PTMP) of the government, you are hereby constituted into an Inter-Agency Committee with the Minister of Trade as Chairman, to regulate the importation of used trucks and engines beyond July 1, 1980 subject to the following conditions:

1. Used trucks of over 40,000 lbs. GVW, used diesel engines 40 horsepower and above, and special purpose vehicles, as determined by the Inter-Agency Committee, shall be allowed for importation.

Completely built-up (CBU) second-hand passenger buses including tourists buses shall not be allowed for importation.

2. Direct end-user firms, legitimately engaged in essential agricultural/industrial pursuits, mining, logging and construction, and traditional importers duly qualified as such by the Inter-Agency Committee on Used Trucks and Tires shall be qualified to import the items in paragraph (1) above.

3. The aggregate value of importation of used trucks and diesel engines by duly qualified traditional importers shall not exceed US $9 Million in any twelve-month period.

4. Used trucks to be imported shall be not older than 1974 models and used diesel engines to be imported shall be not older than 1975 models.

5. Reconditioning of imported used trucks by Accredited Reconditioning Centers (ARC) shall be required prior to registration with the Bureau of Land Transportation effective July 1, 1980 until and unless decided otherwise by the Ministry of Industry. These Accredited Reconditioning centers shall be regulated and supervised by the said Ministry.

6. Violation of any of the provisions of this Letter of Instructions and of the Guidelines issued by the Inter-Agency Committee to implement the same, shall constitute sufficient cause for the imposition of appropriate disciplinary measure/s including seizure proceedings, blacklisting of importer/foreign supplier, and/or suspension/revocation of the firm’s import authority.

The importation program herein defined shall be implemented by the Inter-Agency Committee for a period of one year, from July 1, 1980 to June 30, 1981, when this policy shall undergo a review. Such Guidelines as shall be necessary to effectively implement this program shall be formulated and issued by the Inter-Agency Committee.

For this purpose, the Inter-Agency Committee may enlist the assistance of other government agencies and/or private institutions in the effective implementation of this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of Aug., in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia