MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1494

WHEREAS, it is necessary to formulate a Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for 1987-1992, to guide development efforts in both the public and the private sectors in the six-year period, 1987-1992;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to prepare a Long-Term Development Plan up to 2020 to provide the framework to attain our medium-term and long-term goals and objectives;

WHEREAS, drastically changed circumstances in the international economic scenario and new domestic challenges to development require more responsive and relevant development plans;

WHEREAS, a concerted effort by all sectors of society is necessary to properly and adequately provide the broad base for development and ensure internal consistency in the formulation of a development framework;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order the following:

The National Economic and Development Authority, in coordination with all ministries, offices and instrumentalities including government-owned and controlled corporations, regional development authorities and regional development councils, shall immediately begin to prepare the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan covering the period 1987-1992 and a Long-Term Philippine Development Plan up to 2020.

All the ministries, offices and instrumentalities shall formulate their respective medium-term plans for 1987-1992 and long-term development plans up to 2020. The plans should contain at least the following basic elements: (a) development goals and objectives; (b) strategy and policy framework; (c) tentative targets supportive of broader development objectives; and (d) a descriptive list of ongoing and new development programs and projects to implement this framework, with cost estimates, sources of financing and timetable of implementation.

These plans shall be submitted to the NEDA for coordination and integration before March 30, 1986. Copies of said development plans shall also be furnished the Office of the President and the Ministry of the Budget and Management.

All ministry, agency and corporate plans should draw inputs from their regional offices considering regional development strategies, physical framework and local needs.

In order to make these plans more meaningful in terms of implementation, all agencies, government corporations, regional development authorities and regional development councils shall henceforth prepare more detailed annual development plans linked closely to their respective annual budgets.

Government ministries and inter-agency committees involved in development planning and policy formulation are enjoined to coordinate closely.

The private sector and other sectors of society shall be consulted as often as necessary to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related thereto.

The Prime Minister and the Minister of Economic Planning are hereby empowered and directed to set up an organizational machinery and issue such guidelines and implementing rules and regulations as will ensure effective compliance with this Instruction.

The Minister of the Budget is hereby directed to make available to the Minister of Economic Planning the necessary funds for the purposes herein stated.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1425 – 1525]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.