LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1337

WHEREAS, there has been a sudden upsurge in the number of consumers organizations who wish to be represented in various hearings or intervene in cases pending either before administrative or quasi-judicial bodies or agencies;

WHEREAS, it has always been the policy of the government to encourage and hear the legitimate complaints and/or legal-economic positions of legitimate and honest to goodness consumers organizations on governmental acts affecting consumers;

WHEREAS, some legitimate and representative consumers organizations have expressed misgivings not only on the motive and intent of certain consumers organizations allegedly representing certain sectors of the society, but also their legal representatives or standings as not conducive to a fair, orderly and enlightened hearings and/or investigators;

WHEREAS, there have been cases in the past when alleged consumers organizations had no legal personality and at times did not even represent or command the support of the sector they purport to represent;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, do hereby direct:

1. In order to achieve a fair, orderly and enlightened hearing and/or investigation conducted by administrative or quasi-judicial bodies in matters affecting consumers, no consumer organization may be allowed to enter its appearance or participate in the proceedings without first submitting to the satisfaction of the concerned administrative or quasi-judicial body, the following:

a. The original or certified true copies of its articles of incorporation and by laws;

b. The original or certified true copy of the certificate of registration issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission;

c. Certification by the Securities and Exchange Commission that said organization has complied with all the rules and regulations of the Commission, and that it is an entity of good standing.

2. The administrative and/or quasi-judicial bodies where certain governmental action or activity affecting consumers are pending action and/or decision must first determine whether any consumer organization desiring to participate in or enter its appearance is truly representative of the sector it represents.

3. Should the agency concerned find that any such organization does not represent a substantial number of members in the sector or segment of society it purports to represent, the agency may deny or discontinue the appearance and/or participation of said party.

4. Henceforth, all consumers organizations will be required to register with the Bureau of Domestic Trade within 60 days from the issuance of this Letters of Instruction. The Bureau shall accredit consumers organizations in accordance with the rules and regulations to be promulgated to ensure the desired objectives above-described.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) MANUEL M. LAZARO Presidential Assistant for Legal Affairs

Source : CDAsia