MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1087

T O : All Concerned

SUBJECT: Revised Guidelines for the observance of special and legal holidays.

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 814 provides guidelines for the observance of special holidays and a calendar of holidays for 1979;

WHEREAS, there is a need to update the guidelines for the observance of special as well as legal holidays;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

1. A special public holiday for any province, city or municipality may be declared, but such day shall be a regular working and school day.

2. All working days from time to time falling between holidays or between a holiday and a Sunday shall not be considered special public holidays;

3. When a legal holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall not be a holiday, unless a proclamation is issued declaring it a special public holiday.

4. All other holidays for special purposes such as elections and related events shall be covered by special proclamations.

5. Academic holidays due to floods and typhoons shall be governed by rules and regulations prescribed by the Ministry of Education and Culture with respect to suspension of classes in schools and colleges. For Signal No. 1, classes may be suspended at the discretion of the school management; Signal No. 2, classes in Elementary and High School shall be suspended and for Signal No. 3, classes in all levels shall be suspended.

6. All private and government offices shall follow announcement of the Office of the President as regards holidays due to floods and typhoons in accordance with Memorandum Circular No. 1105.

7. For unforeseen special public holidays that may prolong the suspension of work, the Saturdays immediately following such holidays may be declared as working days.

8. The aforesaid guidelines shall be followed for the remaining part of the Calendar Year 1980 and the years thereafter until otherwise repealed by subsequent legislations.

9. Unless otherwise modified by law, order or proclamation, the following holidays shall be observed in this country;

10. This Letter of Instructions shall not affect the Calendar of Races approved by the Philippine Racing Commission.

Letter of Instructions No. 814 is hereby repealed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia