MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 609

WHEREAS, the town of Moalboal, Cebu, has been declared a tourism zone because of its tourism potential; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide the support facilities and infrastructure to optimize its development for tourism purposes;

WHEREFORE, the following offices are hereby directed to implement the following:

1) The Department of Public Works, Transportation & Communications shall construct or improve the roads from Cebu City to Moalboal, including the road network within the actual development site;

2) The National Electrification Administration shall provide the necessary electric power generating system or extend the distribution network to the development site;

3) The local government concerned shall extend all necessary assistance to the PTA in the purchase or expropriation of private lands affected by the development plans and to prevent speculation over the same or the adjacent areas; it shall suspend all trawl fishing and putting up of fish corrals, except subsistence fishing, within two kilometers from the shoreline until the PTA has further defined its land requirements; it shall furnish the PTA with a list of landowners indicating the sizes of lots and tax declaration numbers of the affected areas.

4) The Bureau of Lands shall furnish the PTA all survey plans of the area proposed for development;

5) The General Manager of the Philippine Tourism Authority shall purchase by negotiation or thru expropriation private lands affected by its development plans, after approval by the Department of Tourism and the President. It may fund all studies and development plans required; negotiate with private sector who may be interested in putting up facilities and amenities; or undertake the project if the private sector is not interested in carrying out the project, in which case the project shall be deemed registered under P.D. 535 and entitled to enjoy incentives granted under the said decree.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1977). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 591 – 705]. Manila: Presidential Management Staff.