LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 336

TO: The Chairman Civil Service Commission

The Chairman Commission on Audit

The Commissioner Budget Commission

WHEREAS, the accomplishment of governmental programs and projects depends upon the competence, efficiency and dedication of the civil service;

WHEREAS, I have decreed that the Civil Service Commission provide leadership in formulating, administering and evaluating continuing service-wide programs for the development and retention of a competent and an efficient workforce in the public service;

WHEREAS, towards this end, I have directed that the Commission shall provide not only leadership but also assistance to all departments, agencies and offices, government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments in establishing more extensive and intensive training classes, seminars and institutes;

WHEREAS, to insure financial support to the Commission’s training efforts, I have decreed that the Civil Service Commission shall collect and charge fees for training courses, seminars, workshops in personnel management and other civil service matters and that such fees so collected shall be used exclusively for training activities of the Commission;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. The Commission shall establish standard fees for training courses, seminars, workshops and for other training services and such fees shall be paid by all departments, agencies and offices, government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments from whatever funding sources available.

2. The Commission shall prescribe standard rates for payment of honoraria or travelling and representation allowance per teaching hour to all persons invited to act as lecturers, resource persons or facilitators in training activities sponsored or initiated by it or jointly undertaken with any department or agency of the government;

3. Any provision of law or rules or regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, any government official or employee invited to act as lecturer, resource person or facilitator in these training courses, seminars, workshops and other training services is hereby authorized to receive honoraria and/or travelling and representation allowances;

4. These charge shall be paid from fees collected by the Commission from participants in connection with training courses, seminars, workshops and other training services;

5. The different departments, agencies and offices, government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments are hereby authorized to pay honoraria and/or travelling and representation allowance from any funds available to them, to lecturers, resource persons and facilitators provided that such lecturers, resource persons and facilitators are not their personnel and provided further that the rates for such honoraria and/or travelling and representation allowance shall be reasonable and in accordance with rates fixed by the Civil Service Commission.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia