MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS No. 36

To: The Executive Secretary The Chairman, Reorganization Commission The Members of the Cabinet Concerned

In accordance with our policy to organize a “Do Tank” that will ensure the speedy and effective implementation of specific programs of reform as well as other vital projects, it is my desire that we appoint or designate regional implementing officers or implementors.

These implementing officers shall be responsible not only to the Department Secretaries concerned but to the President as well and shall submit progress and accomplishment reports on the programs and projects periodically.

The designation of these officers is of utmost urgency in the programs such as land reform, cooperatives, agricultural production, self-employment and community development.

The regional implementing officers shall he empowered to utilize the prerogatives of the Office of the President in their supervision of projects to enable them to call upon or to harness and utilize manpower and other resources of other government agencies in the particular region in the achievement of the objectives of the various vital programs and projects.

Where the program involves the joint efforts of several offices, the senior regional director or officer shall be appointed as the over-all coordinator or chief implemented of the program or project. In the absence of a regional director, any other officer may be appointed or designated and authorized to direct the implementation of the program or project, with the same power and authority to call upon all offices in the area to assist and cooperate in the effective and speedy prosecution of the project or program.

Accordingly, we will have a ready corps of regional implementors or managers who shall be directly responsible to the President.

It is likewise my intention to assign later on an over-all supervisor to oversee and supervise these action or implementing officers.

These officers shall be mobile, travelling constantly to inspect and check the progress of the program and projects in their respective areas, and shall indicate to the President or the Cabinet or member of the Cabinet the problems that block or delay a project or a program, suggesting possible solutions to these problems.

You shall prepare the organization that is herein envisioned as well as the budgetary requirements for it.

I hope this organization will create the corps of action officers for the “Do Tank”, which is vital to the achievement of the goals of the reforms envisioned for the New Society.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERNANDO E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: National Library