MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1123

WHEREAS, it is necessary to formulate a successor plan to the Five-Year Philippine Development Plan, 1978-1982, to guide development efforts in both the public and the private sectors in the next five-year period, 1983-1987;

WHEREAS, drastically changed circumstances in the international economic scenario and new domestic challenges to development require a more responsive and relevant development plan;

WHEREAS, a concerted effort by all sectors of society is necessary to properly and adequately provide the board base for development and ensure internal consistency in the formulation of a development policy framework.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order the following:

The National Economic and Development Authority, in coordination with all Ministries, Offices and Instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations, regional development authorities and Regional Development Councils, shall immediately begin to prepare the necessary successor Five-Year Philippine Development Plan covering the period 1983-1987.

All the ministries, offices and instrumentalities concerned, in formulating their respective five-year plans for 1983-1987, are required to see to it that such plans contain at least the following basic elements: (a) strategy and policy framework; (b) tentative targets supportive of broader development objectives; and (c) a descriptive list of on-going and new development programs and projects to implement this framework, with cost estimates, sources of financing and timetable of implementation.

These plans should stress the contribution of each agency to the achievement of identified national development goals and shall be submitted to the NEDA for coordination and integration before September 1981. Copies of said development plans shall also be furnished the Office of the President and the Ministry of the Budget.

All ministry, agency and corporate plans should draw inputs from their regional offices considering regional development strategies, physical framework and local needs.

In order to make these plans more meaningful in terms of implementation, all agencies, government corporations, regional development authorities and regional development councils shall henceforth prepare more detailed annual development plans linked closely to their respective annual budgets.

Government ministries and/or inter-agency committees involved in development planning and policy formulation are enjoined to coordinate closely to ensure consistency in the plans of member and/or attached agencies.

The private sector and other sectors of society shall be consulted as often as necessary to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related thereto.

The Minister of Economic Planning is hereby empowered and directed to set up an organizational machinery and issue such guidelines and implementing rules and regulations as will ensure effective compliance with this Order.

The Minister of the Budget is hereby directed to make available to the Minister of Economic Planning the necessary funds for the purposes herein stated.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia