MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 449

1. The full implementation of the reorganization in accordance with the Integrated Reorganization Plan (IRP) which was enacted into law under Presidential Decree No. 1, including changes thereto as embodied in subsequent decrees and other executive issuances, is hereby directed.

2. Accordingly, except as hereinbelow indicated, full implementation of the remaining provisions of the plan, as amended, which are not yet implemented, is directed to be effected for the agencies and Parts included therein.

3. The implementation of the activation of newly created agencies whose heads need Presidential appointment shall be contingent upon the prior issuance of appointments by the President to such heads.

4. Implementation of the following provisions of the IRP is hereby suspended:

(1) Creation of the Career Revenue Service (Article III, Part IV) (2) Creation of the Budget-Treasury Data Processing Center (Article III, Chapter I Part V) (3) Management Consultancy Group (Article II, Chapter II, Part III) (4) Unimplemented portions, Department of Foreign Affairs (Part XVIII) (5) Administrative Regulation Filing Office (Part XXII)

5. Further amendments to the IRP as per “Annex A,” attached, are hereby directed to be implemented.

6. In the implementation of the reorganization, the appointment of personnel to positions in the new staffing patterns of the reorganized agencies shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 650 dated July 21, 1973.

7. The Department Secretary concerned may recommend for Presidential approval deferment or phased implementation of the reorganization of the agencies under his department; likewise, he may submit proposed modifications for approval before implementation is made. In this connection, changes in the structures of agencies which involve units below the bureau level may be done through the national budget in consultation only whenever necessary with the Presidential Commission on Reorganization.

8. The administrative actions needed to be taken for the full implementation of the reorganization, including appointments to positions in the staffing patterns as reorganized, shall be effected not later than December 31, 1976.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Reference : Annex “A”

Source : CDAsia