MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 238

In order to provide an improved and systematic departmental structure in the Executive Office to make it fully responsive to the specific needs and requirement of the Office of the President of the Philippines as envisioned under the Integrated Reorganization Plan, the following functional changes in certain positions of authority therein are hereby approved:

1. The existing position of Assistant Executive Secretary for Administrative and Financial Affairs is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, there is hereby created one (1) position of Deputy Executive Secretary with the rank of Undersecretary and considered the only position next in rank to the Executive Secretary.

2. The existing position of Assistant Executive Secretary for Political Affairs is likewise abolished.

3. The existing position of Assistant Executive Secretary for Development Affairs is hereby renamed “Assistant Executive Secretary for Programs and Projects.”

4. Only the Executive Secretary and the Deputy Executive Secretary shall be empowered to sign by authority of the President when implementing and disseminating Presidential directives and policies. However, during the absence of either of these two officials or whenever the exigencies of the service may require, the Executive Secretary may designate any of the Assistant Executive Secretaries to sign by authority of the President specially on matters of utmost urgency which require immediate attention.

5. The Deputy Executive Secretary shall have the following functions:

a. To act on administrative as well as financial matters:

b. To review and/or act, as may be directed by the Executive Secretary, on matters submitted by the Assistant Executive Secretaries for the consideration of the Executive Secretary or the President; and

c. To perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the Executive Secretary.

6. The proposed changes in positional titles shall not apply to positions in the personal staff of the President.

7. The Executive Secretary and the Commissioner of the Budget shall immediately take the necessary steps to implement the foregoing functional changes, including the modification of the existing Staffing Pattern of the Executive Office.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia