Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 482

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the New Society to encourage the Filipino Muslim citizenry to assume their rightful place in the Philippine society;

WHEREAS, as a concrete manifestation of this policy, Presidential Proclamation No. 1217 dated January 3, 1973 established the Maharlika Village to serve the needs of the resident Muslim population of Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, there is need to expand, upgrade and integrate development of Maharlika Village so as to make it truly a symbol to our national aspiration of Unity in Diversity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution hereby directs as follows:

1. The National Housing Authority shall be Project Administrator, and as such shall provide the cooperating agencies detailed plans of their participation and if needed, to advance to the cooperating agencies the funds needed to accomplish their participation and undertake the housing development needed in the project;

2. The Department of Public Highways shall undertake the road construction and land development within the project including landscaping and development of parks and other recreational areas. For this purpose, it shall provide funds in its 1977 budget;

3. The Department of Public Works, Transportation & Communications shall construct all basic community amenities such as schools, clinics, multi-purpose community building. For this purpose, it shall provide funds in its 1977 budget;

4. The Metropolitan Water & Sewerage System shall construct the water system including the required deep wells and water reservoir, and sanitary sewerage systems that will lead to the development of a bio-gas system. For this purpose, it shall provide funds in its 1977 budget;

5. The Budget Commission shall give due course to the request for funds by the participating agencies and to effect the necessary transfer of funds from the cooperating agencies to the NHA to liquidate the advances made by the Authority.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia