MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1165

WHEREAS, to improve the standard of living in the rural fishing communities of the country; to conserve municipal fishery resources against the heavy exploitation of fish and aquatic resources in the entire water areas of Manila Bay along the coastal towns and cities of the Provinces of Cavite, Bulacan, Pampanga, Bataan and Metropolitan Manila; to provide municipal and small-scale fishermen a wider area within which to operate fishing boats of three (3) gross tons or less and to increase their catch per unit effort, I caused the promulgation of Presidential Decree No. 1015, amending the first paragraph of Section 17 and Section 35 of Presidential Decree No. 704;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. That the operation of fishing gear such as commercial trawl and purse seine is hereby prohibited in the entire water areas of Manila Bay within a distance of seven (7) kilometers from the shorelines of the Provinces of Cavite, Bulacan, Pampanga, Bataan and Metropolitan Manila.

2. To achieve effective prohibition of commercial trawl and purse seine operations in the restricted water areas of the towns and cities of the aforestated provinces, the Ministry of Natural Resources, the Ministry of Local Government and Community Development, the Ministry of National Defense, the Philippine Constabulary-Integrated National Police, the Philippine Coast Guard, the Manila Metropolitan Commission and the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources are hereby ordered to strictly implement the above order.

3. All the municipal mayors and barangay captains of all the coastal cities and municipalities and barangays of the provinces of Cavite, Bulacan, Pampanga, Bataan and Metropolitan Manila, through the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, shall be made deputies of the Minister of Natural Resources in the enforcement of these instructions and all other existing and related fishery laws, decrees, rules and regulations.

4. The municipal mayors and barangay captains so deputized shall submit monthly reports of accomplishment to the BFAR, copy furnished the MLGCD, PC-INP, PCG and the MMC.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 28th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia