MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 424

In order to strengthen and make more effective the tree planting program launched under the Letter of Instructions No. 404, dated May 19, 1976, and in aid of the Program for Forest Ecosystem Management (PROFEM), this Letter of Instructions is issued.

1. The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development shall organize and mobilize Provincial, Municipal and Barangay PROFEM Implementing Corps to undertake forest renewal activities hereinafter indicated.

2. The Bureau of Forest Development shall assign its representative to attend to the specific needs of, furnish non-fruit seedlings and render technical assistance to all provinces, municipalities and barangays to enable them to participate more effectively in the PROFEM.

3. The Bureau of Plant Industry shall furnish fruit-tree seedlings and render technical assistance to all provinces, municipalities and barangays in connection with the PROFEM.

4. Each existing Provincial Development Council shall organize a PROFEM Provincial Implementing Corps which shall perform the following functions:

a) Obtain guidelines from and maintain liaison with the Regional Council for Forest Ecosystem Management (RECOFEM) concerned from time to time;

b) Monitor the activities of the provinces and all the municipalities therein and of all high schools and colleges, civic organizations, 4-H clubs, and other citizen and student organizations in the province, as well as tree planting activities along national and provincial highways and roads therein;

c) Direct, supervise and control the forest renewal activities (such as seed collection, nursery operations, planting activities, information campaigns, protection and maintenance work) in lands owned by the province and in provincial parks;

d) Obtain seedlings of non-fruit trees from the Bureau of Forest Development nurseries and seedlings of fruit trees from the Bureau of Plant Industry nurseries when necessary until such time it can produce its own seedlings;

e) Set specific program targets for all municipalities within the province;

f) Coordinate with the District Forester regarding technical assistance requirements, particularly seed sources, seedlings sources, species to be planted during the appropriate planting season and training of involved personnel; and

g) Report regularly on the progress of its work to the Presidential Council, through the Provincial Development Council and the RECOFEM concerned.

5. Each Municipal Development Council, which shall include the District Forester or his representative as a member thereof, shall organize a PROFEM Municipal Implementing Corps which shall perform the following functions:

a) Obtain guidelines from and maintain liaison with the Provincial Development Council from time to time;

b) Monitor regularly the activities of the municipality and all the barangays therein and of all high schools and colleges, 4-H clubs and other citizen and student organizations therein, as well as tree planting activities along municipal roads;

c) Direct, supervise and control the forest renewal activities in lands owned by the municipality and in municipal parks;

d) Obtain seedlings of non-fruit trees from the Bureau of Forest Development nurseries and seedlings of fruit trees from the Bureau of Plant Industry nurseries until such time as it can produce its own seedlings;

e) Coordinate with the District Forester or his representative regarding technical assistance with respect to tree planting, including planting operations, seed collection, nursery operations, information campaigns and protection activities, and the training of involved personnel;

f) Report regularly on the progress of its work to the Presidential Council, through the Municipal Development Council and the Provincial Development Council and the RECOFEM concerned.

6) Each Barangay Council shall organize a PROFEM Barangay Volunteer Implementing Corps which shall perform the following functions:

a) Undergo training the Bureau of Forest Development and the Department of Local Governments and Community Development training teams on matters related to organization, seed collection, nursery operation, planting operation, fire protection, agro-forestry, etc.;

b) Collect seeds for propagation and planting;

c) Obtain seedlings of non-fruit trees from the Bureau of Forest Development and seedlings of fruit trees from the Bureau of Plant Industry nurseries until such time as it can produce its own seedlings;

d) Establish barangay nurseries with the assistance of the District Forester or his representative and the provincial-in-charge of the Bureau of Plant Industry;

e) Produce seedlings in its own nursery with the assistance of the District Forester or his representative and the provincial-in-charge of the Bureau of Plant Industry;

f) Plant trees in areas accessible to the barangay and as designated by the District Forester or his representative during the appropriate planting seasons;

g) Maintain and protect trees planted by the barangay;

h) Establish and maintain agro-forest and/or family orchard whenever feasible;

i) See to it that each barangay member plant at least ten trees every year and that proper and adequate care is given by him to such trees as required by Letter of Instructions No. 404; and

j) Report regularly on the progress of its work to the Presidential Council, thru the Barangay Council, the Municipal Development Council, the Provincial Development Council and the RECOFEM concerned.

7. The Presidential Council for Forest Ecosystem Management shall issue such rules as may be necessary to implement this Letter of Instructions.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) J. C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : CDAsia