MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 812

DIRECTING THE RESTORATION OF THE INTENDECIA BUILDING

WHEREAS, the Intendencia Building was destroyed by fire on February 13, 1979;

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the national government to foster historical consciousness;

WHEREAS, LOI No. 733 directed the restoration of certain areas in Intramuros;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. The Intendencia Building shall be restored to its original condition. Its facade and outside appearance, including height architectural detailing and other respects, shall be in accordance with its original design when constructed during the Spanish Regime. The lobbies, stairs, courtyards, and principal rooms to the interior shall conform to the original design as far as possible. The sidewalk and surrounding streets and open spaces shall also be restored.

2. The restoration work shall be done by the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communication under the supervision and guidance of the Intramuros Restoration Committee created under LOI No. 733. Plans shall be approved by the said Committee.

3. The reconstructed building shall be used to house the National Archives in its second floor and the Bureau of the Treasury in its ground floor. The building design shall be prepared for this ultimate use.

4. The Commission on Elections and the Bureau of the Treasury shall relocate to such temporary quarters as may be necessary. The Ministry of the Budget shall release the necessary funds to allow the payment of rentals and the acquisition of necessary furniture and equipment to replace those destroyed by fire.

5. The Minister of the Budget shall release the funds needed for restoration work on the Intendencia Building, as may be recommended by the Minister of Public Works, Transportation and Communication, and the Intramuros Restoration Committee.

6. To provide for the requirements of the Commission on Elections, the Minister of Public Works, Transportation and Communications is hereby directed to begin construction work of the permanent building of the Comelec at the National Government Center at Quezon City. The necessary funds shall be released by the Minister of the Budget out of the CY 1979 Infrastructure Program for national buildings.

7. The Intramuros Restoration Committee shall submit its recommendations on the utilization and restoration of the Comelec Buildings on Gral. Luna and Postigo Streets, in anticipation of the Comelec’s transfer to the Government Center.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia