MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 468

WHEREAS, the present development efforts require a more competent and qualified personnel force to carry out the complex and challenging tasks of the government;

WHEREAS, development has also brought in its wake sudden and accelerating rates of change in all phases of human endeavor, giving rise to the need for further education among government personnel to keep abreast of this new dynamism;

WHEREAS, government personnel are not entirely unaware of these changes and have been motivated to pursue more and higher learning but have been deterred by financial difficulties;

WHEREAS, the government views the individual employee as one of the most potent forces for the achievement of the objectives of an organization and recognizes that every individual possesses the capability to improve himself given the opportunity to do so;

WHEREAS, the Civil Service Law and rules provide that it shall be the concern of the government to generate opportunities for the development and advancement of government employees either through in-service training locally or abroad or through formal education and scholarship;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. It shall be the policy of the State to insure and promote the continuing development of employees of the government at all levels to increase their capabilities to cope with the manifold and increasingly complex tasks of the government. It has accordingly established a scholarship program, hereinafter referred to as a National Scholarship For Development (NSFD) beamed towards providing formal education to those employees who wish to complete professional or technological courses, and those who desire to pursue higher studies, particularly in those areas determined to be critical to the implementation of development programs.

SEC. 2. This National Scholarship For Development shall be the concern of all heads of departments and agencies of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations and local governments, who shall see to it that employees are duly informed of the requirements of the program and encouraged to participate in it.

SEC. 3. All permanent employees of the government who are desirous of completing professional or technological courses at the collegiate level or pursuing higher studies, are eligible to participate in the NSFD. However, the Department or agency head shall see to it that they are enrolled in courses for which additional skills are necessary in the pursuit of the development effort as determined by the National Economic and Development Authority, and that their attendance in those classes shall be after the regular office hours.

SEC. 4. Each department or agency shall advance from their respective savings on all items, the tuition and other fees of the employees, the refund of which shall be charged against the salaries of said employees in accordance with a contract which the department or agency and the employees concerned shall enter into. Should there arise circumstances which would prevent the employees from refunding the amounts incurred for the scholarship, such shall be taken from their retirement pay or any other money which would accrue to the employees in the course of their employment.

SEC. 5. An employee who continually maintains a high scholastic record shall not be required to refund the money advanced by the agency as a form of recognition for his exemplary academic performance.

SEC. 6. Priority in the availment of the NSFD shall initially be given to employees who are 30 years old and below as a means of articulating the program with the youth development project of the government. However, the NSFD shall be open to all employees who are not yet more than 45 years of age. The number of department or agency participants shall be determined by the department or agency concerned.

SEC. 7. The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) shall provide the departments and agencies of the government with a list of the development areas in which additional skills are needed. Meantime that this list is not yet available, the departments and agencies shall be guided by the following preferred courses:

(1) Preferred College Course:

AB Economics; BS Agriculture, major in Agronomy, Plant Pathology, Animal Husbandry, Agricultural Economics, Agricultural Botany, or Soils; BS Fisheries, major in Fishing Technology, Inland Fisheries, Marine Fisheries; BS Forestry, major in Forest Biological Sciences, Forest Resources Management, Forestry Extension or Wood Sciences and Technology; BS in Agricultural Business, Agricultural Engineering, Agricultural Chemistry, Agricultural Education, Agricultural Extension, Veterinary Medicine, Mining Engineering, Sanitary Engineering, Industrial Education, Geology, Industrial Chemistry, Rural Sociology, Food Technology, Marine Biology, Sugar Technology.

Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Geodetic Engineering, Aeronautical Engineering, Electronics and Communication Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Marine Transportation, Management Engineering, Industrial Technology, Management of Small-Scale Industries, Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics, Statistics, Textile Technology, Rubber Technology.

(2) Preferred Technical Courses:

Wood-Pattern Making, Auto Mechanics, Welding Technology, Electronics, Mechanics, Diesel Technology, Sheet Metal Technology, Automotive Technology, Industrial Technology, Computer Key Punching, Machine Shop Technology, Radio/TV Technicians, Radio Communication and Aircraft Technician.

SEC. 8. For the purpose of drawing up the rules and regulations to implement the NSFD, an inter-agency committee is hereby created composed of representatives of the Civil Service Commission, Budget Commission, NEDA, Department of Local Government and Community Development and Commission on Audit, with the Civil Service Commission providing technical and secretariat services.

Said rules and regulations shall take effect upon approval by the Civil Service Commission.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia