MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1381

RELATIVE TO THE PROMOTION OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH OF COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the accelerated development of the Philippine economy calls for the effective and efficient use of electronic data processing technology to assist in the planning, implementation, management and review aspects of the individual public and private entities participating in the development process;

WHEREAS, there is a need to develop computer literacy through comprehensive computer education programs involving both the formal and non-formal educational and other systems; and

WHEREAS, it is desirable to foster the development of a local computer industry including hardware and software, as well as components thereof, to meet the domestic development requirements as well as the potential for export of locally produced computer hardware and software;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

1. An ad hoc Cabinet Sub-Committee on Computers is hereby created to review the role and potential of computers in the development of the economy, consistent with the framework of the Philippine Development Plan, and to make the necessary recommendations and a plan of action therefor.

The scope of the study shall include (a) the state of computer utilization in the country, (b) current policies of the government on computers, including possible gaps or inconsistencies, (c) the extent of desirable computers literacy as an input for industrial, commercial, and government requirements, (d) the capability of local industry for providing and servicing the domestic requirements for computer equipment and related services, including hardware and associated peripherals, software, components, and supplies, and (e) the potential of local industry for the exportation of computer hardware and software, including components, supplies, and related services.

The Cabinet Sub-Committee shall be headed by the Prime Minister as Chairman, with the following as members: the Ministers of Education, Culture and Sports; Human Settlements; Labor and Employment; Trade and Industry; Transportation and Communications, Public Works and Highways, and the Director-General of the Office of Budget and Management, National Economic and Development Authority, and National Science and Technology Authority.

2. A Technical Committee is hereby created to assist the Cabinet Sub-Committee in the performance of its functions. The Technical Committee shall be composed of the duly designated representatives of the members of the Cabinet Sub-Committee, other concerned government agencies such as but not limited to National Computer Center, Technology Resource Center, and Development Academy of the Philippines as well as representatives from the private sector, particularly organizations and entities involved with computers, to be designated by the Prime Minister. The Chairman of the Technical Committee shall be designated by the Prime Minister.

The Technical Committee shall within 60 days upon signing of this LOl submit to the Cabinet Sub-Committee a preliminary report covering an assessment of the present state of the computer industry, problems encountered, prospects for the industry and a recommended action program, without prejudice to the subsequent submission of a more detailed and comprehensive report and recommendations. The above-mentioned reports, as may be modified or otherwise, commented upon by the Cabinet Sub-Committee, shall further be submitted to the Cabinet and the Prime Minister for their consideration and possible approval of the recommendations proposed in said reports.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1325 – 1424]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.