MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 463

WHEREAS, the coverage of the present Four-Year Development Plan will end in 1977 and there is a need to formulate successor plans to continue and pursue the development goals embodied in the present plan, taking into account more recent developments in the economy which may necessitate a restatement of objectives and priorities;

WHEREAS, Letters of Instruction Nos. 363 and 363-A require all departments, offices and agencies of the government involved in development planning to submit a medium-term plan covering a period of ten years and a long term or perspective plan up to the year 2000, to the National Economic and Development Authority for evaluation, coordination and integration;

WHEREAS, the different offices concerned have submitted their respective plans so that now there is a need to put together and integrate all these plans within a long-term framework while at the same time designing intermediate and medium-term implementing plans.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and authorize:

The National Economic and Development Authority in coordination with all the departments, offices and instrumentalities including government-owned and controlled corporations involved in development planning to prepare the necessary successor plans to the present Four-Year Development Plan, by formulating a Five-Year Development Plan for 1978 to 1982, together with a Ten-Year Development Plan for 1978 to 1987 and a perspective plan up to the year 2000.

In the preparation of the above plans, NEDA, through the Secretary of Economic Planning, is further authorized and empowered to create and appoint the members of an inter-agency committee to assist in the implementation of this order, and to set up the general machinery for the administration and operation of this undertaking.

The Commissioner of the Budget is hereby directed to make available to the Secretary of Economic Planning all the necessary funds for the purpose.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of September, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia