LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 347

TO : The Secretary of Education The Secretary of Health The Secretary of Economic Planning The Acting Commissioner of the Budget

To ensure the maximum effective usage of the limited government resources available for the procurement of equipment, school books, and drugs and medicines, I hereby direct:

1. The inclusion of the Secretary of Economic Planning in the Standing Committee on the Procurement of School Books presently consisting of the Secretary of Education and the Budget Commissioner, with purpose of annually developing and recommending to the President a comprehensive program of school book procurement as may be funded from (a) national government funds, (b) foreign and domestic borrowing, including the World Bank loan for book production, and (c) international aid sources.

2. The creation of a Standing Committee on the Procurement of Drugs and Medicines, consisting of the Secretary of Health, the Secretary of Economic Planning, and the Budget Commissioner, with the purpose of annually developing and recommending to the President a comprehensive program of government procurement of drugs and medicines as may be funded from (a) national government funds, (b) foreign and domestic borrowings, and (c) international aid sources.

3. The Budget Commissioner to incorporate as part of the budget process, the preparation of an annual equipment procurement program for each agency in order to ensure a comprehensive evaluation of agency equipment needs in the light of government financial capability.

4. All agencies concerned, including the Commission on Audit, the Textbook Board, the Education Projects and Implementation Task Force, the U.P. Science Education Center and Government Hospitals, to extend maximum assistance and cooperation as may be required in the preparation of annual procurement programs for school books, drugs and medicines, and equipment.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia