MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1110

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 597 was issued on September 4, 1977 creating an inter-agency task force to formulate and implement an integrated development plan for Mount Arayat and immediate vicinity;

WHEREAS, it now becomes imperative to achieve a realistic, systematic, practical and integrated approach to effect and ensure a successful and accelerated implementation of the development plans and programs as envisioned;

WHEREAS, to realize and accomplish the desired objective, there arises an urgent and compelling need for a simplification of the working mechanism and a structural reorganization thereof, a coordinated and centralized supervision and monitoring of activities, and a direct and active involvement and participation of local officials concerned;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order the amendment of Letter of Instructions No. 597 to read as follows:

“LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 597 – (Creating Magalang-Arayat Task Force To Formulate and Implement an Integrated Development Plan for Mount Arayat And Its Environs)

WHEREAS, our history is replete with records of the revolutionary struggle of the Filipino people for the improvement of their political, economic and social life;

WHEREAS, the contemporary Filipino, seeking no less the uplift of the country is likewise imbued with the same revolutionary zeal for change, striving to realize this change through revolutionary but peaceful means;

WHEREAS, the New Society with its program of reforms, has provided the encouragement and the impetus for the Filipinos to pursue these changes so that they may realize their dreams, hopes and aspirations for a better life;

WHEREAS, Mount Arayat in Pampanga has been the nursery of some of these revolutionary struggles;

WHEREAS, it is deemed desirable to embark on a program of development for Mount Arayat and its environs, for the primary purpose of establishing the area as the monument to the revolutionary spirit of the Filipino people and of the socio-economic reforms that had been undertaken for the upliftment of the masses, especially under the New Society;

WHEREAS, in order to achieve this end there is a need to create a Task Force to formulate and coordinate the planning and implementation of an integrated development plan for Mount Arayat and its immediate vicinity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

1. It shall be the objective of the Government to develop Mount Arayat and its environs and to build it as the symbol and embodiment of the programs of change designed to improve the socio-economic condition of the area and the quality of life of its residents under the New Society;

2. There is hereby created a body to be known as Magalang -Arayat Task Force (MARATAF) to implement a program of development for Mount Arayat and its environs as envisioned, composed of the following members:

3. The Task Force shall be supported by any Executive Committee composed of the following:

which shall supervise/oversee the implementation of the development plan and projects as envisioned herein;

4. The Task Force is hereby authorized and empowered to call upon ministries, government agencies, and instrumentalities to provide such services and assistance as may be necessary for the efficient and effective discharge of the functions and responsibilities of the Task Force. (A list of these government agencies, instrumentalities and offices is attached) The Office of the Provincial Governor of Pampanga shall act as the secretariat for the Task Force to monitor the execution of its programs and projects;

5. The Municipal Mayors of Arayat and Magalang, Pampanga and other leaders of the communities within the covered area are directed to extend full support to this project;

6. Ministries, government agencies and instrumentalities called upon for assistance in this project are hereby directed to utilize any savings they maintain for CY 1977 to fund the implementation and the operation of projects identified under this program. The Budget Commission shall ensure that savings of these agencies and government units are correctly certified and disbursed against such identified projects. The Budget Commission shall further ensure that funding requirement for CY 1978 and annually thereafter shall be incorporated in the respective annual budgets of the concerned offices and agencies;

7. The Task Force shall formulate the necessary development programs to carry out the purposes envisioned herein;

8. All existing records, correspondence, documents and papers pertaining to this project are hereby ordered to be turned over and/or transferred to the Secretariat herein mentioned.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty one.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Reference: Attachment A

Source: CDAsia