MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 935

WHEREAS, the requirement for clearance from the government pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1517 has the initial effect of freezing development;

WHEREAS, all proposals to sell, lease, encumber, improve real properties require clearance from the Human Settlements Regulatory Commission; and

WHEREAS, there is a need for interim guidelines until the government shall have formulated an updated Comprehensive Development Plan and Zoning Regulations for the entire Metro Manila;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby issue the following instructions:

(1) The Human Settlements Regulatory Commission shall continue implementing the provisions of the Metro Manila Zoning Ordinance until the updated comprehensive development plan and zoning regulations for Metro Manila shall have been approved. The local building officials are also deputized to issue locational clearances for projects of local significance conforming to the Metro Manila Zoning Ordinance.

(2) In the meantime, the Human Settlements Regulatory Commission shall require registration of existing rights only for land within areas for priority development.

(3) The Ministry of Human Settlements shall prepare or cause to be prepared the comprehensive development plan and zoning regulations for Metro Manila.

(4) The Ministry of Human Settlements and the Ministry of Finance shall prepare a land pricing scheme wherein land prices/valuation shall be related to the land use classification of the government.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia