MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 648

WHEREAS, the Career Executive Service was established under Presidential Decree No. 1 to build a reserviour of career executives who shall be the innovators and change agents in the public bureaucracy;

WHEREAS, practically all of these career executives have undergone a well-rounded training program at the Development Academy of the Philippines which exposed them to various concepts and processes that lie at the heart of effective and enlightened management;

WHEREAS, the more recent developments in the New Society dictate that such training should include greater national security-awareness and consciousness;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct;

1. The president of the National Defense College of the Philippines shall draw up and implement a program of training on national security for all officials of the government who occupy positions in the Career Executive Service and who have qualified as Career Executive Service Officers except those who are holders of masteral decree in National Security Administration from NDCP.

2. This National Security Course shall cover topics relating not only to internal national requirements but also to those affecting foreign policy and international linkages.

3. This program shall be launched on a continuing basis to support the course of instruction of the Career Executive Service Development Program. For this purposes, the Career Executive Service Board shall make available such information concerning the Career Executive Service, as may be necessary, for the successful implementation of the program.

4. All heads of departments and agencies are directed to give full support and encouragement to this program.

5. A report on the results of the first National Security course shall be submitted to me upon its completion.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia