MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1088

TO: Minister of Human Settlements Minister of Budget Minister of Finance Governor, Central Bank of the Philippines Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines Chairman, Commission on Audit

In order to strengthen and hasten the implementation of the BLISS program of the Ministry of Human Settlements, you are hereby directed to:

1. Develop and implement a countryside livelihood program through BLISS. To initially effect this program, MHS shall front-end livelihood component in implementing all BLISS projects.

2. Develop a rural financial infrastructure to support the above-mentioned countryside livelihood program utilizing the existing rural banking and private development banks systems. Specifically, establish and implement within the existing Central Bank guidelines and government accounting and auditing rules a financial system for the release, distribution, lending investment and collection of funds/remittances of beneficiaries serviced by the BLISS program of the Ministry of Human Settlements. The scheme shall include investments of HSDC into rural banks/ private development banks to obtain majority control of said banks provisions of existing laws notwithstanding

as well as a management training program for rural and private development banks core staff oriented towards livelihood packaging.

3. Treat the shelter, land development and livelihood expenditures for BLISS projects into one single investment of the MHS/HSDC. Interchangeably, all shelter, land development and livelihood loans shall be treated as unitized loan package for mortgage purposes. Rediscounting facilities for these mortgages shall be firmed up by the Central Bank.

4. Adopt an amortization schedule for such unitized loan package.

5. Equitize all BLISS appropriations into the Human Settlements Development Corporation as additional government payments to HSDC capitalization.

6. Execute all necessary documentation for the MHS through the HSDC to own for and in behalf of the Government of the Philippines the BLISS lands donated by the municipal governments.

For immediate compliance.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

November 29, 1980

Source: Malacañang Records Office