MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1184

TO All Ministries, Other Government Agencies and Government Corporations

WHEREAS, sharing the fruits of development is one of the aims of the National Government;

WHEREAS, providing livelihood opportunities to the greater mass of the Filipino people would foster improved quality of life to everyone;

WHEREAS, it is for this purpose that the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran was launched by the National Government;

WHEREAS, successful implementation of the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran, the national livelihood movement, hinges greatly on the people identified to spearhead this activity, particularly at the municipal level;

WHEREAS, all officials and employees of the government, especially those designated to perform the duties and responsibilities of Municipal Action Officers play a vital role in the execution of programs and projects of this national movement;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and ordain:

1. All Ministries, other government agencies and government corporations are hereby instructed to detail all Human Settlements Officers under their organization who have been designated as KKK Municipal Action Officers to the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran Secretariat based in the Ministry of Human Settlements;

2. This detail shall be on a full-time basis, starting from the date of designation;

3. All detailed Municipal Action Officers shall henceforth, report directly to and coordinate with their respective Regional Action Officers in the performance of their duties and responsibilities, as follows:

(a) Oversee the implementation of the KKK in the municipality;

(b) Coordinate with the Municipal Development Council, Support Agency technicians, beneficiaries and banks for program/project activities;

(c) Provide support/assistance to the Municipal Development Council and beneficiaries in the identification of livelihood projects for approval;

(d) Package project prototypes and introduce the same in the form of proposals;

(e) Facilitate project fund releases from designated banks;

(f) Coordinate with the Regional Action Officer for municipal funding requirements;

(g) Act as middleman for the National Food Authority and beneficiaries with regard to the sale of products which can not be absorbed by the local market;

(h) Monitor implementation of KKK projects in the municipality;

(i) Prepare regular status/accomplishment and other necessary reports on KKK projects and other related activities in the municipality;

(j) Perform other related tasks as may be necessary for effective KKK implementation.

4. Full-time detail of HSOs to the KKK Secretariat shall be for the duration of their term as Municipal Action Officers;

5. In no way shall this detail to the KKK Secretariat adversely affect the normal benefits due the Municipal Action Officer, such as leaves, salary increases, promotions, etc.; and

6. All heads of offices are likewise directed to extend all necessary assistance and support to the designated KKK Action Officers to ensure the success of this movement.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of January in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia