MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 167

WHEREAS, a sustained national growth calls for the establishment of a secure position in the growing international export market;

WHEREAS, in order to attain the foregoing objective, one of the more significant steps initiated by the Government is the establishment of an export processing zone in Mariveles, Bataan, under Presidential Decree No. 66; and

WHEREAS, to accelerate and expand our export trade, and to optimize its consequential benefits to the national economy, it is imperative to expedite the exportation of zone-made products by simplifying the export procedures that would apply thereto;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, as amended, do hereby direct the adoption and implementation of the following rules and regulations, which shall govern exclusively the exportation of goods and merchandise emanating from the Bataan Export Processing Zone or any other zone established under Presidential Decree No. 66:

SIMPLIFIED EXPORT PROCEDURE FOR ENTERPRISES REGISTERED WITH THE EXPORT PROCESSING ZONE AUTHORITY UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 66

RULE I. Definitions

A. “Decree” shall mean the Presidential Decree No. 66.

B. “Authority” shall mean the Export Processing Zone Authority.

C. “Simplified Export Procedure” shall mean the reduction in the number of forms to be accomplished and steps to be undergone by a registered exporter.

D. “Registered Exporter” shall mean a Zone enterprise registered with the Export Processing Zone Authority.

E. “Export Permit” shall mean EPZA Form No. 8103 which authorizes the registered exporter to export the goods declared in the Export Permit.

F. “PTS” shall mean the Philippine Trade Standard mark given by the Bureau of Standards with respect to standardized products.

G. “Zone” shall mean the Bataan Export Processing Zone, or any other Zone established under Presidential Decree No. 66.

RULE II. Applicability of the Simplified Export Procedure

The simplified export procedure shall apply exclusively to a registered exporter as defined in Rule I(D) above.

RULE III. Export Documentation

A. The registered exporter shall be exempt from filing the Report of Foreign Sales, Central Bank E.D. Form No. 101.

B. In lieu of the existing export licenses or Central Bank E.D. Form No. 102, the registered exporter shall apply for an Export Permit with the Export Processing Zone Authority on EPZA Form No. 8103. There shall be eight (8) copies of each export permit to be distributed as follows: the original and one copy to the National Export Coordinating Center of the Bureau of Customs; two copies to the Central Bank to be submitted as prescribed by existing Central Bank regulations; one copy to the registered exporter; one copy to the negotiating bank; one copy to the shipping agent; and one copy for the Export Processing Zone Authority.

C. The registered exporter shall be exempt from filing the Export Entry, Bureau of Customs Form No. 25.

D. The registered exporter shall likewise be exempted from the export clearance being issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

E. The commodity clearance of exportable products from the Zone shall be done semestrally or annually by the proper agency.

1) If the registered exporter has a PTS marking from the Bureau of Standards for its standardized exportable products, the same shall constitute the annual commodity clearance for the said products.

2) If the registered exporter has not yet secured its PTS for its products, the Authority shall require that such enterprise apply with the Bureau of Standards for a PTS within six (6) months after its registration with the Authority. Until such time as the said PTS is actually granted, the commodity clearance shall be done on a semestral basis.

RULE IV. Simplified Procedure

A. Upon approval of the Export Permit by the Export Processing Zone Authority, the original and a copy of the same shall be forwarded by the Authority directly to the National Export Coordinating Center of the Bureau of Customs.

The copies for the Central Bank shall be submitted as prescribed by the Central Bank. No further processing of the Export Permit shall be done by the National Export Coordinating Center, except to authorize the loading of the cargo, which authorization shall be granted by the Collector of Customs or his official representative. The customary Commercial Invoice and the Commodity Clearance, together with the Export Permit authorizing actual loading of the cargo, shall be forwarded by the National Export Coordinating Center to the Customs Inspector on board the vessel where cargo will be loaded.

B. The registered exporter shall pay the arrastre charges prior to actual loading of the cargo.

C. The registered exporter shall load the cargo in the presence of the Customs Inspector to whom the Commercial Invoice, the Commodity Clearance and the Export Permit of the said registered exporter shall have been previously forwarded. The Customs Inspector shall have no authority to open or inspect the goods being loaded.

RULE V. Repatriation and Liquidation of Foreign Exchange Proceeds from Exports

Foreign exchange proceeds from exports shall be received in foreign currencies acceptable to form part of the international reserves and shall be repatriated and liquidated in accordance with Central Bank regulations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia