MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1225

WHEREAS, the year Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Two marks a very meaningful occasion for the global environment as it signals the Tenth Anniversary of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (UNCHE) first held in Stockholm, Sweden and the founding of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) both in the year Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Two;

WHEREAS, the national leadership acknowledges the historic importance of the UNCHE and UNEP as vital impetus leading to the adoption and promotion of the government’s human settlements and environment program;

WHEREAS, the commemoration of this Anniversary provides a unique and timely opportunity for the Philippines to affirm the basic validity of our national policies and programs dealing on the environment as well as to manifest our continuing and unqualified support to the principles embodied in UNCHE and UNEP;

WHEREAS, the foregoing premise can be best demonstrated at the national level by launching special activities which would call attention to the importance of environmental protection and likewise encourage the participation of all sectors of the populace;

WHEREAS, as a member of the international community, the Philippines can further demonstrate its support for this global movement by participating in the UNEP Session of a Special Character and the Tenth Regular Session of the UNEP Governing Council;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby issue the following:

1. The Minister of Human Settlements is hereby authorized to prepare and immediately implement a series of activities which would best commemorate at the national level the Tenth Anniversary of UNCHE and UNEP with special emphasis and attention to those as would:

a) Encourage and solicit the participation of the various sectors of the populace including among others industry, academe, youth, and officials of the local governments;

b) Project the national efforts in evolving and implementing an environmental protection program for this and the succeeding decades;

c) Delineate the present and emerging issues and concerns affecting the different aspects of our natural environment; and

d) Give recognition to particular contributions and exemplary achievements made by people, locally and internationally, for the promotion and uplift of the cause of environment protection.

2. The Minister of Human Settlements, as the Chairperson of the National Environmental Protection Council, is hereby further authorized to create and convene such number of committees from among the Members and personnel of the Council to assist and facilitate the successful conduct of activities. All members of the Council are hereby enjoined to provide full support to the celebration of this occasion.

3. The Minister of Human Settlements, together with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, are hereby authorized to implement activities that shall ensure our full and active participation at the UNEP Session of a Special Character on 10–18 May, 1982, and the UNEP 10th Regular Session from 20 May to 2 June 1982.

4. The Minister of Human Settlements is authorized to activate a secretariat from the MHS and NEPC as well as from concerned agencies to serve as support staff for the various national and international activities.

5. The Minister of the Budget in facilitating release of Two Million, Eight Hundred Sixty-Seven Thousand, Six Hundred and Twenty Pesos (P2,867,620.00). National projects/activities shall be funded from the budget of the Ministry of Human Settlements and the National Environmental Protection Council. International projects/activities shall be funded from the International Commitments Fund as provided under Section I (Chapter XXXIV), International Commitments Fund: (KBL 2-1-1) of the 1982 National Budget based on the financial work program submitted by the Ministry of Human Settlements.

6. To call attention to the historic significance of the Tenth Anniversary of UNCHE and UNEP and as a special offering of the Philippines, the Postmaster General in consultation with the Minister of Human Settlements is hereby directed to issue a commemorative stamp and such regular issue of stamps that would symbolize our continuing concern for the global environment.

7. The Minister of Media Affairs is likewise hereby directed to provide media and publication assistance in full disseminating the importance of this celebration.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia