MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 814

WHEREAS, there is a need to proclaim special public holidays in addition to the regular legal holidays in order to preserve our cultural traditions and to observe special events;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to release and declare these special holidays and guidelines thereof at the start of the year in order to allow different sectors to correspondingly adjust their respective calendars;

NOW, THEREFORE, you are hereby directed to follow the following guidelines and observe the listed special holidays for CY 1979:

Section 1. Special holidays for local government may be proclaimed but such days shall be regular working days.

Sec. 2. All working days from time to time falling between holidays or between a holiday and a weekend shall not be considered special holidays.

Sec. 3. All other special holidays for special purposes such as elections and related events shall be covered by special proclamations.

Sec. 4. Academic holidays due to floods and typhoons shall be governed by the Ministry of Education and Culture rules and regulations. For Signal No. 1, classes may be suspended at the discretion of the school management; Signal No. 2, classes in Elementary and High School levels will be suspended; and Signal No. 3, classes in all levels will be suspended.

Sec. 5. All private and government offices shall follow announcement by the Office of the President as regards holidays due to floods and typhoons in accordance with Memorandum Circular No. 1105.

Sec. 6. For unforeseen special holidays that may prolong the suspension of work, the Saturdays immediately following such holidays may be declared as working days.

Sec. 7. The aforesaid guidelines shall be followed for calendar year 1979 and the years thereafter until otherwise repealed by subsequent legislations.

Calendar

List of Holidays for 1979

I. Legal Public Holidays

II. Nationwide Special Holidays

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia