MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 991

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of achieving the objective in the issuance of security plates, there is the necessity to be more discriminate in the issuance of the same;

WHEREAS, national security demands a more effective procedure of issuing and controlling the use of security plates;

WHEREAS, in the drive for the conservation of energy, there is the necessity to deter the use of government vehicles for non-official purposes and one such positive step is to limit the use of security plates on such vehicles;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution do hereby order and issue the following instructions:

1. The Ministry of Transportation and Communications, through the Bureau of Land Transportation, is hereby ordered to recall and to undertake an inventory of all security plates issued to the different ministries, line agencies and offices in the shortest possible time.

2. All concerned are also hereby ordered to adopt the following procedure in the issuance of security plates:

a. All requests and/or applications for the issuance of security plates by the line agencies shall be made and submitted, through their respective ministries, to the Ministry of Transportation and Communications, through the Bureau of Land Transportation.

b. All requests and/or applications processed by the Ministry of Transportation and Communications shall then be transmitted to the National Intelligence Security Agency (NISA) for clearance.

c. All requests and/or applications properly cleared by the NISA shall then be forwarded to the Office of the President for approval, but before any such final approval be given, the requests and/or applications shall be processed by the NISA.

d. All requests and/or applications finally approved by the Office of the President shall then be returned to the Ministry of Transportation and Communications, through the Bureau of Land Transportation, which shall be responsible for the issuance, distribution of the aforesaid security plates to the appropriate line agencies, including the supervision and control hereof.

3. It is hereby further ordered that each security plate issued shall be assigned to only one vehicle and that the transfer to or use on vehicles other than that to which it is assigned, will not be allowed.

4. Finally, it is hereby further ordered that the issuance of security plates shall be limited to government vehicles assigned to the following officials or offices:

a. Minister and Deputy Ministers and officials of equivalent ranks;

b. The Chief Justice and Justices of Supreme Court, the Presiding Justice and Justices of the Court of Appeals;

c. Officials who and offices which, by reason of their position and nature of duties, are certified by the NISA as in need of security plates.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 19th day of February in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia