MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1250

1. The Minister of the Budget is hereby directed to set aside from the current budget, a government subsidy equivalent to the taxes, duties and fees which will have been collected from the importations by the National Steel Corporation, a government-controlled corporation, of 8,471 MT of tinplates, 6,360 MT of tinmill blackplates and 64 MT of tin ingots required by the domestic liquid milk industry to process milk and sell the same in accordance with the socialized pricing scheme of the government for basic commodities as recommended by the NEDA.

2. A similar government subsidy shall also be set aside by the Minister of the Budget for subsequent importations of tinplates, tinmill blackplates and tin ingots by the National Steel Corporation, provided, however, that the volume to be imported shall be determined by an Executive Committee of the NEDA Board created for this purpose to be composed of the Prime Minister, the Minister of Trade and Industry and the Director-General of the NEDA in consultation with the Iron and Steel Authority.

3. The above-mentioned subsidy shall be granted to the National Steel Corporation through the Iron and Steel Authority.

4. The importations of the above-mentioned tinplates, tinmill blackplates and tin ingots by the National Steel Corporation shall be under the supervision of the Iron and Steel Authority.

5. As per the recommendation of the NEDA, the National Steel Corporation may be allowed to distribute the imported tinplates to local milk processors, also under the supervision of the Iron and Steel Authority.

6. The Chairman of the Iron and Steel Authority shall see to it that the above importation of tinplates shall not be used by the local milk processors as a basis for increasing the price of milk considering the cost difference between imported and locally manufactured tinplates.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia