MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 252

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5 of Presidential Decree No. 210 dated June 8, 1973, barangay chairmen, together with barangay captains, have been entrusted the responsibility of registering the members of the various barangays (Citizens’ Assemblies) for the purpose of the holding of a referendum;

WHEREAS, most, if not all of the appointed barangay chairmen are employed either by the Government or by private entities and they depend on their respective salaries and/or wages, for their subsistence they being not entitled to collect any allowance, much less a salary, in the discharge of their duties and obligations as barangay chairmen;

WHEREAS, to discharge their functions in connection with the registration of barangay members, they are constrained to leave temporarily their employ and, accordingly, their respective salaries and/or wages are proportionately deducted;

WHEREAS, such an unwholesome situation was never contemplated for, in effect, they are deprived of their only source of livelihood;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby direct:

1.  That all government entities, agencies and/or instrumentalities as well as government-owned or controlled corporations should allow the employees under them who are duly appointed as barangay chairmen to take leave with pay during the actual period of registration of barangay members in connection with the holding of a referendum, same not to be charged against their accrued leaves;

2.  The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development to see to it that these Instructions are fully complied with. Likewise, he should make proper representations with the owners or proprietors of commercial establishments as well as corporations for them to allow their employees who are barangay chairmen the privilege contemplated in the next preceding paragraph;

3. Any provision of law, decree, order and/or instruction inconsistent herewith are accordingly modified.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia