MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 761

SUBJECT: EMERGENCY RESTORATION OF THE DAMAGED RETAINING WALL OF THE INTAKE COMPLEX IPO DAM, NORZAGARAY, BULACAN

1.0 A large portion of the concrete retaining wall of the entrance channel of the intake structure at Ipo Dam, Norzagaray, Bulacan, collapsed on the night of October 27, 1978 as an after effect of typhoon “KADING”. This destruction has reduced the capability of the Ipo Dam Complex to deliver water to Metro Manila to only a third of its rated capacity of 300 Million gallons per day (mgd).

2.0 Also, as a result of the over- banking of the Marikina River our Pumping Station at Tanong, Marikina, submerged all six pumps, motors and motor control center. This pumping station, which supplies about 30 mgd of water direct to our Balara Water Treatment Plant needs complete rehabilitation.

3.0 In the meantime, the roads leading to the site of the disaster areas has suffered slides, breaks and wash-outs , making them impassable to heavy transport and equipment. Also, the Bailey bridge at Bicti needs to be reinforced because it cannot allow the passage of heavy equipment.

4.0 THIS IS AN EMERGENCY CALLING FOR EMERGENCY SOLUTIONS.

5.0 In view of the foregoing, the following directives are hereby issued to restore the facility to full normal operations within the shortest possible time:

a. Full emergency authority is hereby conferred upon the General Manager, Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System to do the following:

i . Enter into immediate contract with D.M. Consunji , Inc. (DMCI) on a cost-plus basis to furnish supplies, materials, equipment, labor and stores to undertake all the necessary civil structural restoration works according to MWSS plans for the purpose;

ii . Purchase directly and without public bidding, as an exemption to the provisions of Executive Order No. 298, series of 1940, as amended, Executive Order No. 201, series of 1949, as amended, and Memorandum Circular No. 193, series of 1972, all supplies, materials, equipment and stores other than those furnished by the DMCI, on emergency basis ;

iii . Enter into negotiated contracts for other miscellaneous services as, and when, needed;

iv. Grant advance payment to contractors for mobilization purposes and for the procurement of supplies, materials and equipment where applicable;

v. Authorize the rendition of overtime services, including the payment of allowances, to all government personnel involved in the reconstruction and allied work;

vi . Call on any agency or instrumentality of the government as he may need to assist him in this emergency restoration works.

b. The Minister of Public Highways and/or the Commanding General of the 51st Engineering Brigade is hereby directed to undertake emergency repairs of all roads and reinforce bridges along the Ipo-Bicti Highway leading to the site to allow immediate passage of heavy equipment and transport into the site.

c. The Commanding General of the Philippine Air Force is hereby directed to make available helicopters and crew that may be needed to airlift off-site pre-fabricated steel frames and shapes, equipment, supplies and materials into the site of the work.

d. The Minister of Public Information is hereby directed to disseminate the necessary information with emphasis on conservation of water for the next succeeding months.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of October, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia