MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 605

TO: All Heads of Departments of the National Government and Local Governments, Government-owned and/or -controlled Corporations

The proper use of postal code numbers on mail matters is necessary to facilitate fast mail sorting and speedy delivery. To effectively carry out a massive campaign urging the mailing public to use regularly the proper postal code numbers on their mails, the following instructions are hereby issued:

1. All heads of departments of the national government and local governments, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, shall circularize all their officials and employees to use the proper postal code numbers regularly on their official and private mail matter;

2. All letters should bear the postal code numbers of both the sender and the addressee on the face of the envelope;

3. “Arabic” numbers should be used in writing the postal code inside the frames or squares. Do not trace the squares, just write the numbers;

4. The ink to be used in writing the code numbers must be black, blue or blue-black as the new mail sorting machine cannot “read” other colors of ink. Do not use a pencil. Use a ball pen or fountain pen;

5. Postage stamps should be affixed on the upper right hand corner of the face of the envelope;

6. Secure postal code numbers from the nearest post office. For more information on the proper use of postal code numbers, consult local postmasters;

7. Bulk mail or letters using “Window Envelopes” and with typewritten addresses may be sent in the usual manner except that they should bear the new postal code numbers. These shall be sorted manually;

8. The Department of Public Information, in collaboration with postal authorities, shall see to it that for a period of one year from the issuance of these instructions, all mass media facilities shall periodically include a reminder on the proper use of postal code numbers on all mail matter as part of their public service programs or features.

The cooperation of everybody is enjoined to insure successful implementation of the new postal code system and thereby help improve the mail service.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia