MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1289

Declaring the following provinces as initial MAISAGANA EXPORT ZONES – Pangasinan, Cagayan, Isabela, Quirino, Albay, Camarines Sur, South Cotabato, North Cotabato, Maguindanao and Sultan Kudarat.

WHEREAS, the country has been importing large volumes of feedgrains each year to support our rapidly growing livestock industry;

WHEREAS, in the face of the worst balance of payments deficit in our recent past due primarily to a severe worldwide recession, the Maisagana export drive can not only remove corn imports but actually immediately earn foreign exchange for the country, in the short run; and

WHEREAS, we must now take steps both to increase production and to prepare the ground work to support a new export industry the beginning of 1985.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ferdinand E. Marcos, by the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and instruct:

1.The following provinces are declared as the initial Corn Export Zones under the Maisagana program:

2. The Ministry of Agriculture shall ensure the full retraining of production technicians for Maisagana, conduct comprehensive soil analysis to determine the suitability for corn production of specific sites in these zones, and ensure an adequate supply and distribution of various inputs, especially seeds.

3. The Ministry of Public Works and Highways (MPWH) shall give top priority to the dredging, construction and improvement of ports and the construction of national and farm-to-market roads and bridges in these corn export zones. Attached as Annex I is a partial list of roads and bridges for immediate attention.

4. The National Food Authority (NFA) shall, in coordination with the Ministry of Trade and Industry, develop export prospects for corn. The Ministry of Trade and Industry shall also develop export financing and promotions programs, and in conjunction with the Board of Investments, shall study the possibility of providing additional incentives for corn production and for corn processors, traders and exporters.

5. The National Food Authority shall design special post-harvest, grain handling, procurement and exportation programs for corn export zones, with special emphasis on the possible establishment where necessary, bulk handling grain facilities in strategic ports in the zone.

6. The Central Bank of the Philippines shall draw up special credit programs for small corn farmers, corn plantations, corn traders and exporters in these export zones.

7. The National Food and Agriculture Council (NFAC) shall coordinate and oversee the implementation of action programs by the different Ministries and agencies involved in the export zones shall report directly to the President on the progress of implementation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of February, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Reference: Annex I

Source : CDAsia