Office of the President Malacañang, Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 843

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE INTRAMUROS ADMINISTRATION

To: The Minister of Human Settlements The Minister of the Budget The Mayor of the City of Manila The Executive Director, National Historical Institute

WHEREAS, the Intramuros Administration has been created by Presidential Decree, in recognition of the special place that Intramuros occupies in the history of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, it is essential to see to the immediate operation of the Intramuros Administration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct the following measures for the organization of the Administration:

1. The Board of Administrators of the Intramuros Administration is hereby constituted, pursuant to Sec. 2 of P.D. No. 1616, consisting of the following:

2. The Intramuros Development Plan presented to the Philippine Government by the Spanish Government in November 1973 is hereby approved as basis for the work of the Intramuros Administration. The Administration shall update the Plan and shall submit this to the President for final approval within a period of six months from date hereof.

3. The restoration of the Walls of Intramuros shall be based on its pre-1945 condition and shall be undertaken with full archeological and historical expertise.

4. Appropriations in the national budget intended for Intramuros development and maintenance are hereby authorized to be transferred to the Administration. In addition, the sum of five million pesos (₱5 million) is authorized to be released to the Administration out of the Special Activities Fund to allow the Administration to carry out its assigned functions. Its budgetary requirements shall be provided for in the CY 1980 General Appropriations Bill.

5. The City of Manila shall not continue operating the Municipal Golf Links. As such, it is authorized to retain fees and spend City funds in the Improvement of the said facility: Provided , That any permanent improvements shall be subject to the Administration’s approval.

6. No development undertaken by the Administration, particularly the digging of the moat, shall encroach upon the existing Golf Links unless concurred in by the Mayor of the City of Manila.

Done, this 10th day of April, nineteen hundred and seventy nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia