MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 76

To: The Special Committee on Travel

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, in relation to Letter of Instructions No. 74 dated May 12, 1973, and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the following regulations are hereby formulated to govern the travel of Filipino citizens to other countries:

I. Departure for abroad of the following categories of persons shall continue to be authorized:

1. Government officials travelling on official business, as approved by the Office of the President.

2. Scholars and trainees falling under the following classifications, as recommended by the Special Committee on Scholarships:

a. Scholars and trainees of the Philippine Government under grants from foreign governments and international organizations.

b. Scholars under grants from reputed private institutions or organizations.

c. Trainees of established professional and business entities.

3. Students currently undertaking studies in other countries who may henceforth return to the Philippines for a visit and thereafter depart to resume such studies.

4. Officials of international government organizations and affiliate bodies of such organizations of which the Philippines is a member, officials of established foundations and international institutions, as well as other persons travelling in the service or under the auspices of such entities.

5. Persons travelling to other countries under contracts of employment approved by the Office of Manpower Services, Department of Labor.

6. Persons currently under contracts of employment abroad who may henceforth come to the Philippines for a visit and thereafter depart to resume such employment.

7. Bona fide officers and crew members of international air carriers and ocean-going vessels.

8. Immigrants to other countries.

9. Permanent residents of other countries who may henceforth come to the Philippines for a visit and thereafter depart to return to the countries of their residence.

10. Bona fide businessmen in the pursuit of legitimate business.

11. Other persons whose travel may be considered meritorious by the Executive Body of the Special Committee on Travel.

II. The above regulations notwithstanding, the departure of engineers and highly technical personnel shall be allowed only in cases recommended by the Department of Labor and the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA).

III. The Department of Foreign Affairs shall continue to have the responsibility in the issuance of travel documents to those authorized to travel and shall observe the following rules:

1. All passports shall be validated for single travel only.

2. Any subsequent departure from the Philippines shall require revalidation of the passports, except in the cases of crew members under the category I(7) and returning residents under category I(9). Such persons shall be allowed to leave upon presentation of adequate evidence of their bona fide status to the authorities of the Commission on Immigration and Deportation at the point of departure.

The Instructions shall take effect immediately and shall supersede all other Instructions and regulations on the subject.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 22nd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia