OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT Malacañang Palace Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1312

MANDATING THE ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOREST OR TREE PARKS ALL OVER THE PHILIPPINES.

To enhance the beauty and improve the ecosystem of our communities, to provide the populace with a healthy and wholesome environment and places for rest and recreation, and to make our people increasingly appreciate the need for preserving our forests and restoring at the earliest possible time our denuded areas, the following instructions are hereby issued for the guidance of all concerned:

1. Every barangay and municipality or city in the Philippines shall establish, develop and maintain forest or tree parks of such size and number as the circumstances may warrant, but in no case less than one such park for every barangay , municipality or city. In the case of urban areas, the municipal or city government shall provide forest or tree parks in suitable and accessible areas for several barangays who shall assist in the project.

2. The Ministry of Natural Resources, whenever possible, shall allocate from lands of the public domain appropriate areas and sites to be devoted by said political units for the establishment and development of forest or tree parks. The Ministry of Natural Resources, through the Bureau of Forest Development, shall provide seedlings and technical assistance in the development and care of said forest and tree parks, and shall undertake intensive forest renewal, forest protection and other activities to support the development of forest or tree parks.

3. The Ministry of Human Settlements shall see to it that the land use plans of every municipality or city shall provide for appropriate forest or tree parks, and shall closely coordinate with the Ministry of Natural Resources and the Ministry of Local Governments in the planning of new, and the renewal of existing communities to include the creation of forest and tree parks .

4. The Ministry of Local Governments shall see to it that the forest and tree parks are in fact established and developed and that appropriate resources are earmarked by the political units concerned for the creation and maintenance of said areas.

5. The supervision of the establishment and development of the forest or tree parks shall be jointly exercised by these three Ministries. These agencies shall draw such joint agreements, rules and regulations and work programs for the efficient implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia