MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 192-A

Secretary Juan Ponce Enrile Department of National Defense

Secretary Vicente Abad Santos Department of Justice

Chairman Games and Amusements Board

President, Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation

President, Basketball Association of the Philippines

WHEREAS, there are responsible and well-meaning citizens who know of gambling syndicates and unscrupulous persons engaged in large-scale gambling, anomalous practices and machinations in sports contests, like game-fixing, point- or score-shaving, and other deceitful and dishonest acts;

WHEREAS, in order to protect these responsible and well-meaning citizens from harassment and fabricated counter-charges by these syndicates and unscrupulous persons, it is necessary that they should not be unnecessarily arrested and detained whenever they volunteer to disclose or denounce any of the acts penalized under Presidential Decree No. 483 , dated JUNE 13 , 1974, without my personal written clearance or that of the Secretary of National Defense.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, Proclamation No. 1104, dated January 17, 1973 and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order that the investigation, arrest and/or detention of any person who voluntarily discloses or denounces to the President of the Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation, or to the National Sports Association concerned, and/or to any law-enforcing agencies of the Government any of the acts penalized in the aforesaid Decree shall not be subject to arrest and detention and/or criminal prosecution without my personal written clearance or that of the Secretary of National Defense.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13TH day of JUNE , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1 – 237A]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.