MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1001

RECOGNIZING THAT:

The creation of the ASEAN Association for Planning and Housing has provided a venue for continuing regional cooperation in the development of human settlements;

There is an urgent need to apply ASEAN efforts to evolve solutions to the problems of housing and providing related services to the urban poor;

The utilization of ASEAN expertise in housing and planning to solve ASEAN problems in human settlements development is the priority concern of the Philippine Government;

The formation of an ASEAN-wide organization for planning and housing was conceived and nurtured in the Philippines;

The above-enumerated agencies are hereby directed as follows:

1. The Ministry of Human Settlements shall include in its annual budget an amount equivalent to US $50.000.00 as an annual grant to the ASEAN Association for Planning and Housing to support activities relating to the development of human settlements in the ASEAN region including the following:

A. Establishment of a Human Settlements Technology Center which shall document and disseminate approaches and technology being applied in the development of human settlements;

B. Publication and periodic updating of an ASEAN Registry of Experts;

C. Holding of convention, workshops and symposia on planning and housing;

D. Support of research projects and developmental studies;

2. The Ministry of the Budget upon submission of the request for funds, specifying therein the program of activities for the year, shall forthwith release the same to the ASEAN Association for Planning and Housing through the Ministry of Human Settlements. The grant shall be released within the 1st quarter of the calendar year.

3. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall make known to member countries of ASEAN this funding commitment of the Philippine Government to the ASEAN Association for Planning and Housing and shall endeavor to solicit from them similar commitments of support.

4. The National Housing Authority as the agency implementing the government’s housing program, shall, in coordination with the Philippine Council for Planning and Housing, and in consultation with the Ministry of Human Settlements, identify and prioritize such projects to be undertaken in the Philippines.

5. The Philippine Council for Planning and Housing is designated as the official organization accredited by the Philippine Government to the ASEAN Association on Planning and Housing. The Council shall submit to the ASEAN Association for Planning and Housing the list of projects proposed to be undertaken in the Philippines for integration in the yearly program of the Association.

The Philippine Council for Planning and Housing shall render periodic reports on the status of projects so funded under the grant.

Done in the City of Manila, on this day 20th March 1980.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia