MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1257

TO: The National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons The Ministry of Local Governments The Ministry of Education and Culture The Ministry of Social Services and Development The Ministry of Health The Office of Media Affairs The Metro Manila Commission The National Census and Statistics Office The Philippine Sugar Commission All Other Agencies Concerned

WHEREAS, the national government recognizes its responsibility to provide the disabled persons with the fullest measure of protection and assistance in their rehabilitation and thus promote their integration into the mainstream of society, as well as its primary duty to prevent physical and mental disabilities;

WHEREAS, there is a lack of comprehensive information on the nature and extent of the national problem of disability, and the number of disabled persons in the country;

WHEREAS, there is a need to obtain baseline data in order to plan, formulate and effectuate programs for the prevention and the rehabilitation of disability in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President the Philippines, hereby direct that a nationwide census of disabled persons in every barangay in coordination with the National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons (NCCDP) be conducted.

To this end, the following procedures will be observed:

1. The National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons shall determine the data that the census should generate and adopt a form for the purpose. The printing of the census forms will be undertaken by the Office of Media Affairs.

2. Distribution of forms and retrieval is to be the joint responsibility of the Ministry of Local Governments and the Ministry of Education and Culture in the provinces while Metro Manila Commission will take care of the Metro Manila area.

3. Information dissemination on the conduct of the census and mass education on disabilities through print and broadcast media is to be undertaken by the Office of Media Affairs, in coordination with the National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons. The assistance of private groups or organizations, like the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkasters sa Pilipinas and the Kapisanan ng mga Publisista sa Pilipinas will be sought.

4. The Ministry of Local Governments, the Metro Manila Commission and the Ministry of Education and Culture will conduct the actual census utilizing as manpower its officials and personnel in the field.

5. Before the actual conduct of the census, a preliminary survey as to which households have disabled persons will be undertaken in every barangay.

6. The Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Social Services and Development shall assist in census enumeration in the hospitals and social welfare institutions.

7. Data collation and tabulation shall be the responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Culture and the Ministry of Local Governments while computerization of survey results will be undertaken by the Electronic Data Processing Office of the Philippine Sugar Commission with the assistance of the National Census and Statistics Office. Storage of accomplished forms in the provinces will be the responsibility of the district superintendents of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

8. The National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons will take charge of the analysis, evaluation and final report on the results of the census.

The Ministry of Local Governments and the Ministry of Education and Culture may also request assistance from the National Nutrition Center, YCAP Foundation of the Philippines and the KKK National Secretariat and all other government agencies, and issue implementing guidelines to their respective offices and personnel as may be deemed necessary to ensure an accurate and complete census of disabled persons.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22ndday of July in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: Malacañang Records Office