MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 406

REQUIRING THAT AT LEAST 10% OF FIELD MANPOWER REQUIREMENTS OF GOVERNMENT INFRASTRUCTURE AND FOOD PRODUCTION PROJECTS BE PROVIDED THRU THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE AFP DRAFTEES

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree 182, dated May 6, 1973, as amended by Presidential Decree 567, dated October 18, 1974, draftees or those who rendered selective emergency military service shall be given priority in appointment in government service, commensurate with their training, experience, and educational qualifications, provisions of the Civil Service Law to the contrary notwithstanding;

WHEREAS, the Armed Forces of the Philippines is conducting a training program designed to provide draftees with useful skills needed for gainful employment once mustered out of the service;

WHEREAS, under the concept of self-reliance and cooperative scheme, a draftee can himself immediately be the direct beneficiary and ultimately a contributor to the national growth;

WHEREAS, in order to insure for the draftee an economically stable life, sustain his desire for self-reliance and develop him as a resource for national development, it is necessary that he be given all forms of assistance toward his subsequent employment when he leaves the service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

1. At least 10% of the field manpower requirements of all government infrastructure and food production projects undertaken directly by the government or by private contractors shall be composed of draftees who served honorably in the service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

2. In fulfilling this 10% requirements as herein provided, due consideration be given, to the extent possible, to the various levels of skills required; Provided, That no incumbent employee/personnel shall be laid off by reason hereof except for cause as provided by law;

3. The Armed Forces of the Philippines, through its Office of Manpower and Reserve Affairs or any other appropriate unit/office designated by the Chief of Staff, AFP, shall furnish all departments, agencies and offices of the government a schedule and list of all draftees separated from the service by category of skills;

4. The Chief of Staff, AFP, shall, with the approval of the Secretary of National Defense, promulgate necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia