MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 728

DIRECTING THE REVIEW OF GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES AND ORGANIZATION FOR PURPOSES OF FOSTERING GREATER EFFICIENCY AND ECONOMY

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1 established an Integrated Reorganization Plan for the Philippine National Government;

WHEREAS, the exigencies of government operation and changing conditions has necessitated the creation of additional offices, the transfer of functions among agencies, and the abolition of organizational units, since the approval of P.D. No. 1;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to review on a comprehensive basis the implementation of the integrated reorganization plan, in the light of subsequent organizational changes, for the purpose of enhancing economy and effectiveness in government operations;

WHEREAS, P.D. No. 1416 grants the President continuing authority to reorganize the national government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. A Review Committee is hereby created to review the organization and activities of agencies of the national government, with the aims of (a) identifying proliferation in agency organizational units and duplication in functions and activities and (b) recommending such measures as may be necessary to eliminate duplication and to enhance complementary and supportive relationships among government agencies;

2. The objective of this study is to identify measures which will limit current operating expenditures so as to maximize the amount available for capital outlays. The Committee shall therefore recommend measures necessary (a) to eliminate the proliferation of organizational units within individual Ministries, Offices or Bureaus, (b) to reduce duplication of functions among agencies of government, and (c) to reduce overhead expenditures of government by strengthening the principal line agencies of government;

3. The Committee is specifically instructed to study the general areas and the specific activities of agencies that are included in the attached list, and such other similar instances of possible duplication as it may identify;

4. The Committee shall dovetail its work with the ongoing study of government corporations being done by the Presidential Commission on Reorganization;

5. The Committee shall submit its recommendations in the form of suggested organizational or activity changes, including the consolidation of organizational units, the transfer of functions and activities, the abolition of offices, and the redefinition of functions and activities;

6. The Committee shall be headed by the Chairman, Presidential Commission on Reorganization, with the Minister of the Budget and the Dean of the College of Public Administration of the University of the Philippines as members. The Committee shall be supported in its work by the staffs of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization, the Management Office of the Ministry of the Budget, and the U.P. College of Public Administration. Minimum necessary costs for the study, not to exceed P250.00, may be charged to the Special Activities Fund.

7. The Committee shall submit a preliminary report on or before October 31, 1978.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Reference: List of Government Organizations, Functions and Activities Directed for Review

Source: CDAsia