Malacañang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1493

DIRECTING A PROGRAM OF GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO REHABILITATE THE PHILIPPINE PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS ASSOCIATION (PPSTA)

Whereas, the Philippine Public School Teachers Association was founded on May 15, 1947 with the objective of advancing and promoting the interest and welfare of schoolteachers;

Whereas, frauds were committed in PPSTA during the 1970s, leading to the issuance of LOI No. 860 on May 16, 1979 as a means of seeing to the rehabilitation of PPSTA in the interest of its members, all active or retired government employees;

Whereas, the full magnitude of the financial losses of PPSTA has only been recently revealed with the completion of a program audit of its operations, undertaken by officials of the Office of the President, the Commission on Audit, the Insurance Commission, and the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports;

Whereas, the government had no participation whatsoever in PPSTA affairs prior to 1979 and even after the issuance of LOI No. 860, PPSTA was administered by an elected Board of Directors and a Board appointed management group, but government is nonetheless concerned over the welfare and the hard-earned money of the more than 180,000 members of PPSTA, comprising about sixty (60) percent of the schoolteachers and support personnel in the public school system;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Law, do hereby Order and Instruct:

Recovery of Losses and Legal Action

1. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of National Defense shall take all the steps necessary to assist PPSTA in the recovery of properties and assets rightfully belonging to PPSTA;

2. The Minister of Justice shall assist in investigating and where warranted, in prosecuting all persons responsible for defrauding the PPSTA and teachers of their hard-earned funds;

Casino Fund Deposit

3. The Minister of the Budget shall release from the Casino Fund, the amount of twenty five million pesos (P25 million), as a five-year interest free deposit with the PPSTA. This deposit shall be renewable for another five (5) years. The activity shall be considered a socio-economic project of the Fund, specifically intended for teachers and education support personnel.

The money shall be used to settle arrears in members’ claims against the Mutual Assistance System, Mutual Retirement Benefit System, and the Mutual Financial Assistance Service, to the maximum extent of six million pesos (P6.0 million).

The balance of at least P19 million shall finance a special lending program to PPSTA members who are in the government service, in accordance with such conditions as may be agreed upon by the PPSTA and the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, under the guidelines herein established.

Five years after receipt of funds and unless the extension of the loan by another five years is approved by the President, the original amounts borrowed shall be repaid to the Casino Fund. Any surplus accumulated out of Fund earnings shall accrue to the General Fund of PPSTA.

MECS Sariling Sikap Fund

6. The Minister of the Budget shall release in January 1986 the full amount of P20 million appropriated in the 1986 General Appropriations Act (KBI No. 4.4.3, p. 195) earmarked as investment outlay for Sariling Sikap projects. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports is hereby authorized to deposit the said funds with PPSTA for lending to teachers and education support personnel still in the service, under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the Minister and PPSTA.

The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports is likewise authorized to deposit with the PPSTA, Ministry savings that are now administered by the Philippine National Bank for Sariling Sikap projects, as well as future savings from current operating expenditures, including personnel services, as may be realized. The transfer and use of the said savings for MECS Sariling Sikap projects is hereby authorized, as required by P.D. No. 1177.

The funds referred to above shall be held in trust by PPSTA for an initial period of five years as the “MECS Sariling Sikap Fund.” The arrangement may be renewed year to year thereafter on mutual agreement. The MECS may transfer the funds to the Philippine National Bank or other government financial institution for administration if the arrangement is not renewed.

Special Loan Fund Terms

7. The Casino Fund deposit and the MECS Sariling Sikap Fund shall be administered by PPSTA in accordance with the agreement between MECS and PPSTA, subject to the following guidelines:

a. Priority shall be given to loans for the education of members’ children and loans that will finance livelihood projects of eligible borrowers;

b. Loan terms shall be determined by the PPSTA, but individual loans shall not exceed the equivalent of an eligible borrower’s three months’ basic salary or two thousand five hundred pesos (P2,500) whichever is smaller;

c. Loan maturities shall be set generally to make sure that the entire amount of the deposit can be repaid within a five year period;

d. Interest charged on loans shall not be lower than fifteen (15) percent per annum. This interest shall accrue to the respective Fund and shall be invested in further loans to eligible members under the same terms;

e. Borrowers shall pay interest and principal amortizations out of OBM-MECS-IBM Unit salary deductions;

f. Any surplus income of the Casino Fund deposit (net of the P25 million principal) shall be transferred to the PPSTA General Fund at the end of the fifth year and each year thereafter for as long as the deposit is with PPSTA. The net income of the MECS Sariling Sikap Fund shall be transferred to the PPSTA General Fund at the end of each year, up to end of the trust arrangement or the tenth year, whichever comes ahead. This arrangement shall be undertaken to help PPSTA regain financial strength. As such, amounts transferred to the PPSTA General Fund may be used to assist in covering benefits payments or to augment PPSTA reserves and thus, for regular lending purposes;

g. Title to the Fund at all times remains with MECS or the Casino Fund as the case may be. They shall be separately accounted for and their use shall be subject to inspection and audit; and

h. The fund shall be accounted for separately and financial statements on fund transactions shall be prepared and submitted to the MECS and to the President at the end of each fiscal year.

GSIS Assistance

7. The Government Service Insurance System shall assist PPSTA in the following ways:

a. It shall extend, free of charge, technical expertise in the form of a continuing review and updating of the actuarial viability of PPSTA;

b. It shall restructure loans extended to PPSTA in such a manner as to enable PPSTA to meet interest and principal amortization within its cash flow and shall waive penalties for delayed payment; and

c. Interest on PPSTA borrowings shall not exceed that charged for individual GSIS member salary loans;

COA Assistance

8. The Chairman, Commission on Audit, shall assist PPSTA in improving its system of internal financial management and controls. He shall also audit the financial statements and transactions of the Casino Fund deposit and the MECS Sariling Sikap Fund;

PPSTA Management

9. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports shall exercise close supervision over the affairs of PPSTA and shall institute such measures as may be necessary to prevent the recurrence of past abuses, including modification of its By-Laws, organization, staffing and internal operating procedures. He shall, in addition, adopt the following policies in the operation of PPSTA:

a. Operating costs shall be brought down as quickly as possible to the limits authorized by the Insurance Commission for companies comparable to PPSTA;

b. Temporarily excess funds shall be deposited or invested only in debt instruments of government or of government owned or controlled corporations, which instruments shall be purchased directly from the Central Bank of the Philippines, from the Treasury Department of a government financial institution, or from the issuing corporation itself;

c. Board members, management officers, and PPSTA employees shall not enjoy any special preferences on loan amount ceilings and on loan terms and conditions. Advances to them shall be treated like loans, except reasonable advances made for travel and other operating costs which shall be subject to liquidation;

d. Payments to directors and officers, including allowances, bonuses, travel per diems, as well as scholarships and other benefits and privileges granted to family members, shall be subject to the prior approval of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports who shall act upon recommendation of the PPSTA Board of Directors; and

e. PPSTA shall undertake no new real estate projects, and shall exert all efforts to dispose of its properties in Laoag City and in Quezon City which are not needed for PPSTA operations.

10. LOI No. 860 shall be in effect for as long as Casino Fund and/or MECS Sariling Sikap money is on deposit with the PPSTA. It is understood, however, that the PPSTA may repay these deposits at any time in order to allow the lifting of LOI No. 360.

Done, in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December, nineteen hundred and eighty five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1425 – 1525]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.