MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 147

WHEREAS, the constant fear of investigations based many a time upon false, frivolous and malicious complaints has worked adversely against the speedy and efficient implementation of many of the programs of Government such as the cleanliness and beautification program, the Palayan ng Bayan, the Green Revolution program, and the efforts to relocate squatters ;

WHEREAS, there are strong indications that some partisan sectors of our society are utilizing these investigations to harass local officials;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that we guard against these schemes or strategy of the partisan sectors of our society and to maintain at all times prudence in the conduct of investigations against officials of the Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972 and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order:

1. That no investigation or arrest of any provincial, city, municipal or other local elective officials shall be made without previous clearance and authority from me;

2. That any inquiries affecting these local officials should at all times be conducted, if undertaken by the military, in coordination with the Secretary of the Department of Local Governments and Community Development;

3. That the military should desist from intervening in these investigations if the charges against such local officials are within the jurisdiction of the civil courts;

4. That no investigations or inquiries shall be initiated or conducted against any of these local officials on the basis of charges arising from acts committed before September 21, 1972 without first clearing with me through the Secretary of the Department of Local Governments and Community Development;

5. That in all inquiries or investigations, the complainant should first be required to swear to his complaint, which should be in writing, and reminded of his responsibilities as a consequence thereof, advising him as well that rumor-mongering is punishable under existing laws.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia