TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 442

Pursuant to the Presidential Decree No. 963 transferring the functions of location and design of airport runways and related facilities from the Department of Public Highways to the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, through the Civil Aeronautics Administration, the following instructions are hereby issued for immediate implementation:

1. The planning, location, detailed engineering, and programming of funds for the construction and improvement of airports, including runways and related horizontal facilities, shall be undertaken by the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

2. The construction and improvement of airport runways and related horizontal facilities shall be undertaken by the Department of Public Highways on the basis of plans, detailed designs and programs prepared and approved by the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, thru the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

3. All releases of funds for the construction and improvement of airports, including runways and related facilities, shall be made by the Budget Commission to the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, particularly the Civil Aeronautics Administration, based on the approved infrastructure program, and the amounts necessary for the construction and improvement of runways and related horizontal facilities shall be sub-allotted by said Department to the Department of Public Highways in accordance with programs of work approved by the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications.

4. All appropriate personnel, records, functions, applicable appropriations, properties and facilities relevant to planning, location, detailed engineering, and funds programming of airport runways and related facilities shall be transferred from the Department of Public Highways to the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

All concerned are hereby enjoined to act accordingly.

This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia