MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 526

TO : The Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines The President, Philippine National Bank The General Manager, Government Service Insurance System The Administrator, Social Security System The President, Land Bank of the Philippines The President, Construction & Development Corporation of the Philippines, Project Contractor

Planning for the Financial Center at the Manila-Cavite Coastal Road and Reclamation Project

In order to achieve a rational, integrated, central and total planning for the development of the Financial Center at the Manila-Cavite Coastal Road and Reclamation Project, you are hereby instructed to coordinate among yourselves and with the Construction & Development Corporation of the Philippines regarding your building, construction and development plans, the facilities and services needed therefor and their subsequent maintenance to make the Financial Center a model in ecodevelopment.

Specifically, you are hereby instructed to:

1. Form an association consisting of the Development Bank of the Philippines, Philippine National Bank, Government Service Insurance System, Social Security System, Land Bank of the Philippines and the Construction and Development Corporation of the Philippines. This Association shall be referred to by this Letter of Instructions as the Association; Chairman Placido Mapa is hereby designated as Chairman of the Association;

2. Meet regularly to discuss the needs and requirements related to the total development of the Financial Center and in relation to the building and construction plans of each member of the Association;

3. Adhere to the Financial Center Performance standards;

4. Obtain approval of detailed designs and plans from the Association before undergoing construction;

5. Subsequently, provide maintenance services in the Financial Center at acceptable standards through the Association;

6. Comply and implement the national policy of conservation by:

6.1 Adoption of the concept of central and total planning so that development will be in harmony and integrated;

6.2 Planning for the sharing of common facilities, amenities and services such as: district cooling; solid waste collection and disposal; building maintenance and security; water treatment and supply, power, telecommunications, and other facilities; spaces including garden malls, corridors, parking spaces, etc.; and other general and common services;

6.3 Planning for the location and distribution of amenities and facilities that will enable man to walk to work, to shop and to play;

6.4 Planning for the programming of office hours and breaktime to control population movement. Designing an internal transport systems towards the conservation of energy and other resources;

6.5 Planning for activity centers that will make the city alive in the day and in the night;

6.6 Establish a commonality of interests and avoid unnecessary duplicity of facilities and amenities.

7. In general, to coordinate among yourselves and with the Construction and Development Corporation of the Philippines all matters that have not been mentioned or enumerated above but need interpacing and/or lead to conservation and the creation of a healthy environment and an integrated development of the Financial Center at the MCCRRP.

The Chairman of the Association is hereby instructed and authorized to implement this Letter of Instructions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia