MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 830

TO : The Executive Director, Presidential Management Staff The Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority Heads, Ministries and Other Government Agencies Heads, Government Corporations

WHEREAS, it is necessary to ensure the efficient and effective utilization of government funds and property in accordance with the government’s development plans and budgetary appropriations;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to ensure that the implementation of such utilization of government funds and property require the continuous monitoring, auditing of the implementation and utilization of project funds and property and on-the-spot examination of government activities; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to ensure that the review of such government activities should hasten rather than delay government operations.

NOW, THEREFORE, in view of the foregoing considerations, you are hereby directed to implement the following instructions in connection with the above-mentioned functions:

1. The Project Monitoring Staff, National Economic Development Authority, shall undertake the continuous monitoring of the implementation of all government projects in accordance with the government’s development plans;

2. The Presidential Management Staff shall oversee the performance of all government subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, through the conduct of periodic review of their work or on-the-spot assessment of the implementation of projects to determine bottlenecks or problem areas, specially infrastructure and similar projects. For this purpose, it shall submit to the Office of the President all reports on such activities, including recommendations for the improvement of efficiency and effectiveness;

3. In order to help the Presidential Management Staff (PMS) in its work, the Minister of the Budget shall furnish the PMS regularly copies of the cash disbursement ceilings released to government agencies.

4. All Ministries, Government Agencies, and Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations shall direct their offices such that:

a) The Project Monitoring Staff, NEDA, shall be furnished regularly reports required by it to carry out its functions herein prescribed.

b) The Presidential Management Staff shall have easy access to the financial records, project plans and the sites of projects being implemented.

5. The Project Monitoring Staff, NEDA, and the Presidential Management Staff, shall adopt immediately procedures that will enable them to achieve the objectives of this Letter of Instructions.

6. All Executive Orders, Letter of Instructions, rules and regulations or part thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of these Instructions are hereby superseded and/or modified accordingly.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia