Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1513

WHEREAS, the Constitution provides that the State shall undertake urban land reform and social housing programs to provide deserving landless, homeless and inadequately sheltered lot-income resident citizen reasonable opportunity to acquire land and decent housing;

WHEREAS, in accordance with Letters of Instructions No. 555, 556 and 557 as amended by Letter of Instructions No. 686, the national government is implementing through the National Housing Authority, the Zonal Improvement Program (ZIP) in Metro Manila and the Slum Improvement and Resettlement Program (SIR) in other regional cities in order to respond to the housing and related needs of the urban poor;

WHEREAS, a number of identified Areas for Priority Development (APDs) and projects for development under the Zonal Improvement Program (ZIP) in Metro Manila and regional cities are non-operational railroad tracks and right-of-way owned by the Philippine National Railways and which have been occupied by squatter families for many years;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to resolve the land tenure problem and upgrade the quality of life of the urban poor residing in the said non-operational railroad tracks and right-of-way of the Philippine National Railways in accordance with the program of re-development of slums and blighted communities of the government being undertaken by the National Housing Authority;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct as follows:

1. Railroad tracks and right-of-way owned by the Philippine National Railways in Metro Manila as listed in Annex “A” of the Letter of Instructions and, the DAU-PNR site in Mabalacat, Pampanga, which are non-operational or otherwise not being used for their intended purposes and which are occupied by marginal and low income families who have resided on the said land for many years, are hereby transferred and conveyed to the National Housing Authority, for re-development and disposition as Projects under the Zonal Improvement Program (ZIP) and the Slum Improvement and Resettlement Program in accordance with Letters of Instructions Nos. 555, 556 and 557 as amended by Letter of Instructions No. 686.

2. The National Housing Authority and the Philippine National Railways shall jointly plan and implement the redevelopment of the communities in the aforementioned non-operational railroad tracks and right-of-way as a joint venture with the land as the resource participation of the latter and the funds for the re-development of such areas as the contribution of the former in the venture.

3. For the above purpose, the price of the aforementioned land shall be determined in accordance with Presidential Decree No. 1533 taking into consideration the level of affordability of beneficiary families. The agreed price of the land shall become part of the total project cost. The National Housing Authority shall remit to the Philippine National Railways the amount corresponding to the agreed price of the aforementioned land as amortized by the beneficiary families over the prescribed repayment period.

For immediate implementation and compliance.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of January, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Reference: Annex “A”

Source : CDAsia