MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1262

SUBJECT: SUB-CLASSIFICATION OF FOREST LANDS

It is hereby directed that the Ministry of Natural Resources, as the lead agency with its various bureaus concerned, in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Agrarian Reform, the Ministry of Human Settlements, through their respective bureaus concerned, and with the National Economic and Development Authority, undertake the implementation of the subclassification of forest and other public lands into their respective proposed land uses such as: agro-forestry zones, productive and protection forests, settlement areas and other land uses in accordance with the provisions of Section 10, Article XIV, of the New Constitution and other applicable laws.

In order to implement the abovementioned, the Minister of Natural Resources is hereby instructed to create a Sub-Classification Committee, composed of the various bureaus of the Ministries concerned. The Committee shall be charged with the following responsibilities, among others:

1. Formulate and implement appropriate sub-classification schemes for forest and other public lands;

2. Establish a set of criteria for the selection and definition of specific classification schemes;

3. Review and recommend policies and strategies to be followed as well as objectives to be attained in the sub-classification of forest lands, including, where appropriate, proposed amendments to existing or obsolete proclamations, orders, instructions, rules and regulations and other laws;

4. Determine the boundaries and area of each proposed sub-classification scheme; and

5. Disseminate information on the tasks and results of the sub-classification scheme and, where appropriate, encourage public and private participation and/or consultation in the exercise of its duties.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any Ministry, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need.

The Committee is further empowered to create sub-committees as it may deem necessary to carry out its duties and shall report periodically to the Minister of Natural Resources, its activities and accomplishments.

The funds allocated for prior purposes of land classification programs shall be made available for sub-classification of forest and other public lands.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia