MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 328

To: The Executive Secretary The Secretary of National Defense The Secretary of Industry The Secretary of Finance The Secretary of Trade The Chairman, Philippine National Oil Company The Chairman, National Power Commission The Administrator, National Electrification Administration The Chairman, Land Transportation Commission

The costs of importation of crude and other fuel for our energy and power requirements are a big and substantial drain on our resources. These costs have recently increased substantially with the 10% crude price increase implemented on October 1, 1975 by the Organization of Petroleum Producing Countries. Based on current demand this 10% price hike would translate into an expected increase in the country’s annual crude payments by about US$70 Million bringing our total crude importation costs of almost US$800 Million per year. The need, therefore, for conservation and the promotion of efficient utilization of fuels and electricity in all sectors of the economy cannot be over-emphasized. Accordingly, you are hereby directed as follows:

1. I hereby immediately require all departments, bureaus and agencies of the government, including all government-owned and controlled corporations:

a. to reduce their oil, electricity and power consumption by at least 5%, except only in those cases where such a reduction would prejudice the national interest;

b. to desist from putting up power or electricity-based Christmas displays and lights;

c. to avoid the purchase and use of big cars which are heavy users of gas and oil;

d. to shut off all neon, advertising, and building lights not later than midnight everyday except only such lights as are necessary for the protection and security of their premises;

e. to institute fuel, oil and power conservation measures in their respective offices and operations, and to advise the Executive Secretary of the measures so instituted.

2. The Department of Industry shall:

a. immediately require and direct that all industrial plants, factories, commercial establishments and other persons consuming at least ₱3 Million worth of fuel, oil and power per annum, to formulate and submit to the Department of Industry comprehensive programs of power and energy conservation and the Department shall monitor the administration and implementation of such programs.

b. study, formulate and recommend to the President industrial standards for energy utilization to govern industrial plants and factories.

c. in collaboration with the National Economic Development Authority and the Board of Investments, to review the country’s national development plans to attune them to the extent feasible to our available energy resources.

3. The Philippine National Oil Company, the National Power Corporation and the National Electrification Administration shall organize a joint pool of engineers and combustion efficiency experts and make available the services of such experts and technical men to industrial concerns and factories to assist them in developing their conservation programs and improving their energy utilization. Engineers and experts from the private sector like the oil and power industries may be requested to assist, join and participate in the pool.

4. The Department of Finance shall immediately review and study the taxes applicable to big automobiles, sports cars, gasoline powered trucks and luxury appliances requiring significant power usage and recommend to the President the imposition of such taxes and policies as shall be necessary to discourage the use of such uneconomic machines. The Land Transportation Commission shall likewise review the registration fees and requirements for such cars and trucks and make the necessary recommendations to the President.

5. The Department of Trade shall study and promulgate the necessary regulations governing the use of all types of lighted advertising particularly Neon lights. As an initial step, the Secretary of Trade is hereby directed to prohibit the lighting beyond 12:00 midnight of all types of advertising.

6. The Land Transportation Commission, the Philippine Constabulary and all police agencies are hereby enjoined to strictly enforce all laws, rules and regulations prohibiting the operation and use of dilapidated, unroadworthy and inefficient motor vehicles. They are also enjoined to intensify traffic flow improvement campaigns.

7. The Secretary of National Defense shall make available the authority and resources of his office to the other agencies of the government to assure that power conservation and efficient fuel and energy utilization programs, regulations and directives are followed and enforced.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October in the year or our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Source: CDAsia