MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 689

DIRECTING THE REGIONALIZATION OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY AND THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 742, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 824, prescribes the regional groupings into which the various provinces of the country are to be organized in relation to Presidential Decree No. 1 which was promulgated to effect administrative reforms in the government machinery;

WHEREAS, the accelerated development of the countryside continues to be the primary program of the government to provide a better quality of life for our people;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that more effective and more responsive public safety services be extended to our people under such regional groupings by the Philippine Constabulary which is a Major Service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and is also the nucleus of the Integrated National Police pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 765;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, in the interest of improved law enforcement and public safety services, do hereby direct:

1. The activation of thirteen (13) Philippine Constabulary Regional Commands the territorial boundaries of which shall conform with the regional organization prescribed under Presidential Decree 742, provided that the sub-province of Aurora shall be included in Region 2.

2. The phasing out of the four (4) Philippine Constabulary Zones not later than August 8, 1978.

3. The activation, simultaneously, of thirteen (13) Integrated National Police Regional Commands which shall be co-extensive with the above-mentioned Philippine Constabulary Regional Commands.

4. That no additional funds be released by the National Government to support this activity except those provided for in Presidential Decree No. 1250, otherwise known as the Appropriations Act of 1978 and that no increase in personnel be involved.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia