MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 560

TO : All Heads of Departments and Agencies

WHEREAS, graduates of the Junior Executive Training (JET) program have expressed the desire to share the knowledges and skills they have acquired through training, particularly that concerned with the program thrusts of the New Society, with their respective personnel;

WHEREAS, the experience in the JET program indicates that knowledge of these programs leads to better appreciation and, hopefully, commitment towards their successful implementation;

WHEREAS, if all personnel of the government, through such multiplier approach, could be exposed to these learning experiences, there is a higher probability that those in the government would be pooling their efforts voluntarily to achieve our national goals;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, and in recognition of the expressed desire of the graduates of the Junior Executive Training program, do hereby order the following:

1. All heads of departments and agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations and local governments where there are JET graduates, shall see to it that these graduates hold weekly one-hour discussion sessions with their respective personnel on the various programs thrusts of the New Society.

2. These sessions shall be held during the regular office hours but should be so scheduled that they do not disrupt or paralyze the service.

3. The JET graduates shall themselves conduct the sessions and lead in the discussions although they may, from time to time and as necessary, avail themselves of the services of other JET graduates from other departments and agencies, but they may periodically invite resource persons from the agencies concerned with the development programs being discussed to answer questions posed by the participating personnel.

4. The Civil Service Commission may conduct refresher courses on these program thrusts prior to the commencement of these discussion sessions in the various agencies, whenever deemed necessary.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of June in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia