MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 538-A

TO: The Administrator National Grains Authority

The Chancellor University of the Philippines, Los Baños

The Chairman National Science Development Board

The Director-General Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research

The Executive Director Technical Board on Agricultural Credit

The Director Bureau of Cooperatives, DLGCD

The Administrator Farm Systems Development Corporation

WHEREAS, a breakthrough has been attained in the government grains self-sufficiency program with combined use of technology development and extension, infrastructure support, supervised credit and agrarian reform;

WHEREAS, the socio-economic benefits of increased production should be complemented by improved post-harvest system which encompasses all phases from harvesting, threshing, drying, storage, milling, transportation and other related activities;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to combine and integrate government efforts in providing post-harvest research and extension, credit assistance, manpower development and other strategies necessary to effectively minimize post-harvest grains losses and thereby bring about increased domestic grains supply for our growing populace;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby issue the following instructions:

1. That an interagency committee to be known as “Post-Harvest Coordinating Committee” is hereby created to be composed of the following officials:

The Administrator, National Grains Authority The Chancellor, University of the Philippines, Los Baños The Chairman, National Science Development Board The Director-General, Philippine Council on Agriculture and Resources Research The Executive Director, Technical Board on Agricultural Credit The Director, Bureau of Cooperatives, DLGCD The Administrator, Farm Systems Development Corporation

2. The Committee shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate, evaluate programs and insure coordination in the implementation of all research and extension programs on grains post-harvest technology being undertaken by any and all government agencies and instrumentalities;

b. Design a manpower development program for post-harvest technology;

c. Review and rationalize all existing credit programs on post-harvest technology to hasten the adoption and utilization of modern processing and handling facilities for grains;

d. Determine the funding requirements of all such programs on post-harvest technology.

3. The committee shall formulate the rules and regulations to implement this LOI.

4. The committee, through the chairman, shall have the power and authority to call on all government agencies and instrumentalities for assistance in the form of personnel, facilities and other resources as well as to form and create sub-committee as may be required.

Done in the City of Manila this 12th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia