Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 452

TO: 1. The General Manager National Housing Authority

2. The Commissioner Budget Commission

3. The Director Bureau of Lands

4. The General Manager Government Service Insurance System

5. The Administrator Social Security System

6. All Other Entities Concerned

Further to the proclamation of the areas stricken by earthquakes and tsunamic occurrences in Southwestern Mindanao as disaster area, and in order to facilitate relief, rehabilitation and resettlement activities to meet the need for shelter of homeless families in the area, it is hereby directed that:

– The National Housing Authority plan and implement an Emergency Housing Assistance Program which shall provide direct assistance to the homeless in the disaster area, and a Housing Development Program to provide permanent settlements in urban centers of the region;

– The Budget Commission release to the National Housing Authority P6.0 Million for direct housing assistance to homeless families in the disaster area and the P40 Million representing the unreleased balance of the capitalization due the National Housing Authority for 1976, from which amount shall be taken funds needed to develop sites and services projects for homeless low-income families in the cities of Pagadian, Cotabato and Zamboanga;

– The Bureau of Lands identify and survey government and private lands available and suitable for housing in Cotabato City, Pagadian City, Zamboanga City and other urban centers of the disaster area for development into housing projects by the National Housing Authority;

– The GSIS and SSS make available immediately the proceeds of their purchase of the P170 million bond floatation authorized by the President for the National Housing Authority from which amount the Authority shall allocate funds for the development of housing projects as new settlements within urban centers in the disaster area;

– The National Housing Authority coordinate with military units, local governments and other government agencies the implementation of its Emergency Housing Assistance Program and its subsequent Housing Development Program. In this regard, government agencies in the disaster areas are to provide administrative and operational assistance to the Authority.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia