Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 511

TO: The Director General National Economic and Development Authority

The Secretary The Department of Local Government and Community Development

The Secretary Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications

The Secretary Department of Natural Resources

The Secretary Department of National Defense

The Chairman Human Settlements Commission

The General Manager National Housing Authority

The Governor Metropolitan Manila Commission

FROM: The President Republic of the Philippines

WHEREAS, coordination of efforts on the national and regional levels is necessary to ensure ecological and environmental enhancement, and to expedite the preparation of local housing and town plans, and thereby prevent further deterioration of the quality of life in towns and urbanizing centers which grow without the benefit of adequate and rational allocation of land uses;

WHEREAS, there is need to assist towns and urbanizing centers to effect the necessary interim development controls, even as town plans are in preparation, to assure balanced growth outside the Metropolitan Manila Area where a comprehensive development plan is now in effect;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, hereby instruct you:

1. to constitute an ad hoc National Coordinating Council, with the Governor of Metropolitan Manila Commission as Chairperson, which will oversee and assure the preparation and development of town plans, housing and zoning measures, and to this end, to mobilize public and private professionals and to provide techno-aides to local governments and communities requiring technical assistance; within a reasonable period following upon the National Conference on Town Planning, Housing and Zoning, held at the Philippine International Convention Center on 14–16 February 1977;

2. and consequently to design and effect regional mechanisms which will expedite and coordinate the preparation of local housing and town plans, and zoning ordinances, and the formulation of interim development controls and measures so that desirable patterns of housing, land use and zoning can be effected;

3. in carrying out these directives and incumbent programs, the Human Settlements Commission shall serve as Secretariat, with the HSC Executive Director as Secretary General, and may call upon the respective staff of the member and other agencies for assistance, including the Department of National Defense;

4. for this purpose, the Budget Commission and the National Economic and Development Authority are directed to allocate P20M to the ad hoc National Coordinating Committee in support of the technical planning assistance through techno-aides and other supportive networks;

4. and finally, to submit regular reports to the President on the progress of programs, projects and activities pursued by the ad hoc National Coordinating Council.

Done in Metro Manila, this 18th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia