MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 13-A

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines and in order to effect optimum and orderly utilization of the radio frequency spectrum, safeguard national security by preventing by those who are actively engaged in a criminal conspiracy to seize political and state power in the Philippines and to take over the Government by force and violence the extent of which has now assumed the proportion of an actual war against our people and their legitimate Government, and promote a healthy business atmosphere, you are hereby ordered to:

1. Close all radio stations whose operation may endanger national security in direct coordination with the military authorities; confiscate all radio transmitters or transceivers not duly registered with your office; close all stations operating in violation of the provisions of Act 3846 as amended and Act 3396 as amended, and in violation of the terms and conditions of their station licenses.

2. Require all Radio Dealers/Manufacturers to submit monthly reports of stocks and sales of stocks including names of persons, companies or entities who purchased such equipment and to hold liable these dealers and manufacturers for selling or supplying communication equipment or radio frequency crystals to persons, companies or entities not duly authorized by your office.

3. Require all franchise grantees to submit updated reports on all existing stations licensed under their respective franchises and such grantees shall be held liable for the actuations of operators of end-users utilizing such franchises.

For the effective implementation of the aforementioned order, the Radio Control Office is hereby vested with visitorial and investigative authority, dispose of confiscated equipment and to impose fines and surcharges consistent with the pertinent penal provisions of Act 3846 as amended. As the need arises and in areas where, due to personnel limitations, such visitorial and investigative authority may not be effectively prosecuted and/or exercised the assistance of the military authorities may be sought.

This order shall remain effective for the duration of the present national emergency or until otherwise ordered by me or by my duly designated representative.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1972). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1 – 237A]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.