MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 220

In view of the necessity of tapping Philippine indigenous resources, such as hydro and geothermal resources, for power development, and to enable the National Power Corporation (NPC) to effectively prosecute its accelerated power development program, particularly preliminary feasibility studies of potential power resources, without obstruction, interference and hindrance from local inhabitants of the provinces and localities where such works are being undertaken, you are hereby ordered to take the following actions:

1. The Provincial Commanders of the Philippine Constabulary are directed to provide adequate security support in the projects sites/areas of NPC to safeguard and protect its personnel and equipment from harm, theft and destruction and to effect the arrests of person or persons who shall interfere, prevent, obstruct or hinder said personnel in the performance of their duties or projects.

2. The Provincial Governors, City and Municipal Mayors, members of all police agencies, barangay and barrio officials of the provinces or localities where NPC projects are being undertaken are hereby enjoined to cooperate and extend assistance to NPC personnel in the performance of their duties and in the prosecution of their work; and, to this effect, you are directed to inform and exhort your respective constituents to assist and cooperate with the NPC and its personnel and to discourage and restrain them from committing any act of obstruction, interference or hindrance prejudicial to the prosecution and early completion of NPC projects.

3. Should the preliminary studies, investigation and survey being conducted in the Chico River Area positively indicate that construction of the project thereat is justified and has to be undertaken, then the necessary and requisite steps should be taken to effect the proper relocation of the inhabitants to a suitable place.

For immediate compliance.

Done in the City of Manila this 15th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia