MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1245

WHEREAS, the Manila International Airport (MIA) is the international community’s first contact with the Philippines and as such could immensely contribute towards enhancing the country’s image abroad in line with the government’s priority program on tourism promotion and development;

WHEREAS, the government in recognition of the MIA’s significance in the country’s development, has undertaken a massive modernization program requiring several hundred million-peso investment for upgrading the airport’s physical plant, facilities and equipment to meet the highly competitive and exacting standards of modern-day international air travel;

WHEREAS, the development or modernization program for the MIA requires corresponding changes in its administrative or institutional framework to ensure responsiveness with the development requirements of managing an international airport efficiently, effectively and economically;

WHEREAS, the MIA Management in line with its main responsibility for maximizing the MIA’s contribution to the country’s tourism and development program; protecting and enhancing the socioeconomic benefits of the government’s capital investments in airport facilities; and promoting aircraft and passenger movement safely and expeditiously; requires correspondingly that it be vested with adequate legal and operational authority in meeting its objectives; and

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing circumstances and new developments.

NOW THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the authority vested in me by Presidential Decree No. 1416 as amended, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Organizational Relationships . – The Manila International Airport (MIA) Management, headed by the MIA General Manager, shall be under the general supervision but not control of the Ministry of Transportation and Communications for purposes of policy integration and program coordination. The Bureau of Air Transportation shall provide the MIA Management with plans, programs and standards or such technical assistance as may be necessary in the repair and maintenance of airports and their facilities/equipment including buildings and runways.

SEC. 2. Powers and Functions of the MIA General Manager . – The MIA General Manager shall be delegated with substantive executive authority within the overall framework of public accountability to ensure the management of the MIA efficiently, effectively and economically; and its responsiveness to the highly complex, competitive, and ever-changing requirements of modern-day international air travel. In line with this, the MIA General Manager shall perform the following functions:

a. Serve as the Chief Executive Officer of the MIA in the management of its day-to-day operations.

b. Exercise supervision and control over the MIA and its integral units including its buildings, runways, facilities and equipment.

c. Provide general supervision and overall coordination of all government agencies operating in the MIA with respect to the allocation and use of building space and airport premises.

d. Enter into a memorandum of agreement/understanding, contracts or such other arrangements as may be feasible with such government agencies or private entities operating or providing service in the MIA to ensure proper coordination and integration of all activities in the MIA subject to such laws, decrees, rules and regulations as are applicable to a head of an agency in the exercise of such authority.

e. Exercise the usual powers, functions and responsibilities of the head of an agency including matters concerning policy studies and reorganization for consideration by higher authorities, building or area allocation and use, concessions or services for the safety and convenience of the general public, budgetary and financial requirements, requisitions, repair and maintenance of buildings and facilities, movement of persons/vehicles, and regular airport security and such other functions as may be provided by law or directed by the President.

SEC. 3. Airport Security on Anti-Hijacking . – The Ministry of National Defense through the AVSECOM or any of the Ministry’s duly designated agency shall continue to implement the intent and provisions of LOI 961 for the protection of the airline industry.

SEC. 4. All laws, decrees, orders, proclamations, rules, regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Letter of Instructions are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia