Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1363

To further encourage and stimulate the development of the mining industry through the introduction of innovative concepts or adoption of measures designed to accelerate production and bolster the national economy, which can only be achieved through the joint and concerted efforts of the Government and the private mining sector, you are hereby directed:

1. To draw up well-planned, long-term programs and financial aid schemes aimed at stabilizing the position of the mining industry as a premier dollar-earner, which are automatically implementable when the need therefor arises;

2. To review the grant of assistance to the mining industry particularly in the exploration, development/exploitation of marginal ore reserves;

3. To simplify government requirements in the processing of applications by the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences incident to the grant of mining rights therefor;

4. To hold and maintain open discussion and dialogues with the Chamber of Mines or representatives of the private mining sector on matters relative to the above, and in the amendment of any law, decree, or the rules and regulations affecting the mining industry; and

5. To formulate a long-range plan for the mining industry consistent with national development goals and programs.

The Minister of Natural Resources, upon the recommendation of the Director of Mines and Geo-Sciences, shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Letter of Instructions.

All heads of government agencies, offices whose functions are affected by this Letter of Instructions are hereby directed to coordinate and cooperate with the Minister of Natural Resources and/or the Director of Mines and Geo-Sciences in the implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia