MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1380

REVISING THE PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES FOR THE ACQUISITION OF COMPUTER EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES

WHEREAS, the encouragement of computer literacy and familiarity with as well as the utilization of computer in government, education, industry, and commerce is considered a desirable priority policy for development;

WHEREAS, the potential of and demand for the local utilization of microcomputers and minicomputers have increased rapidly with the improvements in technology and as these have become more affordable;

WHEREAS, it is now desirable to improve upon and liberalize the existing procedural guidelines for the importation and acquisition of electronic data processing equipment as stipulated in the issuances of various government agencies and other entities, in the light of rapid developments in computer technology, particularly in the field of microcomputers; and

WHEREAS, the National Computer Center has recommended that its prior participation and evaluation may no longer be necessary in the matter of importation by the private sector of computer hardware and software, including associated peripherals;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

1. The individual importation of computer hardware and software, including components and supplies, by and for the use of the private sector shall no longer require the prior technical evaluation and clearance of the National Computer Center;

2. The acquisition of microcomputers, and associated peripherals and software, which equipment is hereby classified as ordinary office equipment similar to typewriters and calculators, by government agencies and other entities, including government-owned and controlled corporations, shall no longer require prior individual clearance from the National Computer Center, provided that the value of the computer equipment to be acquired by the entity within the fiscal year does not exceed two million pesos (P2.0 Million).

3. Government agencies and other entities are hereby authorized to use any savings for any fiscal year out of their budgetary appropriations for current operating expenditures, other than those for salaries and wages, for the purpose of acquiring computer equipment, including peripherals, during the fiscal year in which the savings are realized, provided the value of the computer equipment to be obtained out of savings for each fiscal year by the entity shall not exceed two million pesos (P2.0 Million).

4. The National Computer Center shall, within 30 days of the signing of this LOI, establish the appropriate guidelines for the acquisition of computer equipment, including associated peripherals, the value of  which may exceed two million pesos (P2.0 million ) made by the government agencies and other entities, including government-owned and controlled corporations, particularly with respect to the larger minicomputers and mainframes, so as to minimize, if not do way with, the need for individual evaluation of computer acquisition proposal of government entities.

5. Those regulations and other issuance of government agencies and entities which may be at variance with the provisions of this directive, including Letter of Instruction No. 750 issued on October 16, 1978, are hereby amended accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty -four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia