MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 229

WHEREAS, statistics show that one of the major causes of fatal or serious accidents in land transportation is the presence of disabled, stalled, or parked motor vehicles along streets or highways without any appropriate early warning device to signal approaching motorists of their presence;

WHEREAS, the hazards posed by such obstructions to traffic have been recognized by international bodies concerned with traffic safety, the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signal and the United Nations Organization (U.N.);

WHEREAS, the said Vienna Convention, which was ratified by the Philippine Government under P.D. No. 207, recommended the enactment of local legislation for the installation of road safety signs and devices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, in the interest of safety on all streets and highways, including expressways or limited access roads, do hereby direct;

1. That all owners, users or drivers of motor vehicles shall have at all times in their motor vehicles at least one (1) pair of early warning device consisting of a triangular, collapsible reflectorized plates in red and yellow colors at least 5 cms. at the base and 40 cms. at the sides.

2. Whenever any motor vehicle is stalled or disabled or is parked for thirty (30) minutes or more on any street or highways, including expressways or limited access roads, the owner, user or driver thereof shall cause the warning device mentioned herein to be installed at least four meters away to the front and rear of the motor vehicle stalled, disabled or parked.

3. The Land Transportation Commissioner shall cause Reflectorized Triangular Early Warning Devices, as herein described, to be prepared and issued to registered owners of motor vehicles, except motorcycles and trailers, charging for each piece not more than 15% of the acquisition cost. He shall also promulgate such rules and regulations as are appropriate to effectively implement this order.

4. All hereby concerned shall closely coordinate and take such measures as are necessary or appropriate to carry into effect these instructions.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia