MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1375

You are hereby directed to implement the KKK Food Stamp System with the KKK-PCA as lead implementing agency in joint cooperation with Food Terminal, Inc./KADIWA and the KKK-accredited private commercial outlets namely: Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Chamber of Filipino Retailers, Inc., and the Philippine Association of Supermarket, Inc. and others.

The KKK Food Stamp System shall include the issuance and conversion of food stamps to food coupons for purchase of more goods or lottery tickets which will give the holder a chance to win periodic prizes of food items and/or livelihood packages. For this purpose, the KKK-PCA is hereby authorized to conduct lottery schemes for the next twelve (12) months in relation to food production and distribution campaign covering the period January 1984 to December 1984.

The system shall cover essential food items and may include critical non-food items that may be determined by the KKK-PCA in coordination with FTI/KADIWA and KKK-accredited commercial outlets. For this purpose, the KKK-PCA shall have a maximum allocation of thirty (30%) percent from the goods and other food items seized by the Ministry of Trade and Industry Anti-Profiteering Task Force to support the Food Stamp System.

The system shall include the appropriate support physical and financial facilities and procedures necessary for efficient implementation, including the required assistance to producers of essential food items to acquire imported or domestic critical raw materials. This assistance may take the form of bulk importation of raw materials by the KKK-PCA using non-traditional methods of importation such as Countertrade.

The KKK-PCA, pursuant to its powers given under Executive Order 866, is hereby directed to promulgate the policies and systems to effect Countertrade transactions and shall coordinate with the Central Bank on the implementation of such systems.

For this purpose, the Office of the Budget and Management is hereby directed to release immediately to the KKK-PCA the amount of P300 million chargeable against the KKK-PCA equity authorized under Executive Order No. 866; provided that the initial amount of P100 million shall be released before the 31st of December, 1983 to immediately commence the Food Stamp System herein authorized.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA, this 30th day of January, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia