MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 897

WHEREAS, the legislative and executive machinery for the Autonomous Regions is now established and in operation;

WHEREAS, it is incumbent upon the national government agencies in Regions IX and XII to provide the Autonomous Regions all the support they need in the implementation of projects for the accelerated development of the two regions;

WHEREAS, at present some of the Regional Directors in Regions IX and XII are not provided with enough authority to completely act on substantive matters pertaining to their respective operations; and

WHEREAS, there is need to further delegate authority on substantive matters to these Regional Directors to enable them to respond more quickly and effectively to the requirements of the two regions.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

1. In addition to the authority presently exercised by the Regional Directors in Regions IX and XII, authority is hereby further delegated to them on the following substantive matters, subject to such national policies, standards and guidelines as may be established by the Ministry concerned:

a. Ministry of Agriculture

(1) Bureau of Animal Industry

(a) Register and license all business engaged in the sale and distribution of animal feeds and feedstuffs .

(b) Issue license to feeds and feedstuffs manufacturers, importers and exporters.

(c) Impose a ban on the movement of livestock within the region as a means of preventing the outbreak or spread of animal diseases.

(d) Enter into memoranda of agreement with other government and/or private institutions in the implementation of joint projects.

(2) Bureau of Soils

(a) Supervise, regulate and control, including the issuance of permits/licenses for, the establishment and operation of all soil laboratories in the region.

(b) Conduct soil survey and classification, and soil characterization through physical analysis.

(c) Enter into memorandum of agreement with other government and/or private institutions in the implementation of joint projects.

b. Ministry of Education and Culture

(1) Modify school curricula and adopt innovative practices reflective of the culture and traditions of the people in the region.

(2) Grant/withdraw permit to private schools for the operation of third level of instruction for nonboard courses.

(3) Grant/withdraw or cancel government recognition for private school courses at the first and second levels of instruction, including short-term vocational/technical courses, and at the third level for non-board courses, including foreign schools.

(4) Restore cancelled or revoked government recognition of private school courses, except board courses, including retention of the same in cases of non-operation, transfer to another site, or change in ownership of the private school.

(5) Approve proposed imposition of expulsion penalty to students.

(6) Conduct examinations, screen, and interview applicants for scholarships and the study-now-pay-later plan including selection of the same.

(7) Approve requests for correction or change of names of private schools.

c. Ministry of Health

(1) Issue and renew license for masseurs. (2) Renew license for embalmers. (3) Approve request for increase of bed capacity of private hospitals.

d. Ministry of Public Highways

(1) Conduct traffic studies and other researches geared at improving highway facilities, traffic flow with control and highway safety.

(2) Prepare and conduct economic and technical feasibility studies of road projects except those proposed to be funded out of the proceeds of loans.

(3) Conduct preliminary engineering and identity alternative alignment of road projects except those proposed to be funded out of the proceeds of loans.

(4) Approve right-of-way agreements (Deeds of Absolute Sale for lots needed for right-of-way involving acquisition of lots with an estimated cost not exceeding P100 , 000.00).

(5) Conduct bidding and approve contracts of projects costing up to P500 , 000.00.

(6) Enter into and approve negotiated contact regardless of project category provided the cost is less than P300 , 000.00.

e. Ministry of Public Works

(1) Conduct comprehensive geological investigation and researches on potential waterworks resources.

(2) Prepare plans, designs, specifications and cost estimates on projects pertaining to buildings and artesian wells.

(3) Plan and program wells proposed for drilling.

(4) Conduct bidding and approve contracts for projects costing up to P500 , 000.00.

(5) Enter into and approve negotiated contracts regardless of project category provided the cost is less than P300 , 000.00.

f. Ministry of Social Services and Development

(1) Implement demonstration and/or pilot testing projects.

(2) Develop programs, projects, and conduct seminars on family planning, civic responsibility, nutrition and child care.

2. The ministry or agency head concerned shall not be precluded from delegating more powers to these regional offices than what is herein provided.

3. The ministry or agency head concerned shall see to it that the necessary resources and facilities shall be provided these regional offices to enable them to effectively exercise the authority herein delegated.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia