MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 751

RELATIVE TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE MASTER PLAN FOR EDP IN THE GOVERNMENT PURSUANT TO P.D. NO. 1480

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Government to create the appropriate environment for the rational use and application of computer technology to further national development;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to safeguard public interest in the procurement of electronic data processing (EDP) equipment and services; provide for the effective evaluation of EDP and related programs for the economical and efficient realization of program objectives; encourage the development of government-wide information systems needed for planning and decision- making; rationalize the development and maintenance of EDP projects and data bases, and promote the development, retention and optimum utilization of qualified technical and managerial EDP personnel;

WHEREAS, in recognition of said need, the National Computer Center has been restructured, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1480, in order that it may effectively formulate policies and standards and coordinate all activities related to computerization in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct:

1. The National Computer Center (NCC), in furtherance of its role as the policy body of the Government on computerization, shall formulate and adopt a long-range strategy to organize all government EDP services within the computer-sharing framework which would optimize existing Special Service Centers, Functional Centers, Regional Computer Centers, and an Interlinking Computer Center.

2. The NCC shall proceed with the development of the Master Plan of EDP in the government pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1480 in close consultation and coordination with the different ministries and agencies. Said Plan shall include a national program for computer education and training, for information processing and national information systems development.

3. The ministries and agencies shall prepare EDP plans containing information on their projects, equipment and personnel, which plans shall be the basis for the development and updating of the EDP Master Plan. The contents, format and timing of these plans shall be established along the guidelines set by the National Computer Center in coordination with the Ministry of the Budget.

4. The principle of full visibility of the costs of developing and operating EDP projects shall be adopted. Full costing systems shall be introduced for all ministries and other EDP centers in accordance with the guidelines developed by NCC and the Ministry of the Budget.

5. The NCC shall establish within its structure a Policy, Planning and Standards Office to develop, disseminate and interpret policies and guidelines for EDP applications, procurement and operations; to monitor the progress of government EDP; and to ensure that EDP experiences are shared with and among all ministries and agencies.

The NCC may call upon the heads of all ministries, bureaus, agencies, and all government offices and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, to provide necessary information and assistance to carry out the provisions of these Instructions.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia