MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1014

WHEREAS, I have directed the Ministry of Natural Resources in my speech before the Philippine Federation of Fishfarm Producers, Inc. in its 1979 PFFP Annual Convention at the Manila Peninsula Hotel, Makati, Metro Manila, on May 24-25, 1979 to allocate funds for fishery scholarship purposes out of its current appropriations; and

WHEREAS, as a corollary to this directive, the Minister of Natural Resources issued Special Order No. 201, series of 1979 creating the “Ferdinand E. Marcos Scholarship Program for Fisheries” to produce sufficient number of manpower to serve the requirements of both the government and private sectors in the fishing industry by way of financial assistance to deserving college students and assist in the placement of graduates of this Program in appropriate employment positions in the fishing industry;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

1. The Ministry of Natural Resources shall allocate TWO MILLION PESOS (P2,000,000.00) from funds released to the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources for 1980, and an equal sum annually thereafter, as seed money to support said Scholarship Program.

2. The Ministry of Natural Resources shall operationalize said Scholarship Program by constituting a Program Committee and designating the Chairman and members thereof. Further, the Program Chairman is authorized to accept donations, bequests, grants and fellowships to expand scholarship opportunities as a strategy for the country’s accelerated fisheries development program.

3. The roles and responsibilities of the Scholarship Program Committee shall include, among others, selection through open and competitive examinations for high school students who opt to pursue B.S. courses in fisheries; formulation of criteria for BFAR personnel, fishery college instructors and professors as well as technical workers in the fisheries industry in order to avail of masteral and doctoral scholarships here and abroad, including non-degree training.

4. The Ministry of Education and Culture, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, and the U.P. College of Fisheries are hereby directed to provide appropriate advisory, technical, and secretariat services supportive of the Scholarship Program implementation.

5. The Ministry of the Budget is also directed to include in the 1980 and subsequent Appropriations Decrees the necessary funds for this purpose.

6. The Ministry of Natural Resources shall likewise keep me informed on the progress of the implementation of the Scholarship Program for Fisheries.

7. Presidential Decrees, Letters of Instructions, Executive Orders, Memorandum Circulars, Rules, Regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Letter of Instructions are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia