Malacañang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1385

MINIMIZING FUND RAISING CAMPAIGNS DIRECTED AT SCHOOLTEACHERS AND SCHOOLCHILDREN

To: The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports

Whereas, schoolteachers and schoolchildren are often asked to contribute or to purchase tickets for various causes not directly related to the school system, notwithstanding the limitations placed by law on such campaigns;

Whereas, the educational system needs improvement in terms of teacher compensation, equipment and physical facilities;

Whereas, in recognition of the difficult times, government should help minimize the frequency of fund raising campaigns intended for non-school related causes and which are addressed to schoolteachers and schoolchildren, in order to channel as much of the funds available from these sources towards the improvement of the school system itself:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Law, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. The participation of school officials and administrators, teachers and students in fund raising campaigns, including the sale of tickets to benefit functions, shall be limited to those undertaken for the direct benefit of individual schools or of the educational system and to those specifically authorized by Law, namely the Red Cross, Anti-Tuberculosis, Girl Scouts, and Boy Scouts campaigns;

2. Contributions for such fund raising campaigns as may be authorized pursuant to this Letter, including those identified in no. 1 above, shall be on a purely voluntary basis, without any quotas being assigned to schools, teachers or students;

3. The Ministry (Proper), Regional Offices, Schools Divisions, Schools or its other component agencies shall not devote any of their scarce resources in the furtherance of fund raising campaigns other than those authorized under this Letter.

Done, in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, nineteen hundred and eighty four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia