MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 913

CONSTITUTING THE DIVISION CHIEFS AND ASSISTANT DIVISION CHIEFS OF MINISTRIES INTO CORPS OF MIDDLE LEVEL EXECUTIVES

Whereas, Division Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs constitute a key link in the organization of the national government, representing the level at which policy determination and implementation converge;

Whereas, the effectiveness of a Bureau, Office or Agency hinges of the affective performance of Division Chiefs and Assistant Chiefs;

Whereas, a system of job rotation will enrich experience and background of government personnel, preparatory to advance to higher levels of the career executive service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. All Division Chiefs holding itemized positions in the Central Offices of all the Bureaus, Offices, Services, and Agencies within a given Ministry shall constitute a Corps of Division Chiefs of the Ministry. All Assistant Division Chiefs in the same offices shall similarly constitute a Corps of Assistant Division Chiefs within the Ministry.

2. A systematic job rotation system shall be instituted among Division Chiefs and among Assistant Division Chiefs within each Ministry. The implementation within a Ministry shall be under the direction of the Minister and the Assistant Secretary for Personnel Management, observing such guidelines and rules and regulations as may be formulated by the Civil Service Commission.

3. The Minister of the Budget shall evaluate the organizational structure and the work volume of each Ministry, for purposes of creating additional Division Chief and Assistant Division level positions within the Office of each Minister, who shall form part of the Corps created under items one and two of this Letter. These positions may be filled by contractual personnel and in any case shall be considered as primarily confidential and highly technical in character and co- terminous with the Minister who approved their appointment to those positions, except as may be otherwise approved jointly by the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and the Minister of the Budget.

4. Division Chiefs/Assistant Chief positions created in the Offices of Ministers as authorized under these Instructions shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the number of Division Chiefs/Assistants occupying permanent items in the Central Offices of the various agencies of the Ministry.

5. The Division Chief and Assistant Chief positions in the Office of the Minister created under these Instructions shall participate in the job rotation scheme. They may be signed such staff or line responsibilities as may be decided upon by the Minister.

6. New positions may be created beginning in CY 1979 out of funds available in lump sums for personal services in Minister/Agency/Bureau budgets within the ten percent limit specified under item no. 4 herein.

7. This Order shall be immediately effective.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia