MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1128

WHEREAS, the overwhelming approval of the Constitutional amendments during the recently concluded plebiscite was actually an indorsement of the goals, objectives and accomplishments of the New Society in bringing about a better quality of life for our people;

WHEREAS, because of this overwhelming indorsement , there is now a more urgent need for our government to improve, integrate, maximize and expedite all efforts towards the attainment of these goals and objectives;

WHEREAS, all officials and employees of the government, most especially those occupying Career Executive Service positions and others occupying positions of equivalent rank, play a vital role in the execution of programs and projects designed to implement the said goals and objectives of the New Society.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct that:

1. Immediate steps shall be taken to further improve, integrate, maximize and expedite efforts in the prosecution of government programs, projects and activities in the following areas:

(a) Economic development and infrastructure projects;

(b) Extension services and livelihood projects;

(c) Medical services, public assistance and other outreach programs;

(d) Information dissemination and gathering of feedback on the sentiments and reactions of people towards government policies and programs and their effectiveness;

(e) Individual and team performance, dedication and commitment to the public service, morality and integrity; and

(f) Efficient and effective public service in general in order to bring the government closer to the people.

2. Special attention should be given to the rural and urban areas which are classified as depressed.

3. All officials and employees of the government shall join in this massive campaign to improve government performance and operations. The officers and members of the CESDPAA which has formulated OPLAN “Pagpapaunlad Ng Bayan” to implement this Letter of Instructions, in coordination with the Heads of offices and agencies concerned, shall lead in the implementation of this LOI.

4. All heads of offices, Governors, City and Municipal Mayors and Barangay Captains shall extend the necessary assistance and support to insure the success of this project. They shall submit progress reports to the Office of the President from time to time.

5. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia