MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1477

ESTABLISHING A PHILIPPINE NATIONAL COMMITTEE TO COMMEMORATE THE FORTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNITED NATIONS.

WHEREAS, the United Nations General Assembly in its resolution 38/455 of 20 December 1983 decided that the Fortieth Anniversary of the United Nations shall be commemorated;

WHEREAS, there is a need to highlight, as well as focus attention on the important role the UN has played in the pursuit of a peaceful, secure and progressive world order for the last forty years;

WHEREAS, the United Nations has proved to be a vital instrument for promoting international cooperation and understanding, and for harmonizing national action directed towards development and the improvement of the quality of life;

WHEREAS, this occasion will provide the opportunity for members states and the peoples of the world to reflect on the performance of the organization and over the past four decades with a view to strengthening the organization, we also encourage a rededication by member states to the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as one of the original signatories to the UN Charter, has actively participated in the activities of the United Nations since its establishment in 1945;

WHEREAS, to promote interest among the Filipino people in the work of the UN, support for its activities as well as appreciation for the benefits the Philippines derives from its membership in the organization, there is a need on this occasion to organize appropriate activities to achieve these objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND, E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. The above-mentioned officials shall constitute themselves into a National Committee for the 40th Anniversary of the United Nations with the Prime Minister as Chairman and the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs as Vice-Chairman, and others as members;

2. The National Committee shall prepare the groundwork and preparations for the 40th Anniversary celebration and shall call upon the assistance of other agencies of government and the private sector, including non-governmental organizations concerned with UN matters to ensure the successful commemoration of the anniversary;

3. The National Committee shall plan, prepare, supervise and coordinate special events and activities for the 40th anniversary and shall set up working committees for sectoral programs relating to UN activities; and

4. The Minister of the Budget and Management is hereby directed to release a reasonable amount to support the financial requirements of the National Committee.

For immediate implementation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of August, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia