MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO.

WHEREAS, in the referendum held last February 27, 1975, the people, particularly the residents of the cities of Manila, Quezon, Caloocan and Pasay, have manifested their desire to change the present local government machineries of said cities to attain greater expediency and efficiency, through close coordination, in the rendition by them of essential municipal public services into a manager-commission type of government;

WHEREAS, based on feasibility studies, the most practical set-up would be to place all said four (4) cities under a general manager insofar as the common and essential services are concerned; and

WHEREAS, close coordination and integration of the common public services would enhance individual capabilities and insure efficacy in the discharge thereof;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby direct that:

1. All the operations of the Cities of Manila, Quezon, Caloocan and Pasay shall be coordinated by a General Manager, who shall be appointed by me, insofar as they refer to the common, essential and public services, as exemplified hereunder, which they are obliged to render as municipal corporations.

2. A Committee shall be constituted, composed of the Secretary of Local Government and Community Development as Chairman, the General Manager, Vice-Chairman, and the City Mayors of Manila, Quezon, Caloocan and Pasay, as members, which shall determine the various policy areas considered to be urgently requiring an integrated approach, and which shall be subject to the powers and functions of the General Manager, as hereinafter defined.

3. The General Manager shall:

a. Formulate the guidelines to be observed in each and every determined policy area but the policy determination prior to implementation, shall remain with the various city councils involved;

b. Maintain a monitoring system of execution of and/or compliance with approved policies which shall be used as basis in the evaluation, both qualitatively and quantitatively, of performance like time schedule, cost, etc.;

c. Have authority to withhold and/or suspend any and all the policies adopted by any of the city councils when they are not in accord with the guidelines set for said particular policy area; and

d. In case of failure of any particular city government even, at least, to approximate the expected performance in any particular policy area, the General Manager may, with prior clearance and/or authority from me, through the Secretary of Local Government and Community Development, assume direct responsibility thereon.

4. Until further instructions, the present mayor-council form of government of said cities shall be retained and they shall continue to operate as such except as to the common and essential municipal functions (policy areas) being discharged by them as contemplated in the preceding paragraphs.

5. The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development, with the assistance of the Provincial Governors of Rizal and Bulacan, shall be responsible for maintaining close coordination with the General Manager in the discharge of said common functions among the thirteen municipalities comprised within the Greater Manila Area, namely: Las Piñas, Makati, Malabon, Mandaluyong, Marikina, Muntinlupa, Navotas, Parañaque, Pasig, Pateros, San Juan, Taguig and Valenzuela, and, for the purpose, shall have authority to set guidelines and promulgate rules and regulations deemed necessary therefor.

6. The General Manager shall examine and study the feasibility of increased barangay participation in the affairs of their respective local governments and propose to the Committee definite programs and policies on the implementation of the same.

7. For strict compliance.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia