MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1049

In view of the reported proliferation of shanties and other illegal structures in the vicinity of the famed Banaue Rice Terraces at Banaue, Ifugao, and the use to which they are being put to which mar the rustic and indigenous natural beauty of the area, thus adversely affecting, in no small measure, the national tourism development efforts, and in view of the consequent hazards which they pose to the health and well-being of the community, the following officials are hereby instructed to implement strictly the instructions hereunder enumerated, to wit:

A. The mayor of Banaue, Ifugao, shall immediately

1. make a survey of all buildings or structures presently existing in the vicinity of the Terraces and along the roadsides leading thereto to determine compliance with zoning, building, sanitation, and other codes, ordinances, rules and regulations;

2. demolish all illegal structures;

3. relocate or assist in the relocation of all illegal occupants of land or other persons who may be displaced or evicted in pursuance hereof;

4. in coordination with the proper office or agency, implement strictly the building code, zoning, sanitation, and other rules and regulations pertaining to environmental protection;

5. coordinate with the Chairman of the Philippine Tourism Authority with respect to the tourism development of the area; and

6. Submit a report within a period of 60 days from date hereof regarding his compliance herewith.

B. The Chairman of the Philippine Tourism Authority shall, within the context of tourism advancement, coordinate with and assist the Mayor of Banaue, Ifugao by way of, but not limited to the following:

1. Pinpoint locations of visually offensive structures;

2. Recommend ways of developing existing structures not otherwise constructed in violation of existing laws and regulations and with the consent of the individuals concerned, undertake the beautification thereof;

3. Undertake the construction of amenities at vantage view points in and around the Terraces;

4. Set aside such funds as may be necessary to carry out these instructions.

For immediate compliance.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia