MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1275

The Minister of Agrarian Reform

WHEREAS, the land reform program of the government is one of the steps taken in attaining economic emancipation of the masses, giving to the agricultural tenants the control of their farmholdings as their units of productions;

WHEREAS, it has come to my attention that the Mountain State Agricultural College has acquired from the Province of Benguet a tract of land (TCT Nos. 16374 and 163756), a portion of which containing seven (7) hectares, more or less, has been occupied from time immemorial by more or less sixty (60) Igorot families devoting the same to the cultivation of vegetables and other food crops;

WHEREAS, these occupants-tillers deserve to be extended the benefits of the land reform program of the government by making them owner-cultivators of their respective farmholdings;

NOW, THEREFORE, and in view of my earnest desire to liberate each and every Filipino not only politically but also economically by implementing fully the land reform program, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct;

1. The President of the Mountain State Agricultural College to separate from the land covered by TCT No. 16374 and TCT No. 163756 a portion thereof containing seven (7) hectares, more or less, presently occupied and cultivated by some sixty (60) Igorot families and transfer the same by way of sale at cost to the actual occupant-tillers thereof in accordance with their areas of occupancy and cultivation.

2. The Minister of Agrarian Reform to undertake the census, identification and screening of the occupant-tillers and conduct the necessary boundary and subdivision survey thereof based on their actual occupancy and cultivation.

3. The Ministry of Agrarian Reform and the Mountain State Agricultural College to extend to the occupant-tillers technical assistance in the development of the areas in line with the KKK program of the government.

4. The Register of Deeds of Benguet to register the deeds of conveyance executed in favor of each occupant-tiller and issue corresponding transfer certificates of title to them free from any fee or tax whatsoever.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia