MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 517

TO : THE COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS BUREAU OF CUSTOMS MANILA

THE GOVERNOR CENTRAL BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

In order to expedite the entry, processing and release of all importations consigned to the National Power Corporation or its contractors for the exclusive use in the construction and erection of the Nuclear Reactor Plant and its civil works at Napot Point, Morong, Bataan, you are hereby directed to take the following steps:

1. Assign immediately all necessary Customs personnel to Napot Point, Morong, Bataan, which is hereby declared a National Port of Entry;

2. Allow the unloading and the processing of papers at the Port of Mariveles, Free Trade Zone, Bataan, of shipments consigned to the National Power Corporation for the exclusive use in the construction and erection of the Nuclear Reactor Plant and its Civil works;

3. For all shipments, dispense with the requirement for certificate of Tax Exemption from the Department of Finance and/or all other government offices. In lieu thereof, a sworn statement of the NPC Manager or his representative that the shipment is to be used exclusively for the construction and erection of the Nuclear Reactor Plant or its civil work shall suffice;

4. Dispense with the requirement for Central Bank Release for all shipments whether done on a dollar or non-dollar basis. In lieu thereof, the certification mentioned in paragraph 3 shall suffice;

5. With respect to Tax and Duty Free importations of equipment for temporary use in the Philippines, which is hereby authorized, dispense with the requirement for the submission of bond to guarantee re-export. In lieu thereof, a re-export guarantee issued by the NPC Manager or his representative shall suffice.

In carrying out of the foregoing order, you are also hereby directed to see to it that all Customs personnel exert all coordinating efforts and exercise reasonable discretion in order to further expedite the processing and release of the foregoing importations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia

Letter of Instruction No. 517, March 16, 1977