MALACANANG Manila

MALACANANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1402

WHEREAS, in the light of present economic realities, the government has to provide assistance to the unemployed.

WHEREAS, current statistics indicate that annually there are at least 700,000 new entrants into the country’s labor force.

WHEREAS, the economy has to provide jobs not only for these new entrants but also for the backlog of unemployed which was estimated at 5.9% of the labor force during the first quarter of this year, as well as for returning overseas contract workers whose numbers are expected to increase as the development programs of the labor-receiving countries especially in the Middle East are completed.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and direct as follows:

1. The Ministry of Labor and Employment shall immediately establish and set up job exchange centers in the regional headquarters in the National Capital Region, Region III, Region VII, and Region XI and in such other strategically economic areas where necessary as determined by the Minister of Labor and Employment.

2. The job exchange centers shall provide facilities and services for assisting the unemployed such as in the following areas: registration, testing, counselling, information dissemination as to the other assistance or services provided by other agencies, both private and public, referral for acquisition and upgrading and due it placement in industries. The centers shall also be responsible for monitoring the labor market in their respective area of coverage.

3. The Ministry of Labor and Employment shall develop the approximate structure and staffing pattern as to effectively deliver the above mentioned services.

4. The initial amount of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated out of State Insurance Fund for the purpose.

For immediate compliance.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May, 1984.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia