MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 998

CONCERNING THE PURCHASE OF UNIFORMS FOR CERTAIN AGENCIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

Whereas, the Herdis Group has been divested of its holdings in Herditex, Inc., which has been transferred to the Philippine Veterans Investment Development Corporation (PHIVIDEC);

Whereas, The Phividec was organized for the benefit of veterans of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and is supported by government;

Whereas, agencies of the national government procure material for uniform requirements of its official and employees;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. Material for uniforms of the major services of the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall be purchased from Herditex, Inc.

2. Schoolteachers shall be given the option to receive their uniform allowance in the form of cash or in the form of material centrally procured by the Ministry of Education and Culture, either at its head office or at regional offices. In the case of such central procurement, the necessary clothing material shall be purchased from Herditex, Inc.

3. Agencies of the government other than the Ministries of National Defense and of Education and Culture are hereby enjoined to procure their uniform requirements from Herditex, Inc. Any and all invitations to bid for the supply of such uniform material shall include Herditex, Inc.

4. The transition measures necessary to ensure minimum dislocation on the part of existing suppliers to the MND and to take into account the product line, production start up and schedules of Herditex, Inc. shall be formulated by the Divestment Committee created by LOI No. 658.

5. The cost and specifications of the materials for uniform shall be determined on the basis of mutual agreement between the agencies concerned and Herditex, Inc. Any controversy shall be forwarded to the Divestment Committee for resolution.

6. Effective immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of March, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia