MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 603

WHEREAS, with the implementation of the Agreement on ASEAN Preferential Trading Arrangements, there is a need to undertake promotional activities designed to bring businessmen and industrialists of ASEAN countries together and for these ASEAN business groups to meet with Non-ASEAN counterparts interested in trade, tourism, investments and transfer of technology;

WHEREAS, an “ASEAN Trade Fair ’78” shall be a relevant and effective developmental and promotional vehicle for expanding ASEAN trade and strengthening intra-regional cooperation;

WHEREAS, the organization of this proposed trade fair, which shall be the responsibility of the ASEAN governments on rotation basis with Manila as the first site, was approved by the ASEAN Committee on Trade and Tourism and the ASEAN Economic Ministers.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby authorize the holding of ASEAN Trade Fair ’78 in Manila sometime in May 1978.

To ensure the successful hosting of the ASEAN Trade Fair ’78, the following orders are hereby issued:

1. There is hereby created an Executive Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, which shall be responsible for the general organization, coordination and overall supervision of the ASEAN Trade Fair ’78. For this purpose, the Committee is hereby authorized to create a Secretariat and such other working units as may be necessary.

The Executive Committee shall be composed of the Secretary of Trade as Chairman, and the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Secretary of Finance, Secretary of Industry, Chairman of the Board of Investments, Secretary of Tourism, Chairman of the Philippine Export Council, President of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, President of the Philippine Chamber of Industries and President of Confederation of Pilipino Exporters or their respective representatives, as members.

The Committee, assisted by the Secretariat, is hereby empowered to call directly on any and all government departments, bureaus, offices and agencies for such personnel assistance, either on detail or consultancy basis, and the necessary support and to pay the necessary allowances and/or honoraria therefor.

The Committee is likewise authorized to avail of the expertise and services of competent and experienced persons and/or entities to assist in the management of the affair; to seek or solicit the financial and/or technical assistance of the private sector; and to undertake such other activities as will ensure the success of the project.

2. The Management of the “ASEAN Trade Fair ’78” shall be vested in a Secretary-General who shall be the head of the Secretariat and who shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Committee. His powers and duties shall be:

a. Organize, administer and supervise the Secretariat staff, including the appointment or designation of the personnel thereof;

b. Prepare and devise the organizational structure necessary for its operations and the budgetary requirements of the Fair, subject to the approval of Executive Committee;

c. Subject only and finally to the approval of the Executive Committee, to enter into contracts, disburse funds, and perform such other activities which are necessary for the successful execution of this project;

d. Receive and utilize, for furtherance of the Fair’s activities, funds, materials and services from sources other than the Government’s financial support;

e. To do all such act or acts as may be necessary for the proper execution of the project.

3. To meet the 1977-1978 financial and operational requirements of the ASEAN Trade Fair ’78, the Budget Commission is hereby directed to release the amount of P2 million from the Special Activities Fund for CY 1977. The Budget Commission is further directed to program the amount of P3 million from the same source for release in CY 1978.

Likewise, instrumentalities of the Government concerned with export development, as well as government financial institutions, are hereby directed to extend such financial and technical support to the Committee as may be reasonably authorized by said institutions or agencies.

In this connection, the Committee shall maintain a separate account for the efficient and effective control of the expenditures and disbursements of the ASEAN Trade Fair ’78, and turnover of any unexpended balance to the General Fund, subject to the accounting and auditing requirements of the Commission on Audit.

The account shall include incomes and proceeds from all sources which shall automatically be appropriated to the Executive Committee.

4. The Department of Foreign Affairs shall assist in the travel and protocolar requirements of the Fair and the necessary informational activities abroad to generate wider participation therein.

5. The Central Bank of the Philippines, the Department of Tourism, the Local Governments, the Bureau of Customs, the Commission on Immigration and Deportation and the Manila International Airport shall coordinate and assist in all plans and activities for the reception and entertainment of participants and/or for facilitating their entry into and departure from the Philippines, including such goods and materials to be used in the ASEAN Trade Fair ’78.

6. The private sector is hereby enjoined to take full cognizance of the importance of the project and to fully cooperate in the attainment of its goals and objectives.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia