MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 807

To facilitate the implementation of the social reform program of the Government designed to improve the economic conditions of human settlements in our country and the life of our people, the following instructions are hereby issued:

1. The Minister of Natural Resources is hereby directed:

a) To set aside the whole area of 800 hectares, more or less, of public lands situated in the poblacion of the Capital Town of Digos, Davao del Sur, popularly known as the “Crumb Estate”, as reserve for the expansion of the townsite of the Municipality of Digos, Province of Davao del Sur, and for other public purposes;

b) To promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out effectively the subdivision and distribution of the property among the actual occupants thereon as listed in Annexes B and C of the Order of then Secretary Tanco, dated February 25, 1972 and other persons affected, according to the guidelines set forth herein;

2. The Director of Lands:

a) To cause the subdivision survey of the aforesaid area (Crumb Estate) in accordance with the Land Use Plan of the Municipality of Digos prepared in coordination with, and with the assistance of other Government agencies concerned;

b) To dispose of the residential lots under the provisions of R.A. No. 730, whenever applicable, and commercial and industrial lots in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IX of the Public Land Act in the following manner;

1) To sell one lot to each of the actual occupants listed in Annexes B and C of the Order of then Secretary Tanco, dated February 25, 1972 and to each of their children who are 18 years of age or over or head of the family; to each of the heirs of B.Z. Crumb and to each of their children who are 18 years of age or over or head of the family; and to each of the 22 defendants in Civil Case No. 344 of the Court of First Instance of Davao and to each of their children who are 18 years of age or over or head of the family;

2) Actual occupants, including the heirs of B.A. Crumb, listed in the aforesaid order of then Secretary Tanco, whose occupancies are or have to be converted into roads, plazas or set aside in favor of any government agency or to be disposed of in favor of any government agency or to be disposed of in any person or entity, shall be reimbursed by the aforesaid government agency or entity or other persons who will own or make use of the said portions, of the value of the occupants’ respective improvements on the land in accordance with the appraisal to be made by the provincial assessor or the value declared by the actual occupants, whichever is lower;

3) All proceeds realized or to be realized from the sale or disposition of the subdivided lots shall accrue to the general fund of the Municipality of Digos to be used solely for the development, maintenance and improvement or beautification of the areas subdivided;

4) Actual occupants of areas which are not or have not yet in the meantime been developed as part of the townsite expansion or disposed of may continue occupying the same and enjoying their improvements thereon, subject to the supervision and control of the Bureau of Lands, in coordination with the Sangguniang Bayan of Digos.

3. The Municipality of Digos:

a) To develop the area phase by phase or in its entirety as its funds and resources may warrant within the shortest period possible but not beyond the year 2,000.

4. The Director of Lands or his duly authorized representative, the Municipal Mayor of Digos or his duly authorized representative, the Minister of Human Settlements, or her duly authorized representative, and two representatives of the actual occupants of the area to be appointed by the Mayor are hereby constituted as a Committee, with the Municipal mayor of Digos or his duly authorized representative, as Chairman, to coordinate with other government agencies in the implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia