MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 977

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government has offered to host, and which was accepted by the United Nations General Assembly, the 5th Session of the Special Committee on the Review of the United Nations Charter to be held in Manila from 28 January to 22 February 1980;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government attaches great importance to this meeting which will consider vital questions and proposals for the strengthening of the role of the United Nations relative to the maintenance of international peace and security and the peaceful settlement of disputes, the development of cooperation among all nations, the promotion of the rules of international law in relations between states, and the rationalization of existing procedures of the United Nations;

WHEREAS, such questions and proposals are of vital concern to the interests of the developing countries;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to formulate, consolidate and strengthen the Philippine position in regard to said questions and proposals to be considered by the Session;

WHEREAS, it is extremely important that such a meeting be efficiently organized and that all agencies concerned, governmental and non-governmental, should cooperate and coordinate with one another to ensure its meaningful success;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

An Inter-Agency Council on the Review of the United Nations Charter is hereby created. This Council shall be responsible for substantive and physical preparations in connection with the hosting by the Philippine Government of the Session of the Special Committee on the Review of the United Nations Charter and Strengthening of the Role of the Organization scheduled on 28 January to 22 February 1980 in Manila.

The Chairman of the Council shall be the Minister of Foreign Affairs with the Minister of Justice as Vice-Chairman, and the Solicitor General, the Minister of the Budget, and the Minister of Tourism, and the Director of the University of the Philippines Law Center as Members.

The Chairman of the Council shall designate other government agencies as members of the body as the need arises.

The Council shall be responsible for identifying issues pertaining to the United Nations Charter Review which are of primary significance to the Philippines, and to formulate and coordinate the Philippine position on such issues.

The Council shall establish an inter-agency technical group to discuss and formulate recommendations on the substantive issues pertaining to the United Nations Charter Review.

The Council shall establish a Secretariat within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Council Chairman shall establish a system of honoraria and allowances for the inter-agency technical group.

The Chairman of the Council is hereby authorized to request any agency of the Philippine Government to assist in the discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the Council and to designate such personnel, including consultants, it may require for the purpose.

The Council shall formulate and adopt its implementing rules and regulations.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 21st day of January, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia