MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 712

The increasing requirements of the population for the standard facilities for decent and healthy living, particularly water, compel the government to exercise greater initiative in discovering further reserves in the environment and managing these for the general welfare. The problem is particularly felt in the Greater Manila area, where immediate steps must be taken as outlined below.

1. In view of the need to locate underground sources of water supply in the Greater Manila area and surrounding provinces, it is hereby directed that a hydrologic survey of the entire area be immediately undertaken. While the immediate concern is the Greater Manila area, however, the same effort should subsequently be extended to the rest of the country.

2. On recommendation of the Ministry of Human Settlements, the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System and other agencies concerned are hereby directed to take immediate steps to stop the use of the Manila Bay and Laguna de Bay as waste deposits by the towns and residential areas besides these bodies of water. It is the unanimous view of experts who have studied the pollution problem in the area that the progressive deterioration of these two water resources has been caused by their utilization as dumping areas for human water in the surrounding towns.

In this connection, it is further directed that measures be undertaken to recycle wastes from towns along the Manila Bay and Laguna de Bay by the most efficient method possible under present technology.

3. A large factor which contributes to pressure on the resources of the Greater Manila area is the continuing migration to the area, especially Manila itself. It should now be concern of government not only to stop this exodus from the provinces but to reverse it instead.

It is therefore directed that study of this problem and possible solutions, particularly how the reversal of the migration to Manila may be effected, be undertaken immediately. A suggestion is to prohibit any movement for purpose of residence into the Metropolitan Manila area unless there is proof of availability of facilities.

A report on the foregoing matters to be submitted as soon as possible is desired.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President and Prime Minister of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia