MALACANANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1404

ESTABLISHING A MARITIME TRAINING COUNCIL

WHEREAS, the Philippines is determined to maintain its position as a major supplier of seafarers to world shipping;

WHEREAS, the employment of Filipino seafarers constitutes a major source of foreign exchange earning of the country;

WHEREAS, the Philippines had submitted on January 11, 1984 to the International Maritime Organization the Instrument of Accession to the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping 1978 for Seafarers (SCTW) which is intended to promote safety of life and property at sea and the protection of the marine environment.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order:

Section 1. A Maritime Training Council shall be established to give effect to the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers. The Council shall be attached to the Ministry of Labor and Employment for administrative and policy control and shall be composed of the Minister of Labor and Employment as Chairman, and the following as members: the Administrator of the Maritime Industry Authority, the Commandant of Philippine Coast Guard, the Director of the Bureau of Higher Education, the Administrator of the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration, the Administrator of the Welfarefund Administration, the Chairman of the Professional Regulations Commission and one (1) representative from the private sectors, to be appointed by the Chairman.

Section 2. The Council shall have the following functions:

1. Develop, formulate and prescribe standards of training for seafarers as prescribed by the Convention.

2. Issue certificates of proficiency or competency to seamen who meet the training requirements of the Convention.

3. Assist the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports in regulating and supervising the establishment and operation of seamen training centers throughout the country.

4. Liaise and coordinate with international organizations particularly with the International Maritime Organization, as regards the training, upgrading and qualifying seafarers.

5. Formulate rules and regulations to implement SCTW of 1978 and to attain the objectives of this Letter of Instructions.

6. Prescribe and collect fees from seamen training center subject to clearance by the National Tax Research Center and to be remitted to and will constitute as part of the Seafarers Welfare Fund.

7. Undertake special programs/projects in furtherance of the objectives of training and upgrading of Seafarers.

8. Study, evaluate and recommend to the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports the number and maximum enrollment of nautical schools to ensure that the graduates will have reasonable opportunity to be employed aboardship after their graduation.

Section 3. The Council shall have a Secretariat to be composed of a representative each from the agencies represented in the Council and administrative personnel. It may call upon any government agency or instrumentality for technical and personnel assistance in the performance of its functions.

Section 4. To support its operations the Council shall be funded from the proceeds of the Seafarers Welfare Fund (SWF). For the Current Fiscal Year, the amount of Five Hundred Thousand Pesos is hereby authorized to be collected from the SWF office and subsequent annual financial requirements shall be allocated by SWF office subject to approval by the Minister of Labor and Employment in his capacity as Chairman of the SWF.

Section 5. This Instructions repeals, revokes or amends the Governance of Specialized Maritime Training of 1982, LOI 538, S-1977 and other instructions or issuances inconsistent herewith.

Section 6. This instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May in the year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia