MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 189-A

TO: The Secretary of National Defense

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972; declaring a state of martial law, and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and considering:

1. That a coordinated and efficiently-managed production of sugar, in order to provide a continuous supply of this prime commodity, sufficient to meet our commitments to the United States and our domestic requirements, is critically essential to the national welfare and economy;

2. That the Pampanga Sugar Mill (PASUMIL), as one of the country’s largest sugar milling firms, ought to be geared towards the foregoing objective in keeping with the government’s blueprint for long-range economic reforms;

3. That the PASUMIL management has, by issuing quedans in the absence of sugar supposedly represented by them, destroying the facilities of the mill such as its railroad tracks and allowing milling operations to deteriorate, committed a grave violation of our laws, undermined our country’s credit standing in the sugar central of the world and impaired our capability to meet our sugar quota commitments to the United States and our domestic requirements; and

4. That in view of the foregoing, it is imperative that the government, through the Philippine National Bank or a reputable private group to be contracted by said Bank, take-over PASUMIL in order to insure its continued and proper operation starting with the milling season in September 1974. Such take-over should be carried out in a manner that will protect not only the owners of PASUMIL but also its creditors, employees and the sugar planters dealing with it.

WHEREFORE, and in order to promote the general welfare and the economy of the State, you are hereby ordered to forthwith take-over or cause the take-over of the possession of the assets of PASUMIL, as well as the management, control and operation thereof, in accordance with the foregoing objectives and guidelines, for the duration of the present national emergency or until countermanded by me or my designated representative.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th Day of May in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1 – 237A]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.