Malacañang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1481

Whereas, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines is a public corporation created by C.A. No. 111 (amended by P.D. No. 460) which, among others, designates the President of the Philippines as Chief Scout;

Whereas, the Constitution and the By-Laws of the Boy Scouts provides that the confirmation of the President of the Philippines, as Chief Scout, is necessary for amendments of the Constitution and By-Laws, as well as membership in the National Executive Board;

Whereas, the membership of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines comes mainly from the public schools systems and its membership and fund campaigns are conducted with the encouragement and active participation of government officials and employees;

Whereas, the instructions given under LOI No. 1338 issued on June 28, 1983 are not fully complied with, given continued violations of the BSP Constitution and By-Laws, including unauthorized amendments in its By-Laws that run counter to the spirit of the 1974 restructuring of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Law, do hereby Order and Instruct the following in order to assure the continuity and stability of the Scouting Movement in the Philippines:

1. All positions in the National Executive Board of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines are hereby declared vacant;

2. The Charter-Life members of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines shall (a) constitute themselves into a Temporary Executive Committee to call for and supervise the election of a new National Executive Board, including its officers and (b) reorganize the staff of the BSP National Headquarters;

3. All amendments to the By-Laws effected by the National Executive Board after December 18, 1978 are hereby declared null and void ab initio .

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of September, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia