MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 459

You are hereby directed to participate in the implementation of the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan which calls for close coordination and cooperation among the various agencies involved in fisheries development.

The roles and responsibilities of the agencies in fisheries development are delineated as follows:

1. The Department of Natural Resources shall:

a) Monitor the activities of the participating agencies in implementing the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan;

b) Develop additional programs and system for the more efficient and effective implementation of the Plan;

c) Prepare and implement an integrated infrastructure facilities program for the fishing industry;

d) Regionalize the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan; and

e) Establish a Fisheries Research Fund.

2. The Department of Education and Culture shall, in coordination with the Department of Natural Resources, University of the Philippines and Educational Projects Implementing Task Force, prepare and implement a master plan for fisheries education and training programs.

3. The Department of Local Government and Community Development shall:

a) With the assistance of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, organize Samahang Nayon for fishermen, concentrating on the Muslim Mindanao sustenance fishermen; and

b) Provide training to BFAR extension workers on Samahang Nayon organization.

4. The Department of Industry shall promote the small- and medium-scale fishing and fishery related industries through technical and management assistance in project identification, development and implementation.

5. The Department of National Defense shall, through the Philippine Constabulary and the Philippine Coast Guard, assist in the implementation and enforcement of all fishery laws, decrees, proclamations, memoranda, circulars, general orders, letters of instructions and all rules and regulations, as provided in the Memorandum of Agreement between the Department of National Defense and the Department of Natural Resources dated July 31, 1976.

6. The Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications shall, upon request of the Department of Natural Resources draws plans and construct infrastructures like fishing ports, harbors and markets for the fishing industry.

7. The Department of Public Highways shall give priority to the planning and construction of roads leading to fishery industry infrastructures, especially in Muslim Mindanao.

8. The University of the Philippines shall:

a) Prepare and implement a comprehensive fisheries research program in coordination with the Department of Natural Resources and Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research; and

b) Assist the Department of Education and Culture in the preparation and implementation of a master plan for fisheries education and training programs.

9. The Central Bank of the Philippines, Philippine National Bank, Development Bank of the Philippines and Presidential Committee on Agricultural Credit shall:

a) Provide funds for credit requirements of the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan; and

b) The Presidential Committee on Agricultural Credit shall coordinate the programming and negotiating of long-term and short-term financial needs of the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan.

10. The Philippine Council for Agriculture and Resources Research shall, in coordination with the Department of Natural Resources, the Fishery Industry Development Council and the University of the Philippines, monitor and evaluate all fishery research activities.

11. The Fishery Industry Development Council shall:

a) Formulate policy guidelines on the management, conservation, protection, utilization and development of the fishery and other aquatic resources;

b) Collect data and information for the formulation of policy guidelines;

c) Coordinate fishery activities of all participating agencies;

d) Monitor and evaluate fisheries development projects in coordination with the National Economic and Development Authority; and

e) Take the lead in updating the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan.

12. The Philippine Fish Marketing Authority shall:

a) Undertake site surveys and investigations for the establishment of marketing infrastructure facilities for the fishing industry;

b) Prepare and implement a market development program for the industry; and

c) Operationalize a Fishery Market News Service in major fish landing centers, in coordination with the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources.

13. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources shall:

a) Prepare and implement a fisheries extension program;

b) Implement the fisheries regulatory functions;

c) Rationalize the licensing system;

d) In coordination with the Department of Local Government and Community Development, provide the technical and manpower needs in organizing fishermen’s associations;

e) In coordination with the Philippine Fish Marketing Authority, implement an improved fisheries statistical system; and

f) Recommend to the Fishery Industry Development Council any plan or program consistent with the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan.

The Department of Natural Resources shall keep me informed on the progress of the implementation of the Integrated Fisheries Development Plan.

Letters of Instructions, Executive Orders, Memorandum Circulars, Rules, Regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Letter of Instruction are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of September, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia