Malacanang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1406

DIRECTING THE ADOPTION OF MEASURES TO AUGMENT THE COMPENSATION OF DESERVING SCHOOLTEACHERS, WITHIN THE BUDGETARY CAPABILITY OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

Whereas, the attraction of the best schoolteachers into the service and their retention depends on an attractive level of compensation;

Whereas, the ability of the national government to grant increases in compensation is limited by its financial resources;

Whereas, there is a need to recognize meritorious performance, beyond the dictates of general increases due to the cost of living;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby Order and Instruct the adoption of the following special compensation measures for schoolteachers in the national government:

1. The number of slots in the Master Teacher program, as provided under the plan for the Career Progression for Teachers shall be doubled, from the existing 5% of the total number of teachers, to 10%, thus allowing the conversion of about 15,000 teacher positions to Master Teachers;

2. The duly approved equivalent record forms (ERF) salary adjustment formula shall be implemented, whereby teachers who enroll in graduate courses of their duly approved equivalents shall be entitled to certain prescribed salary increases, benefiting about 60,000 teachers who have improved their educational qualifications and competence;

3. The compensation of Superintendents and Assistant Superintendents of Schools shall be adjusted so as to make their salaries comparable with those of their counterparts in first class provinces and cities, affecting some 360 officials;

4. The merit increase program for deserving employees of government shall be revived as soon as possible, with priority to be given to deserving schoolteachers and education support personnel;

5. The Minister of the Budget and the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports shall design a gradual and orderly implementation of the measures directed under this Letter. The most deserving staff members may be authorized salary increases beginning May 1, 1984. Adjustments for others shall be staggered during the rest of the year, as evaluation of proposals are completed and to keep within the financial capability of the national government.

Done, in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May, nineteen hundred and eighty four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia