MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 662

TO : ALL CONCERNED

CREATING THE NATIONAL, REGIONAL, PROVINCIAL AND MUNICIPAL PHYSICAL FITNESS AND SPORTS DEVELOPMENT COUNCILS.

WHEREAS, the government has recognized as a matter of national policy the development of the youth and sports in the country;

WHEREAS, in line with the national objective of countryside development, there is a need to intensify and accelerate the implementation of physical fitness and sports development program for the population at all ages and in all levels of the community in order to serve as a solid foundation for the inculcation of national discipline and health for the citizenry;

WHEREAS, there is a need to integrate physical fitness, sports development and the nutrition program in order to generate mass involvement and participation of both the private and the public sectors in the physical fitness and sports development program;

WHEREAS, in order to meet the national requirements for physical fitness and sports development and in line with the strategy to simultaneously establish nationwide the regional offices of the Department of Youth and Sports Development to encompass the whole country, there is a need to involve all sectors of the citizenry down to municipal and barangay levels;

WHEREAS, in order to achieve this there is a need to create the physical fitness and sports development councils to formulate the policies and direction of an integrated national physical fitness and sports development program in all levels;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested by the Constitution do hereby order the following:

1. There is hereby created the Physical Fitness and Sports Development Councils as follows:

a) The National Advisory Council on Physical Fitness and Sports Development

2. The Kabataang Barangay shall be the action unit with line support from the different government agencies.

3. The Department of Education and Culture shall assign Physical Education teachers on full-time basis to the integrated program through the YCAP organization.

4. The National Nutrition Council shall feed its program through the Physical Fitness and Sports Development Councils.

5. The Department of National Defense shall provide support and participation to the level of the barangay through the Integrated National Police which is under its administration.

6. The Department of Health through the rural health centers in coordination with the National Nutrition Council shall provide the health and nutrition inputs of the programs.

7. An inter-agency services committee within the DYSD shall be established to effectively coordinate project and program execution and monitoring.

8. The Member corporation in the Government Corporation Athletic Association shall, under the given general direction of penetrating the mass base, professionalize its ranks by the employment on full-time basis of physical fitness and sports director.

9. The National Youth and Sports Development Foundation shall be activated as a lateral support group to the program in terms of professional management and generation of funding requirements.

10. The physical fitness program shall be implemented with:

a) The pilot training of DEC personnel and K B Members under the “Lakas at Sigla” program.

b) The revision of the DEC curriculum to stress physical education courses to be handled by full-time P.E. instructors. The DEC shall submit to the Council the proposed program to implement this objective.

c) The transfer of regional and local sports facilities and centers to the Department of Youth and Sports Development under the policy control of the Development Councils and under the joint management and supervision of the DYSD and the Kabataang Barangay. The transfer shall be by phase as recommended by DYSD and Kabataang Barangay.

d) The reorganization and reconstitution of the National College of Physical Education (NCPE) into a National Academy for Sports and Physical Fitness to supplement the efforts of government agencies in training experts on a continuing cycle.

e) The maintenance of appropriate anthropometric charts (system of physical measurement and improvement) for physical fitness program participants by the local nutrition centers.

11. The specialized sports implementation shall be pursued in accordance with the sports priorities guidelines of the President with the support of the national sports associations.

12. The organization and management of the National Sports Association will be in accordance with DYSD guidelines.

13. DYSD shall establish such relationships with both the Philippine Olympic Committee and the National Sports Council as would further contribute to the development objectives of the National Government.

14. The management of sports competitions shall also be professionalized.

15. The procurement of sports equipment and supplies shall be rationalized.

Incentives

1. The local government shall allocate a reasonable percentage of their incomes to physical fitness and sports development hewed along DYSD’s national development programs.

2. Government corporations shall allocate a reasonable percentage of their regular annual budget for physical fitness and sports development to support both internal and external programs/projects subject to approval by the DYSD, inclusive of cash donations or contributions.

3. Donation by the City of Manila/Metro Manila Commission of the land where the RMSC is housed to served as interim residence of DYSD.

4. Exemption from all taxes of non-profit sports club (with youth programs within the clubs) upon recommendation of the DYSD.

5. Provision of nutritional guides and food supplements to participants in physical fitness and sports development program in community or school sports center.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia