Malacañang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1463

OPERATIONALIZING THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS CORPORATION AND DESIGNATING THE TEXTBOOK BOARD SECRETARIAT AS ITS INTERIM STAFF

WHEREAS, as part of the educational development program under Presidential Decree No. 6-A, the Government initiated in 1976 a textbook project thru a World Bank loan to eliminate the textbook shortage in the public schools;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that the Textbook Project be continued beyond the period of the World Bank loans on a self-sustaining basis as an imperative towards the desired improvement of the quality of education;

WHEREAS, an Instructional Materials Corporation (IMC) has been created under Executive Order No. 806 dated May 27, 1982 as a covenant under World Bank Loan 2030-PH (Elementary Education Sector Program) in order to institutionalize the Textbook Project and strengthen its organizational effectiveness to perform a more comprehensive function of providing the school system not only with basic textbooks but also other forms of instructional media and technology;

WHEREAS, there is a need to institute measures in the interim to insure that the instructional materials production activities of the Government shall continue without undue interruption while the implementing details and measures for the operation of the IMC are being finalized;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended, the President is empowered to undertake such organizational and related improvements as may be appropriate in the light of changing and new developments:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. The present staff of the Textbook Project otherwise known as the Textbook Board Secretariat shall serve as the interim staff of the Instructional Materials Corporation pending the completion of the necessary implementing measures such as the new staffing pattern and the reallocation of appropriations. The Corporation may secure the services of expert consultants on the same basis as that authorized for the Educational Projects Implementing Task Force;

2. The present Executive Director of the Textbook Board Secretariat or any other official of the Ministry shall be designated as Officer-in-Charge of the Corporation by the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports pending the formal activation of the IMC by the appointment by the President of the General Manager and the members of the Board of Directors of the Corporation;

3. The powers relative to the effective implementation of the Textbook Project vested by Letter of Instructions No. 873 dated June 13, 1979 in the Textbook Board, which is abolished under Executive Order No. 806, shall be exercised by the Officer-in-Charge of the Corporation under the direct supervision and control of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports;

4. Subject to the approval of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, the Officer-in-Charge shall recommend and implement, corporate plans and policies as embodied in a budget of income and expenditures in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order No. 806;

5. All valid contracts, agreements, and other obligations entered into or incurred by the former Textbook Board and/or the Textbook Project shall continue in force and shall be honored by the Corporation;

6. From the applicable appropriations in the General Appropriations Act of 1985 (Batas Pambansa Blg. 866), including any unused allotments and releases due the Textbook Project under Program, Project, Activity (P/P/A) Nos. 1.7.22, 1.7.23, 3.2.2, 3.2.3 and 4.2.14 are reallocated and made available to the Corporation as corporate equity contributions or advance payment of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports for textbooks and other instructional materials and services as may be delivered by the Corporation to the Ministry;

7. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately, and the implementing measures needed to bring the IMC to full operation shall be completed within three months from its issuance.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of May nineteen hundred and eighty five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia