MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1305

DIRECTING MEASURES TO PREVENT CEMENT HOARDING, PRICE MANIPULATION AND PROFITEERING

WHEREAS, in the past years, particularly during the summer season, there have been recurring shortage of cement supply caused by hoarding, manipulation and profiteering by unscrupulous traders;

WHEREAS, unless emergency steps are taken for this summer season, hoarding, profiteering and manipulation of cement will again be perpetrated causing economic dislocation and hampering business, inimical to public interest ;

WHEREAS, there is need to adopt prompt, expeditious and urgent measures to stop or prevent this pernicious act of economic sabotage;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers granted in me by the Constitution, hereby direct:

1. That henceforth, all acts of hoarding, profiteering and price manipulation are to be considered acts of economic sabotage.

2. The Minister of Trade and Industry, to take all appropriate emergency measures to prevent hoarding, profiteering and manipulation of cement. These measures shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

a) To call on law enforcement agency/ies to conduct raids on warehouses or other similar places where there is reason to believe that cement is being hoarded.

b) To order the seizure and confiscation of such hoarded cement.

3. The Minister of National Defense, to provide all the necessary assistance to effectively implement the conduct of raids, searches and seizures above provided.

4. The Minister of Justice, to create a special team of prosecutors to handle the investigation and prosecution of complaints filed by the Minister of Trade and Industry and/or his duly designated representatives. This special team of prosecutors shall complete the investigation and file the necessary information immediately.

For purposes of all the above, the Minister of Trade and Industry is hereby empowered to issue implementing rules and regulations as may be required from time to time.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia