MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 873

VESTING IN THE TEXTBOOK BOARD THE CONTINUING DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION, AND DISTRIBUTION OF TEXTBOOK FOR THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND ESTABLISHING AN ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINERY THEREAT

WHEREAS, one of the educational development projects under the Ten-Year Educational Development Program as embodied in Presidential Decree No. 6-A is the design, utilization, and improvement of instructional technology and development/production of textbooks and other instructional materials;

WHEREAS, the critical shortage of textbooks in the public schools compelled the Philippine government to enter into a Loan Agreement with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) to finance a Textbook Project which under said Agreement was to be initially managed by Educational Development Projects Implementing Task Force (EDPITAF) in coordination with the Textbook Board of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

WHEREAS, a Textbook Project staff was created as a precondition to the effectiveness of said Loan Agreement;

WHEREAS, with the termination of the Loan Agreement by Year 1981, the Philippine government will, as a national policy, continue with the Textbook Project for Philippine schools under the supervision of the Minister of Education and Culture through the Textbook Board;

WHEREAS, the Textbook Board as established and organized under Presidential Decree No. 687 is not in a position to adequately and effectively perform the continuing development, production, and distribution unless it is provided with the necessary administrative services and qualified technical staff to pursue the Textbook Project efficiently;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and direct that .

1. The Textbook Board shall have an administrative unit adequately staffed with accounting, budgeting administrative and other regular supportive personnel. The unit shall be headed by the Director of the Textbook Project.

2. The present Textbook Project staff which has been assigned with EDPITAF shall now be transferred to the Textbook Board and provided with the full personnel complement needed to insure effective completion to the present Textbook Project by Year 1981. The hiring and compensation of the Textbook Project staff shall be exempt from existing regulations governing appointments and compensation of government employees.

3. The Textbook Board shall have the power to hire personnel, engage the services of technical consultants and other experts, and enter into contracts and negotiations necessary in the implementation of the Textbook Project.

4. In accordance with the provision of Presidential Decree No. 6-A the Textbook in implementing the Textbook Project shall be empowered to import articles, materials, equipment, machinery, and supplies free from all duties, fees, imposts, and all other charges and restrictions imposed by the Republic of the Philippines or any of its agencies or political subdivisions.

5. The Minister of Budget shall see to the additional appropriations for the Textbook Board to carry out its additional functions.

6. The Chairman, Commission on Audit shall assign a Resident Auditor to the Textbook Book.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia