MALACAÑANG MANILA

Letter of Instructions No. 1126

INSTITUTING A NATIONAL EXTENSION WORKERS DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION PROGRAM WITHIN THE UNIVERSITY OF LIFE

WHEREAS, extension workers of the government in various economic and social sectors perform a vital and pivotal role in the proper acceptance and successful implementation of various programs and projects of the government at the grassroots level;

WHEREAS, considering the force that the corps of extension workers constitute in national life, there is a felt need to immerse them in a development education program that orients them to the humanistic commitments of the government and makes them more effective in the public functions that they perform;

WHEREAS, the university of Life (Pamantasan ng Bagong Lipunan) was constituted for, and is capable of, providing a development education program that is devoted to the ideals of humanism;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, PRESIDENT FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby instruct the following:

1. For the purpose of providing to government extension workers a development-oriented education and training program that is consistent with the philosophies, commitments, goals and priorities of the government, the University of Life is directed to institute within its educational system a National Extension Workers Development Education Program, consisting of both orientation sessions and training courses.

2. All government extension workers in such fields as agriculture, agrarian reform, industry, natural resources, health, nutrition, population, social services, local government and community development, shall undergo the program under such terms as may be determined by the implementing regulations to this instructions .

3. National and local government agencies and instrumentalities sending their extension workers to the program shall shoulder the expenses involved in such training, including such amounts as may be levied by the University of Life for services rendered.

4. To further support the University of Life in undertaking the program, it is hereby authorized to receive contributions from government agencies and investments from government-owned and/or controlled corporations and private corporations and/or entities for purposes of implementing the program.

5. The University of Life is further directed to draft the implementing rules and regulations to these instructions for approval by the President.

Done in Metropolitan Manila, this 11th day of the month of May, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia