MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1175

WHEREAS, Batas Pambansa Blg. 72 provides for the taking of a national census of population by province, city, municipality and barangay ;

WHEREAS, the NEDA had submitted the preliminary results of the 1980 population census of the Philippines by municipality, city and province as conducted by the National Census and Statistics Office (NCSO), which results were approved by the President under LOI 1083, for official use by all agencies and instrumentalities of the government in their planning and/or appraisal of development activities relating to population and other population-related matters;

WHEREAS, the population count at the barangay level could not as yet be finalized by the NCSO inasmuch as there is no complete official listing of barangays available as of this date and it appears that the NCSO list does not tally with the lists provided by the Ministry of Local Governments, the Commission on Elections and the Ministry of Finance;

WHEREAS, Section 8 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 72 provides that “the final population count as determined from the processed census returns shall be considered official for all purposes upon proclamation by the President.” (Underscoring supplied)

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct as follows:

1. In order that the results of the 1980 population census may be proclaimed as provided under Batas Pambansa Blg. 72, and pending the issuance by the Ministry of Local Governments (MLG) of an integrated listing of barangays which shall be considered official for all purposes, the NCSO is hereby directed to finalize the population census at the barangay level by including therein the population counts in all barangays recognized by the Ministry of Local Governments and/or the Commission on Elections (COMELEC).

2. Population counts of (a) barangays in existence in 1970 or 1972 which may not be found in either MLG or COMELEC lists, shall be included; and, (b) those barangays created (after the ratification of the Constitution in January 16, 1973) pursuant to Presidential Decree 86 or P.D. 86-A which concern mainly poblaciones , and in the case of Metro Manila, wards, shall be separately indicated and properly noted for formal creation in conformity with the Constitution.

3. Population counts of all other barangays which do not fall into categories (a) and (b) above shall be credited to the corresponding barangays of origin.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 19th day of November, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia