Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1248

CREATION OF THE PHILIPPINE HOST COMMITTEE FOR THE EIGHT SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATIONS, 30 AUGUST ‑ 10 SEPTEMBER 1982

WHEREAS, the United National Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) on 2 November 1981 decided to accept the invitation of the Philippine Government to host the eight session of the United Nations Commission on Transnational Corporations (UNCTNC);

WHEREAS, this eight session of the United Nations Commission on Transnational Corporations will consider the final draft of the Code of Conduct on Transnational Corporation which if approved by the Session will be known as the Manila Code of Conduct on Transnational Corporations;

WHEREAS, the hosting of this international meeting is in line with the government’s policy of developing Manila into a Convention City.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. The abovementioned officials shall constitute themselves into a Host Committee for the eight session of the United Nations Commission on Transnational Corporations with the Minister for Foreign Affairs as Chairman, the Minister of Trade and Industry as Co-Chairman, the Governor of the Central Bank as Vice-Chairman, and the others, as Members.

2. The Host Committee shall prepare the groundwork and necessary preparations for the hosting of the Session and shall call upon the assistance of other officials and agencies of government and the private sector dealing with convention matters and transnational corporation to ensure the successful convening of the session.

3. The Host Committee shall organize working groups to ensure smooth implementation of its work and decisions. There is hereby created a Committee on Substantive Matters with the Ministry of Trade and Industry as Chairman, which shall formulate the Philippine positions on the various agenda items of the session.

4. An organizing Secretariat is hereby created to serve as the support staff of the Host Committee and which shall liaise and coordinate with the UNCTNC officials and staff servicing the session. The Assistant Minister for United Nations and International Organizations shall head the Secretariat as Secretary-General. The Assistant Minister of Trade and Industry and the Deputy Governor of the Central Bank shall be Co-Secretaries-General.

5. The Minister of Tourism shall take charge of providing hospitality and social functions, including tours and hotel accommodations for the delegates.

6. The Director-General of Media Affairs shall provide the necessary media coverages and publicity of the session for local and international releases and to provide the necessary information on the Philippines to delegates, observers and other foreigners attending the session. He shall also be in charge of accreditation of foreign and local news correspondents.

7. The Ministry of the Budget is hereby directed to release the amount of Six Million Pesos (P6,000,000.00), of which the equivalent of $285,000.00 shall be deposited with the United Nations as payment for the additional cost of holding the session in Manila and the balance to be used for locally incurred cost as determined by the Host Committee.

For immediate implementation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of June in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia