MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 892

SUBJECT: Effecting the Widespread Application of Proven Viable Technologies Pertaining to Non-Conventional Energy Sources

WHEREAS, the worldwide energy situation is becoming more critical, with the growing shortage and increasing cost of oil which remains a major source of the energy requirements of the country;

WHEREAS, there is need to accelerate the application of proven viable non-conventional energy sources for the country to attain as much self-reliance and self-sufficiency as possible in meeting its growing energy needs; and

WHEREAS, for this purpose, it would be desirable to vigorously pursue activities and operations relating to the application of proven viable technologies on non-conventional energy sources and delineate the primary responsibilities of agencies concerned.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The following agencies of the government shall have primary responsibility for undertaking activities leading to the widespread application and utilization, whether commercial or non-commercial, of proven liable technologies relating to the non-conventional energy sources indicated opposite each:

Letter of Instructions No. 888 shall continue to govern the national alcogas program.

SEC. 2. Such activities shall include, but need not be limited to:

(a) The identification of the most suitable markets and prospective users of such technologies;

(b) The selection of the more suitable technologies, whether of a commercial or a non-commercial nature, for the particular requirements envisioned;

(c) The encouragement and availment of the appropriate participation of the private and/or public sectors in the production, distribution, and utilization of such technologies, considering further the different requirements or small-scale and large-scale users;

(d) The development of individual, sub-regional, regional, or national programs and strategies for implementing the application and use of such technologies;

(e) The implementation of such projects and programs as are needed for the utilization of such technologies;

(f) The determination of such specific and general incentives as may be necessary to effect increasing acceptance of the general use of such technologies; and

(g) The establishment of such measures of performance as may result in the meaningful monitoring of the progress of their activities.

SEC. 3. The Ministry of Energy shall continue to be responsible for administering a national program for research and development concerning non-conventional energy sources. It shall meet with the abovementioned agencies within ninety (90) days from the issuance of this LOI to provide such agencies with the necessary technological information and materials for pursuing their projects.

SEC. 4. In the pursuance of their activities as herein directed, the agencies concerned shall utilized their respective resources as may be necessary and expedient in order to ensure the success of their projects. The agencies abovementioned may constitute such task forces and special groups as may be necessary to enable them to more efficiently discharge their responsibilities under this LOI. For monitoring purposes, they shall meet with the Ministry of Energy on at least a quarterly basis to report on the progress of the implementation of such projects, taking into account the provisions of Section 2.

SEC. 5. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23 day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia