MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 450

TO : The Secretary of National Defense The Secretary of Foreign Affairs The Secretary of Justice The Secretary of Local Governments & Community Development The Secretary of Health The Secretary of Trade The Governor, Central Bank of the Philippines The President, Philippine National Bank

In keeping with our constitutionally derived policy of encouraging every Filipino to freely fulfill his religious obligations, I have authorized private Muslim groups to undertake this year’s pilgrimage to Mecca. It is my intent to allow Muslim leaders, preferably the religious of the MINSUPALA region to organize this pilgrimage, to include the selection of its members, choice of the mode of and contracting for transportation and the funding of their voyage. To ensure the expeditious and orderly execution of all phases of this activity, I desire that each of your departments provide the necessary advisory, administrative, technical and supervisory assistance to the pilgrims.

The Department of National Defense is hereby designated the primary action office purpose of coordinating all government entities involved in facilitating this privately managed pilgrimage. It shall be the principal point of contact between the government and the leader-organizers of the pilgrimage.

The Secretary of National Defense is authorized to choose from among the applicant Muslim leaders the groups that shall be recognized as representatives of the pilgrims capable of managing this pilgrimage wholly on their own. He shall issue such rules and guidelines and organize such bodies as he may deem necessary to help accomplish the secure and orderly pilgrimage to Mecca. Per latest available information, the pilgrims should arrive in Mecca not later than November 21, 1976 in order that they can take part in the religious ceremonies and other activities attendant to the pilgrimage.

Done in the City of Manila this, 19th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia