MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1325

WHEREAS, Letter of Instruction No. 1239 calls for the competent management and the productive and egalitarian utilization of Laguna Lake.

WHEREAS, the Laguna Lake Development Authority aims to democratize the use of the Lake through the equitable allocation and management of its resources, hand in hand with the restoration of ecological balance through environmental management under its proposed Cooperative Development Program.

WHEREAS, under this Cooperative Development Program, small fishermen shall be organized into cooperatives/associations and shall be provided with financial, technical and managerial assistance;

WHEREAS, the Farm Systems Development Corporation, created under P.D. No. 681 as amended by P.D. No. 1595 was created primarily to promote the organization of and to provide assistance to associations and other rural-based entities which are willing to pursue the objectives of hastening rural development and increasing food production, and has been empowered to register such associations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct the following:

1) The Laguna Lake Development Authority to immediately implement the Cooperative Development Program and for this purpose , 1 shall restructure illegal fishpens to be distributed among fishermen associations to be called the “KAPISANANG KABUHAYAN SA KALAWAAN” (KKK);

2) The Farm Systems Development Corporation to assist the LLDA in organizing lakeshore duck raisers, and small fishermen into associations, register them with the said Corporation pursuant to P.D. No. 1595, and finally act as channel for the release of loans; from the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran;

3) The Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran to designate the Farm Systems Development Corporation as its channel for loans granted to the Kapisanang Kabuhayan sa Kalawaan;

4) The Ministry of the Budget to immediately release to the Farm Systems Development Corporation the amount of P77.7 Million, the projected requirements for the first year of implementation of the Cooperative Development Program.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA, Philippines, this 21st day of May in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Three.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Management Staff