Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1310

WHEREAS, in the Final Report dated May 4, 1971 submitted by the Lake Lanao Task Force created pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 215 dated February 5, 1971 of the Office, it was recommended that “The National Power Corporation should as much as possible limit the rate of drawdown of the lake water level but in no case should it be more than 1.5 meters per year not exceeding a total of 5 meters below its normal elevation;”

WHEREAS, in Memorandum Order No. 398, of this Office, dated November 1973, the normal maximum lake elevation of Lake Lanao was placed at seven hundred and two (702) meters;

WHEREAS, taking into account the normal maximum elevation of 702 meters and the recommended allowable total drawdown of 5 meters below normal maximum elevation, the minimum lake elevation to be observed is 697 meters, an elevation deemed necessary to protect the socio-economic and ecological conditions of the areas surrounding Lake Lanao;

WHEREAS, in view of the prolonged drought in Mindanao, the recommended yearly drawdown rate for National Power Corporation (NPC) of 1.5 meters from Lake Lanao has been found inadequate to meet the power generation requirements in the area;

WHEREAS, Lake Lanao is the primary source of hydroelectric power generation of NPC in Mindanao and in order to sustain NPC power supply to industries, electric cooperatives, utilities, and other power consumers in the area, it is essential that it be allowed, during this period of emergency, to drawdown the water level of Lake Lanao by more than 1.5 meters a year, without, however, affecting the minimum lake elevation of 697 meters.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct as follows:

1. For the purpose of power generation to meet the emergency brought about by the prolonged drought in Mindanao, and for the duration of said emergency, National Power Corporation is hereby authorized to drawdown the water level of Lake Lanao by as much as may be necessary for its required power generation, but in no case shall the drawdown affect the minimum lake elevation of 697 meters which shall at all times be observed and maintained.

2. This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of April in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-three.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia