MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS No. 1182

To: The Heads, Directors, Chairman, etc., of the following Ministries, bureaus, offices and agencies: Board of Censors for Motion Pictures Board of Energy Board of Investments Board of Power and Waterworks Board of Tax Appeals Board of Transportation Bureau of Cooperatives Bureau of Customs Bureau of Quarantine Bureau of Domestic Trade Bureau of Energy Utilization Bureau of Fiber Inspection Service Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Bureau of Foreign Trade Bureau of Forest Development Bureau of Land Transportation Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences Bureau of Research and Laboratories Bureau of Tourism Services Central Bank Central Board of Assessment Appeals Civil Aeronautics Board Civil Service Commission (applicants for Civil Service Examination) Collector of Customs Commission on Audit Commission on Elections Energy Conservation Commission Commission on Immigration and Deportation Food and Drug Administration Home Financing Corporation Insurance Commission Labor Arbiters Land Registration Commission Local Civil Registrars Legal Office, Malacañang Maritime Industry Authority Ministry of Agriculture Ministry of Health Ministry of Human Settlements Ministry of Natural Resources Ministry of Tourism National Bureau of Investigation (clearance) National Electrification Administration National Labor Relations Commission National Seamen Board National Telecommunications Commission National Water and Air Pollution Control Commission National Water Resources Council Office of Consular Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Overseas Employment Development Board Philippine Atomic Energy Commission Philippine Bureau of Product Standards Philippine Consulates Abroad Philippine Patent Office Professional Regulation Commission Register of Deeds Reprinting Committee Technology Transfer Board Textbook Board, and Such other agencies which exercise quasi-judicial functions.

SUBJECT: Collection of Legal Research Fee Imposed by Presidential Decree No. 200 Amending Republic Act No. 3870

It has been brought to my attention that many of the agencies charged with collecting the additional legal research fee imposed by Presidential Decree No. 200 amending Republic Act No. 3870 are not complying with the mandate of the law. The law requires the collection of the additional amount of one percent (1%) 0 f the filing fee imposed but in no case lower than five pesos, in the case of the appellate courts and the additional amount of one percent (1%) of the filing fee imposed, but in no case lower than two pesos, in the case of all other courts, including all administrative or special courts, agencies or tribunals exercising quasi-judicial functions.

To reinforce and expand the activities adopted in response to growing law-related needs of the country, Executive Order No. 714 dated 1 August 1981 implementing Presidential Decree No. 711, directs that the additional research fees collected shall upon collection be automatically released to the University of the Philippines and immediately deposited in a separate account in any authorized Government depository bank in the name of the National Treasurer as ex-officio Treasurer of U.P. under the U.P. Chapter.

WHEREFORE, you are hereby enjoined to require, and to see to it that your official and employees charged with collection of the aforementioned fees remit the same without delay pursuant to the foregoing paragraphs.

For strict compliance and immediate implementation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: National Library