MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 866

WHEREAS, the Virginia Tobacco Industry is essential to the economic life of the Ilocos Region and the country as a whole;

WHEREAS, there is a present threat of fuelwood shortage to the tobacco industry and the community within the region;

WHEREAS, it is important that the forest resources of the region is properly managed, conserved, revitalized and developed for ecological, as well as economic reasons;

WHEREAS, towards this end, the Ministry of Natural Resources and the Philippine Virginia Tobacco Administration have jointly developed the Ilocos Region Fuelwood Development Program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President – Prime Minister, do hereby direct the following:

1. That the PVTA and the MNR vigorously pursue the implementation of the aforestated program which principally affects the province of Ilocos Sur, Ilocos Norte, La Union and Abra;

2. In furtherance of this objective, the aforementioned agencies shall be responsible for the creation, establishment and organization of the following program management and administrative machineries;

a. Program Executive Committee – to serve as the policy making and governing body of the program and which shall be composed of the following:

Chairman – Chairman PVTA Co-Chairman – Minister MNR Members:

Provincial Governors of Abra, Ilocos Norte Ilocos Sur and La Union

Director, Bureau of Forest Development Director, Bureau of Lands

b. Program Management Office – which shall be under the direct supervision of the Program Executive Committee for the purpose of coordinating the implementation of the program at the central, provincial and municipal levels. It shall be headed by a Program Director to be appointed by the Program Executive Committee. The Program Director shall be supported by a technical and administrative support staff.

c. Program Technical Committee – which shall extend management assistance and serve as an advisory body to the Program Director. It shall be composed of the following:

d. Provincial Coordinating Committee – to plan, direct, supervise and assume responsibilities for the implementation of the program within the province concerned. It shall be composed of:

e. The Municipal Implementing Unit – which shall serve as the work force in the municipal level and it shall be headed by a Municipal Program Coordinator to be appointed by the Provincial Program Coordinating Committee.

3. Specific guidelines for the effective implementation of the program shall be issued by the Program Executive Committee which shall include provisions on functions, duties and responsibilities including but not limited to the existing personnel.

4. The Ministry of Local Government and Community Development through the lawful governmental units shall coordinate with the agencies involved in the program particularly the MNR and the PVTA and shall provide the necessary support.

5. The Ministry of the Budget shall undertake the necessary action in the terms of releasing and or allocating the financial requirements of the program out of the existing tobacco fund of the PVTA in the National Treasury as affected by P.D. 1234.

6. In order to ensure the success of the program other government agencies and offices, including government owned and controlled corporations concerned or involved in any manner in the operation contemplated herein, more particularly the Ministry of Budget and the MLGCD, and are hereby directed to extend such assistance as may be needed or required by the PVTA, the MNR and the Program Management Office for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Letter of Instructions.

This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 23 rd day of May in the year of Our Lord 1979.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia