MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 373-A

TO : The Commanding General, Philippine Air Force The Commanding General, Philippine Constabulary The Flag Officer in Command, Philippine Navy The General Manager, Philippine National Railways The Secretary, Department of Local Government and Community Development

In addition to Sections 1, 2 and 3 of LOI No. 335 implementing a coordination and assistance scheme for the leadership training program for all Kabataang Barangay Chairman, the following shall constitute the supplementary guidelines:

1. The Philippine Air Force shall provide transport facilities to airlift the Kabataang Barangay Staff and participants from the provinces of Luzon, Visayas, or Mindanao Region from the nearest airport of their province to the airport nearest the campsite in Mambucal, Murcia, Negros Occidental; Camp Marina, Cebu City; Mt. Makiling, Los Baños, Laguna; or Malagos, Davao City for the duration of the program.

2. The Philippine National Railways shall provide locomotives and/or buses in transporting the staff and participants from their provincial stations in Luzon to the station nearest the campsite in Mt. Makiling, Los Baños, Laguna. In case buses are used, said group must be transported directly to the campsite.

3. The Philippine Constabulary shall provide vehicles to transport participants and Staff from their assembly area to the designated campsite or from the place of disembarkation from Philippine Navy vessels, Philippine Air Force aircrafts or Philippine National Railways locomotives and/or buses to the designated campsites.

4. The Philippine Navy, in addition to the two camps stated in Section 1 of LOI 335, shall ferry participants from the nearest port of call of their province to the port of call nearest the last two camps stated above.

5. The Commanding Generals of the Philippine Air Force and Philippine Constabulary and the General Manager of the Philippine National Railways shall coordinate with the Secretary of the Department of Local Government and Community Development on the total listing of participants, the schedule of the training seminars, including the time of departure and arrival.

6. The Secretary of the Department of Local Government and Community Development shall provide in advance all the necessary requirements for proper action of the Commanding Generals of the Philippine Air Force and Philippine Constabulary, the Flag Officer in Command of the Philippine Navy and the General Manager of the Philippine National Railways.

Strict compliance with this Letter of Instructions is desired.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia