MEMORANDUM ORDER. 6

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY AND NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY FOR 2010-2016

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to formulate a national security policy and national security strategy for 2010-2016 to guide national security efforts on both public and private sectors towards the attainment of the nation’s national security goals and objectives;

WHEREAS, there is a need to translate the vision of the Aquino Administration towards a more secure and progressive Filipino Nation;

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure that the country’s national security policy and national security strategy for the period 2010-206 is responsive and complementary to the country’s developmental goals and objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The National Security Advider/National Security Council Director-General (NSA/NSC-DG) shall spearhead the formulation of the National Security Policy (NSP) and National Security Strategy (NSS) for 2010-2016, in coordination with all concerned departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of the government  including government-owned and controlled corporations and regional offices.

SECTION 2. The National Security Policy must focus on four (4) key elements:

(1)Governance

(2)Delivery of Basic Services

(3)Economic Reconstruction and Sustainable Development

(4)Security Sector Reform

SECTION 3. The National Security Policy shall be submitted to the National Security Cabinet group for coordination and integration at the national and regional levels and subsequently to the cabinet on or before November 30, 2010, and the National Security Strategy on or before April 30, 2011.

SECTION 4. All departments, agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations shall consider the said documents for their respective plans and programs with national security dimension. They shall likewise draw inputs from their regional offices considering development, strategies and local security needs.

SECTION 5. In order to make these security agenda complimentary to their development objectives, all agencies, government corporations, and their regional development bodies shall henceforth prepare and formulate their respective security-related programs closely linked to their development plans.

SECTION 6. All sectors of society, both government and non-government, are enjoined to participate in these national endeavon in order to arrive a national consensus on our development objectives and national security priorities.

SECTION 7. The NSA/NSC-DG shall issue guidelines necessary to ensure effective complieance with this directive.

SECTION 8. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of October in the year of the Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary