MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 79

PROVIDING FOR THE INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM FOR THE MONITORING OF REHABILITATION AND RECOVERY PROGRAMS, PROJECTS, AND ACTIVITIES FOR YOLANDA-AFFECTED AREAS

WHEREAS, in the aftermath of Typhoon Yolanda, the strongest storm to make landfall in recorded history, the President issued Memorandum Order (MO) No. 62 (s. 2013) providing for the functions of the Presidential Assistant for Rehabilitation and Recovery (PARR) to unify the efforts of government and other agencies involved in the rehabilitation and recovery efforts;

WHEREAS, more than a year after Typhoon Yolanda and as conditions begin to normalize, the functions of PARR can now be subsumed under the regular functions of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) and other relevant agencies under Republic Act (RA) No. 10121, or the “Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council of 2010”; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize and enhance the coordination and monitoring of the implementation of future disaster-related programs, projects, and activities to ensure their more efficient evaluation and reporting to the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Institutional Mechanism. The NEDA Director-General, as the NDRRMC Vice-Chairperson for Rehabilitation and Recovery, shall assume the coordination, monitoring, and evaluation of all disaster-related programs, projects, and activities (PPAs) previously under the PARR and ensure the full implementation of this Order. All relevant implementing agencies shall continue the task of implementing all PPAs.

In this regard, all concerned government agencies shall extend their cooperation and support to effectively transfer the functions of PARR and wind-down its affairs, which shall include, among others, the proper inventory and transfer of its assets, equipment, and relevant documents, and the termination or return to the mother units of the PARR officers and personnel.

SECTION 2. Implementation. The NEDA shall make use of existing institutional arrangements pursuant to Executive Order (EO) No. 376 (s. 1989) entitled “Establishing the Regional Project Monitoring and Evaluation System,” as amended, in the monitoring of the PPAs for Yolanda-affected areas. However, NEDA may create a Project Monitoring Office to augment its existing staff complement.

Furthermore, the following Clusters shall be convened at the national and regional levels by the respective Chairpersons to assess the over-all status of rehabilitation and recovery efforts, and address policy issues on rehabilitation and recovery for Yolanda-affected areas.

Infrastructure Cluster Chairperson: Department of Public Works and Highways

Resettlement Cluster Chairperson: Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council

Social Services Cluster Chairperson: Department of Social Welfare and Development

Livelihood Cluster Chairperson: Department of Trade and Industry

Support Cluster Co-Chairpersons: Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and NEDA

The NEDA shall be represented in all the Clusters for purposes of validating, integrating, and preparing periodic progress reports on Yolanda PPAs. It may call upon any department, bureau, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and local government units, and request the assistance of non-government organizations, the private sector and other entities in carrying out its monitoring and coordination activities.

SECTION 3. Funding. Subject to pertinent budgetary, accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations, funds needed for the monitoring and coordination of rehabilitation and recovery PPAs for Yolanda-affected areas, including the hiring of contractual personnel and maintenance and operations expenses, shall be sourced from NEDA funds and such other sources as may be made available by the DBM and other partner institutions. Subsequent funding requirement shall be provided by the DBM through the appropriations for NEDA under the General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 4. Reports. The NEDA, through the NDRRMC, shall submit to the Office of the President periodic reports on the implementation of this Order.

SECTION 5. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules, and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Separability. Should any provision of this Order be declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 22nd day of April, in the Year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Fifteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary