Office of the Bresident
of the Philippines
SMalacatiang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. _ 75

RECONSTITUTION OF THE DISPOSAL COMMITTEE
IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

Memorandum Order No. 3, dated 17 July 2010, reconstituting the Disposal
Committee in the Office of the President, as amended by Memorandum Order
No. 33 on 22 February 2012, and Memorandum Order No. 68 on 10 March 2014,
is hereby further amended, so as to designate Atty. EULOGIO AMADO M.
SABBAN, Director IV, Legislative Office, as Chairman, vice Atty. Bobby Vv.
Dumlao.

This Order shall take effect immediately,

By authority of the President:

  
 

  

PAQUITO N. @CHOA, IR. *

Manila, 04 November 2014

 

SECTION 1. The articles specifically listed in the Annex hereof [Articles
Granted Concessions under the ASEAN-India Free Trade Area (AIFTA)], and
accompanied by the proper Certificate of Origin (CO) Form Al shall be subject to the
rates of import duty as indicated in Columns 4-19 of said Annex.

_ SECTION 2. For the Republic of India and the ASEAN 9 (i.e., Brunei
Darussalam, Kingdom of Cambodia, the Republic of Indonesia, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Union of Myanmar, the Republic of Singapore, the
Kingdom of Thailand and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam) the applicable rate shall
be ihe AIFTA preferential tariff, subject to the submission of the proper CO Form Al.
Pursuant to Section 1313(a) of the Tariff‘and Customs Code of the Philippines, as
amended, ihe Tariff Commission may, upon request, issue tariff classification rulings
to confirm the applicable rates of duty of particular products covered by this
Executive Order.

SECTION 3. From the date of effectivity of this Executive Order, all articles
listed in the Annex which are entered or withdrawn from warehouses in the
Philippines for domestic consumption shall be imposed with the rates of duty therein
prescribed, subject to compliance with the Rules of Origin as provided for in Article 7
of the Agreement on Trade in Goods.

SECTION 4. Noihing in this Executive Order shall preclude the Philippines
from invoking its right of recourse to all trade remedy measures provided for in its
laws, this Agreement and relevant international agreements as an effective device
against possibly injurious import surges. ~

SECTION 5. The provisions of this Executive Order are hereby declared
separable and in the event any of such provisions is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions, which are not affected thereby, shall remain in
force and effect.

SECTION 6. All other Presidential issuances, administrative rules and
regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are
hereby revoked or modified accordingly

SECTION 7. This Executive Order shall take effect after fifteen (15) days
following its complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this OP gay of February in the year of Our

Lord Two Thousand and Eleven
Vy ie

fy of the President

   

PAQUITO N. OCHOA JR.
ecutive Secreta

   

Clice atthe ‘Brostoert at he hlimpines
LL