MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 66

CREATING THE METRO MANILA SKYWAY STAGE 3 PROJECT COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, under the Philippine Development Plan 2011-2016, the Philippine government aims to accelerate the provision of safe, efficient, reliable, cost-effective, and sustainable infrastructure;

WHEREAS, one of the major thematic areas in transport set as the primary focus of both public and private investment is the decongestion of Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, the Skyway Stage 3 Project (the Project) is projected to decongest Epifanio de los Santos Avenue and the major roads in Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a Coordinating Committee to ensure the fastest possible completion of the construction of the Project, and coordinate the various government agencies, local government units and private entities concerned;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution and Section 1, Chapter 1, Title I, Book III, Executive Order [EO] No. 292, s. 1987 or the Administrative Code of 1987, state that the President shall have control of all the executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and ensure that the laws be faithfully executed; and

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987 , vests in the President the continuing authority to reorganize the Executive Department.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation and Composition. The Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3 Project Coordinating Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) is hereby created to be composed of representatives from the following:

The Chairperson may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), local government units (LGUs), non-government organizations (NGOs) and the private sector for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require.

The duly authorized representatives of the member-agencies of the Committee shall have a rank not lower than Assistant Secretary.

SECTION 2. Functions. The Committee shall have the following functions:

a) Act as the coordinating body between the various government agencies, local government units and private sector to facilitate the completion of the construction of the Project;

b) Identify bottlenecks and measures to address them;

c) Identify specific ways, and perform every act necessary and expedient to facilitate the completion of the construction of the Project within the accelerated schedule;

d) Establish a Secretariat to service its technical and administrative requirements which shall be composed of personnel detailed to the Committee from member agencies with the Committee Chairperson determining the number desired and duration of their assignment; and

e) Perform such other functions and activities as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order, or as the President may direct.

SECTION 3. Term of the Committee. The Committee shall cease to exist upon the completion of the construction of the Project.

SECTION 4. Funding. The member-agencies of the Committee are authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order. Additional funds and possible fund sources as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order shall be identified and provided for by the Department of Budget and Management subject to the approval of the President.

SECTION 5. Submission of Quarterly Reports. The Committee shall submit a report to the Office of the President (OP) on the status of the implementation of the Project within thirty (30) days from the date of effectivity of this Order, and every quarter thereafter.

SECTION 6. Separability Clause. Should any provision of this Order be declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause. All orders, proclamations, rules, regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 6th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Twenty Fourteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary