MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 22

DIRECTING THE PHILIPPINE COUNCIL FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (PCSD) TO UNDERTAKE THE NECESSARY PREPARATIONS FOR AN EFFECTIVE COUNTRY PARTICIPATION IN THE TWENTY-YEAR REVIEW OF THE 1992 UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (UNCED) COMMITMENTS AND THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 2012

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government formally adopted the principles of sustainable development as embodied in the Rio Declaration by the UNCED in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992;

WHEREAS, the PCSD was created by virtue of Executive Order (EO) No. 15 (s.1992) to initiate the formulation of Philippine Agenda 21 (PA 21), as well as to review and ensure the implementation of the country’s commitments towards sustainable development;

WHEREAS, pursuant to General Assembly Resolution 64/236, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development 2012 or Rio+20 will take place in Brazil;

WHEREAS, the Rio+20 Conference aims to secure renewed political commitment for sustainable development, assess the progress to date of Agenda 21, identify the remaining gaps in the implementation of the agreements of the major summits on sustainable development, and address new and emerging challenges;

WHEREAS, the focus of the Rio+20 Conference will be on the following themes: (a) green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication; and (b) institutional framework for sustainable development;

WHEREAS, the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), in its report “Our Common Future” published in 1987, defines sustainable development as “meeting the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of the future generations to meet their own needs;”

WHEREAS, the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs as the Secretariat for the Rio+20 Conference has scheduled the following preparatory meetings: a) High Level Dialogue on the Institutional Framework for Sustainable Development, 19-21 July 2011; b) Regional Preparatory Meeting for Asia Pacific Region, 19-20 October 2011; c) Second Intersessional Meeting of United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD), 15-16 December 2011; d) Third Intersessional Meeting of UNCSD, 26-27 March 2012; and e) Third Preparatory Meeting of UNCSD, 28-30 May 2012;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order (MO) No. 47 (s. 1999) directed local government units (LGUs) to formulate and implement sustainable integrated area development plans and Local Agenda 21; and,

WHEREAS, MO 110 (s. 2002) was issued directing PCSD to undertake the necessary preparations for an effective participation of the Philippines in the ten-year review of the 1992 UNCED commitments, enabling the Philippines to actively participate in the Johannesburg Summit.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Preparations for and Participation in the Rio+20 Conference.

The PCSD is hereby directed to undertake the necessary preparations for the upcoming 20-year review of the Rio Declaration adopted by the UNCED and effectively participate in the Rio+20 Conference. It shall:

a) Review the progress of the implementation of the Action Agenda of PA 21 and the Enhanced PA 21, including all multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) which originated from the UNCED;

b) Adopt a multi-stakeholder consultation process in all aspects of the review, where government, business, labor and civil society shall participate.

National government shall lead the review at the national and regional levels. Each sector is encouraged to conduct their respective sectoral reviews in preparation for the national and regional multi-stakeholder reviews. LGUs, in coordination with the business, labor and civil society are encouraged to lead the conduct of review at the community level, to the extent possible;

c) Coordinate the drafting of the Philippine Rio+20 Report, documenting the results of the review process and formulate a country position on the themes of the Rio+20 Conference;

d) Participate, to the extent possible, in preparatory meetings and events leading up to and including the Rio+20 Conference; and,

e) Call on any and all government agencies, resource persons and other groups, as necessary, in the preparations for and participation in the Rio+20 Conference and perform such other acts which are necessary to carry out its mandated functions and responsibilities.

SECTION 2. Collaborating Agencies. All relevant government agencies, departments and instrumentalities are directed to participate in the review of the PA 21 Action Agenda and the formulation of a country position on the themes of the Rio+20 Conference. The Secretary of Socio-Economic Planning and Director-General of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), as Chairperson of the PCSD, and its Coordinating Secretariat, shall coordinate the over-all review process to ensure synergy and internal consistency. Furthermore, it shall call on the following agencies to lead in specific aspects of the review process:

a) The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), as Chair of the PCSD-Committee on the Conservation and Management of Resources for Development, shall take the lead in the review and revision of the action agenda related to environment and natural resources and the MEAs on Convention on Biological Diversity, Convention to Combat Desertification and Convention on Climate Change;

b) The Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), as Chair of the PCSD-Committee on Strengthening the Role of Major Groups, to lead the review on the integration of sustainable development in local governance; and,

c) The Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) shall coordinate with the PCSD on all matters connected with the Rio+20 Conference processes. It shall facilitate the participation of the Philippines in regional and global consultative workshops and the Rio+20 Conference. It shall also endeavour, where possible, to include civil society, labor and business representatives endorsed by the PCSD in official delegations to the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development in connection with the Rio+20 Conference.

SECTION 3. Role of Civil Society, Business and Labor Sectors. The PCSD shall coordinate with civil society, business and the labor sectors in the review process. The Civil Society Counterpart Council for Sustainable Development (CSCCSD) is hereby enjoined to take the lead in coordinating the participation of civil society sectors, ensuring that other civil society networks are brought in during the consultation process, as well as during the preparatory meetings and the Rio+20 Conference. Efforts shall also be exerted to encourage the Management Association of the Philippines (MAP) and the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines (TUCP) to take the lead in coordinating the participation of the business sectors and labor organizations, respectively.

SECTION 4. Funding. Subject to prescribed budgetary guidelines, all government agency-members of the PCSD are directed to allocate funds to cover the operational requirements in compliance with this Order. Funds from international organizations and development partners shall also be tapped to support the preparatory activities and the actual participation of the country in the Rio+20 Conference. LGUs, civil society, business and labor sectors shall use their own funds for activities related to their respective participation.

SECTION 5. Separability Clause. If any of the provisions of this Order shall be declared unconstitutional, the other provisions of this Order shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 5 th day of August in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary