MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 34 .

DIRECTING ALL HEADS OF UNITS/OFFICES IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PROPER TO SUBMIT A MANUAL OF OPERATIONS

In the interest of service, all Heads of Units/Offices in the Office of the President (OP) Proper are directed to submit their respective Manual of Operations or its functional equivalent containing the following information:

1. Internal structure and functional configuration. This part should describe the organizational attributes and functional arrangements of the UnityOffice based on current issuances relating thereto (Samples in Annexes A-C) This may include, at the minimum, the following:

a) Mandate;

b) Legal Basis/es;

c) Mission Statements;

d) Function Statements;

e) Approved Organizational Structure; and

f) Expected Outputs.

2. Internal operations system {work flow and key processes). Contains the narrative description and explanation of significant actions involved in a process (Sample in Annex D). The narrative should provide for the sequence of steps involved, especially the control points, the names and positions of the people performing the actions and taking decisions, and the timing of such actions.

The flow charts ( Sample in Annex E) of each process should contain:

a) description of inputs and their sources:

b) description ot each sequenced step in the process of producing the output (evaluation, review, approval, delivery);

c) description of the outputs and their destination or recipients;

d) description of document recording and storage/filing procedures;

e) frequency and timing of the process;

f) expected start-to-finish time duration;

g) determination of staff/officer and office/division involved in each step in the process; and

h) estimation of the monthly or regular workload by division based on the estimated frequency with which the wo r k process operates.

3. Staffing patterns and personnel deployment plan. This includes information on the following (Samples in Annexes F-H).

a) Approved Staffing Pattern based on the Notice of Organization, Staffing and Compensation Action (NOSCA);

b) Description of duties and responsibilities of each position as reflected in the Position Description Form; and

c) Qualification Standards required for each position.

The Manual of Operations or its functional equivalent shall be submitted in two (2) copies to the Office of the Executive Secretary through the Malacañang Records Office (MRO) within sixty (60) working days from the effectivity of this Order.

OP Proper Offices engaged in delivering Frontline services such as the Presidential Action Center and Malacañang Recorcs Office (MRO) shall, in lieu of the Manual as herein required, submit a Citizen’s Charier and Report of Compliance on the provisions of RA 9485 or the “Anti-Red Tape Act’ and its Implementing Rules and Regulations.

Done in the City of Manila. This 28th day of February in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary