Office of the President of the Philippines Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 55

EXTENDING THE PERIOD OF APPLICATION OF MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 47 , SERIES OF 2012

WHEREAS, this Government, in line with its objective of providing good governance, aims to provide a just and expeditious administration of justice;

WHEREAS, under Section 17, Administrative Order No. 22 , series of 2011, where exigencies arise, the Executive Secretary may temporarily designate the Deputy Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs (DESLA) or any Deputy Executive Secretary to decide and sign decisions, resolution or orders in appealed cases; and

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order (M.O.) No. 47, series of 2012, temporarily designated Deputy Executive Michael G. Aguinaldo, to decide and sign decisions, resolution or orders in appealed cases limited to the following instances: (1) Those where the decision, resolution or order AFFIRMS the decision, resolution or order of the HLURB; and (2) Those where the resolution or order DENIES or DISMISSES a motion seeking reconsideration of a previous decision, resolution or order of the Office of the President, which affirmed the decision, resolution or order of the HLURB.

WHEREAS, there is a need to extend the period of application of M.O. No. 47, series of 2012 in order to reduce the backlog of the OP;

NOW, THEREFORE, in light of the continuing need to provide just and expeditious justice and to efficiently reduce the backlog of the OP, the period of application of M.O. No. 47 is extended for a period of six (6) months from 1 July 2013 to 31 December 2013, unless sooner terminated.

In cases involving a conflict of interest as certified in writing by the DESLA, Deputy Executive Secretary for General Administration (DESGA) Teofilo S. Pilandro, Jr. is temporarily designated to decide such cases and sign decisions, resolutions and orders.

The foregoing temporary designation shall not preclude the Executive Secretary from exercising his powers and functions pursuant to the provisions of Section 25, 26 and 27, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987 .

City of Manila, 5th day of July, 2013

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary