MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 62

PROVIDING FOR THE FUNCTIONS OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ASSISTANT FOR REHABILITATION AND RECOVERY

WHEREAS, Typhoon Yolanda (international codename: Haiyan) caused widespread destruction, substantial damage and death in several areas, including Samar, Leyte, Negros, Cebu, Bohol, Capiz, Aklan, Antique, Iloilo and Palawan (“the affected areas”);

WHEREAS, the President has appointed a Presidential Assistant for Rehabilitation and Recovery (“the Presidential Assistant”) to unify the efforts of government and other agencies involved in the rehabilitation and recovery efforts; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide for and specify the functions of the Presidential Assistant.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Presidential Assistant shall have the following functions:

a) Act as over-all manager and coordinator of rehabilitation, recovery, and reconstruction efforts of government departments, agencies, and instrumentalities in the affected areas, to the extent allowed by law;

b) Coordinate with the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) and its member agencies and consult with the concerned local government units (LGUs) in the formulation of plans and programs for the rehabilitation, recovery and development of the affected areas (“the plans and programs”), including an over-all strategic vision and integrated short-term, medium-term and long-term programs, which shall be submitted to the President for approval;

c) Propose funding support for the implementation of the plans and programs;

d) Exercise oversight over the relevant government agencies with respect to the implementation of the plans and programs;

e) Call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), government financial institutions (GFIs), LGUs, and request non-government organizations (NGOs), the private sector, and other entities for assistance as the circumstances and exigencies may require in carrying out his mandate;

f) Engage the assistance of consultants, experts, and professional advisors whenever necessary, subject to applicable government rules and regulations;

g) Submit to the President status reports on the implementation of the plans and programs as often as the President may require; and

h) Perform such other functions and activities as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Memorandum Order, or as the President may direct.

SECTION 2. All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities of the government, including GOCCs and GFIs, are hereby directed to render full assistance and cooperation to the Presidential Assistant as may be required to carry out his functions pursuant to this Order. LGUs, NGOs, and the private sector are also encouraged to give assistance to the Presidential Assistant as the circumstances may require.

SECTION 3. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 6th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Thirteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary