Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On higher wages for Filipino Laborers

My Beloved Countrymen:

I wish to thank you from the bottom of my heart for joining with me in my birthday celebration. I appreciate it all the more because you are helping a worthy cause—our fight against tuberculosis. Those afflicted with the dread disease who will profit from your charity tonight will bless you for giving them a helping hand. To you all, my cordial greetings and the expression of my sincere gratitude.

More important, however, than curing tuberculosis is preventing it. I am told that there was an old Chinese custom wherein a Chinese family paid a handsome salary to its physician while there was no sickness in the family, but reduced the pay as soon as somebody was taken ill. Whether or not the Chinese at the time knew they were indulging in the science of preventive medicine, the fact is that they seemed to have had the proper slant on the prevention of disease.

I mention this because it is my conviction that while there should not be any let-up in our present campaign against tuberculosis and we should give the Philippine Islands Anti-Tuberculosis Society our unstinted support, the time has come for us to take preventive measures; for to eradicate tuberculosis from the Philippines we must eliminate the causes that have made the white plague the one disease that claims more victims every year than any other disease known to us in the Philippines.

The most common cause of tuberculosis is malnutrition. Our poor people are underfed and, lacking the physical strength, they are an easy prey to tuberculosis. They are underfed because they are underpaid. And tonight I propose to make as the keynote of my birthday celebration an appeal to the whole nation that better wages be paid the laborer, be he on the farm or in the factory.

It is true that our laborers here get a higher wage scale than that given to the workingmen of some of our neighboring countries. But the standard of living here among our masses is higher than that of those nations. More important, however, than this is the fact that, it cannot be an excuse for us to neglect to do that which is our duty to do just because in company with other countries we may be a trifle better off. This is no reason why we should not pay higher wages if that which we give our laborer now, while higher than that given by neighboring countries, is not sufficient to give him what he needs for his support and that of his family.

It is trite to say that the first and most fundamental right of man is his right to live. This right imposes upon well-organized society the duty to provide him with the means for his existence. That other countries around us fail in this primary duty is no good excuse for us to evade it.

I have heard it said that if we pay higher wages to our workmen, we are doomed in our competition with the countries in this section of the globe. This is fallacious, because to pay good wages to our laborers is to give them proper nourishment, and proper nutrition means health. A healthy laborer can do more and better work than one who is sickly and underfed. Of course, in proportion as we pay higher wages to our workingmen, they in turn are in duty bound to improve the quality and quantity of their work.

On my 58th birthday, my main concern is the question of higher wage for the Filipino laborer. Today I signed an executive order fixing a minimum wage for all Government laborers, an increase of 20 per cent over that which we have been paying in the past. You will agree with me that by all signs and portents, the country is out of the depression. There is an upward swing in our trade and business. The prices of our principal products are better now than they have been the last few years. Our mines are increasing the wealth of the nation. There are people who are getting rich. We must let the workingman share in this prosperity.

I am exerting all efforts to provide our Government with the necessary force to maintain law and order. But the best foundation of peace is not that which is built on fear; it is that which is the result of justice and contentment. No subversive doctrine can thrive here if our working class is treated justly and every laborer is given that which is his due. It is the best guarantee for the preservation of our Government and our nation.

It is our boast that we are the only Christian nation in the Far East. Our boast would be an empty one if we do not show in actual practice that we are Christians. Christianity’s highest teaching is to love our fellow man. Let us love by helping him and his family live happy and contented.

If I were allowed to make a plea as I celebrate my birthday today I would unhesitatingly ask everyone who is listening to me to join in one concerted effort to improve the living conditions of our masses. It is my one concern because I would like to see it done spontaneously by those in a position to do so without our having to impose it by legislation. Social justice is far more beneficent if it comes as a matter of sentiment and not of law.

May the Almighty bless our country and continue showering on us His choicest blessings!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library