ADDRESS

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE

[Delivered before the assembled R. O. T. C. Units, Campus of the University of the Philippines, Manila, January 18, 1937]

Gentlemen of the Reserve Officers Training Corps:

You have made me very happy today. You have given me one of the greatest thrills of my life. On the eve of my departure for abroad on an errand which will be of far-reaching consequences to our people, you stand before me 6,000 strong, the very pick of our colleges and universities wearing the distinguished uniform of the soldier and receiving your military training in accordance with the directions of the first legislative enactment of the Government of the Commonwealth.

I am not here to convince you that the first and most important duty of our Government, and of every one of its citizens, is the defense of the State against foreign aggression, internal rebellion, or domestic lawlessness. That is clearly stated in the declaration of principles, Article II, section 2, of our Constitution. That is a principle which every Filipino today, with very few and dishonorable exceptions, has well ingrained in his mind and in his heart, and in none more than in you, as evidenced by the fact that you are receiving with enthusiasm your military training, in preparation for the performance of your duty to defend your country if and when the necessity shall arise.

Rather am I here to voice my indignation at the attempts that have been made to misrepresent what this Government is doing and its objectives in the preparation of its national defense. Not that I have the slightest fear that such misrepresentations will have any effect upon the public mind in our country, or that they may deter our Government from carrying out its most important task, for the world may rest assured that the Filipino people are determined to become an independent nation and to rely upon their own resources and man power to maintain their territorial integrity and national rights.

No organization in the United States whatever high-sounding name it may bear, no man or group in the Philippines under any guise whatever, can stop us from going ahead with our plans to insure the safety of our country and to uphold its dignity and self-respect.

But it is well that our purpose be properly understood. We are a new nation soon to take our place in the international brotherhood of independent states. It is our privilege—indeed, it is our duty—to reveal and make known to the world our ideals and aspirations as a people.

We are peace-loving. Our Constitution is the first modern Constitution which condemns war as an instrument of national policy and adopts the generally accepted principles of international law as a part of the fundamental law of the land. We have no desire, therefore, now or ever in the future, to use the armed forces of our country for the purposes of aggression, but only in the defense of the national territory and for the maintenance of peace and order within our borders.

In good or bad faith, through ignorance or malice, allegations are being made that we are “militarizing the Philippines,” that we are “sabotaging Filipino schools,” that our national defense program “amounts to a covert conspiracy to keep the United States in the Islands” or is “intended to strengthen the military power of America in the Western Pacific in the event of war with Japan.” On the other hand, it is also alleged that neither the Philippines nor the United States, nor both countries combined, can ever successfully defend this country, and we are told that we should rely upon the neutralization of the Philippines, guaranteed by international agreement, for the defense of our independence.

“MILITARIZING THE PHILIPPINES” ( ?)

The present strength of the Philippine Army, including the Constabulary, is 7,048 enlisted men and 439 regular officers. Of these, 4,551 are Constabulary soldiers and only 2,497 are doing other regular army service. The present military strength of the United States Army in the Philippines consists, of 10,251 enlisted men and 529 officers, including Filipinos in the service of the United States. Our plan, when realized, will give the regular Philippine Army force, including the Constabulary, a maximum strength of only 10,000 enlisted men.

You can readily see that our maximum regular army force will not exceed, even after the attainment of independence, the present strength of the United States Army in the Philippines. How can anyone, therefore, in good faith, say that the national defense plan, as provided in Commonwealth Act No. 1, is militarizing the Philippines?

In the past, when the charge was made that a nation was militaristic, the indictment was based upon the fact that there was in that nation a big regular military force constituting a privileged class which absorbed, or attempted to absorb, the supreme direction of the policies of the State.

Who can seriously contend, that in our rapidly growing nation, now already of at least fifteen million people, a mere ten thousand regular soldiers—some engaged in police duty and others in ordinary military tasks—can ever constitute a special privileged class that can rule the country?

Under the National Defense Act, and under every law of the land, the Army is subject to civil authority, and the supreme command of the armed forces of the nation is placed by constitutional mandate in a civilian elected by the people every six years and without right to reëlection— the President of the Philippines. The Philippine Army is fully conscious of its duty to obey the direction of civil authority. The Philippine Army knows that its paramount duty is to uphold the law and to maintain peace and order, under the direction and command of the Chief Executive of this Government.

Is it perchance,—and evidently it is,—the compulsory military training of our youth that is being branded as militarizing the Philippines? Our system of military training for our youth has been, in general, patterned after the system which for many years has been followed by a small country in Europe—Switzerland—the country which, despite its small territory and population, has maintained its national integrity and gained the respect of the most aggressive and militaristic nations of the world. No one has ever called Switzerland militaristic; in fact, she is the most democratic country in Europe and perhaps in the whole world today.

It is not a regular military force of tremendous size that we are building. It is a citizen army—an army that in time of peace will be devoted exclusively to the arts of peace and agriculture, to industry and trade, to letters and sciences, to every activity that makes for progress, for harmony and goodwill, for human advancement and well-being. The military training we are giving our youth is intended, not only to train them in the effective use of arms for the defense of the motherland, but also to indoctrinate them with those civic virtues which make for better soldiers in time of war and for better citizens in time of peace.

We need to make our people, especially our youth, conscious of their oneness, jealous of their democracy, and proud of their race and nationality,—so conscious and proud of all these, so devoted to their country, that they will die fighting for it.

“SABOTAGING THE SCHOOLS” (?)

Instead of sabotaging our schools, by preparing our youth to defend their country, we are actually giving them a fuller and more comprehensive training. We are training them in the art of peace and in the science of war.

Here again we are complying with the mandate contained in Article XIII, Section 5, of our Constitution.

Under the National Defense Act, as soon as a boy reaches the age of ten he begins to receive training in the duties of citizenship, in addition to his vocational instruction. It is scarcely one year since we began the military training of our youth, and already the wholesome effect of this training is being felt in every household where a member of the family is receiving military instruction. Rich parents have told me how their sons, who heretofore have never cared to do anything for themselves but have always expected their servants to attend to their clothing, now get out of bed early in the morning, shine their shoes and their brass buttons, and press their clothes, so that they may appear presentable at their scheduled military parades and exercises. The bearing and behavior of these young men are now more assertive and dignified. Indeed, the whole country, within the brief period of one year, has been electrified by the realization of our new obligation to rely upon ourselves entirely for the protection of the motherland.

We are charged with diverting school funds to military purposes. Yet almost coincident with the establishment of the Commonwealth, we have provided additional revenue from a new source, to be used exclusively for school purposes. Some two million pesos of cedula tax will be turned over to our schools this year, in addition to the usual annual appropriation of more than fourteen million pesos.

The wisdom of this tax lies in the fact that as the school population increases with the growth of our people, this revenue also increases.

“COVERT CONSPIRACY TO KEEP THE UNITED STATES IN THE PHILIPPINES”

The most ridiculous charge made against our National Defense plan is that it is a covert conspiracy to keep the United States in the Philippines. On what ground? Upon what sound logic, may it be inferred that training the Filipinos to defend themselves is a covert conspiracy to keep the United States in the Philippines? Is it not, on the contrary, the best evidence that we are getting ready to depend upon ourselves for our protection, and not upon the United States? In other words, is not our Defense Plan positive proof that we are preparing the nation to assume all the responsibilities of independent statehood? Was not the main argument propounded against Philippine independence the fact that the Filipinos had no army, had no means to defend themselves against foreign aggression? It would certainly be more logical to say that those who are against carrying out the National Defense plan are the ones conspiring to keep the United States in the Philippines. They are the covert enemies of Philippine independence, because they want to perpetuate our present helpless situation and thus depend upon American protection forever.

The selection of Field Marshal Douglas MacArthur as Military Adviser to the Government of the Commonwealth is being pointed out as proof that our National Defense plan aims to give the United States a big army in the Philippines with which to wage war against Japan.

Gentlemen of the Reserve Officers Training Corps: Upon my word of honor I want to say to you that the idea of making Field Marshal MacArthur a Military Adviser to the Government of the Commonwealth in the preparation of our National Defense came originally from me, and no one, either American or Filipino, has ever suggested the thought, much less Field Marshal MacArthur himself.

On a previous occasion I stated how the selection of General MacArthur as Military Adviser came about, but it well bears repetition at this time. When I saw that the Tydings-McDuffie Law was about to be passed by Congress, and the Philippine dream of independence thus converted into a reality, my immediate concern was how to maintain that independence once we had achieved it. So I went to the office of General MacArthur, then the Chief of Staff of the United States Army, and asked him pointedly this question: “General, do you think that the Philip pines, once independent, can defend itself? If you cannot give me an honest and direct answer, please ignore the question.” The General said: “I don’t think that the Filipinos can defend themselves, I know they can. By this I mean,” he proceeded to explain, “that you can organize such defense as will make the conquest of the Philippines so expensive and so costly in life and money that no nation in its senses will attempt to do it.”

Then I asked the General again: “Would you be willing, General, to undertake the study, preparation and execution of a plan of national defense for the Philippines? And do you think you can do it within the limited resources of the country, bearing in mind the other important and unavoidable obligations of a progressive modern government?”

The General then asked me, before answering my question: “Can you spend yearly nine million pesos more than you are now spending for the Constabulary?”

Upon giving him an affirmative answer to his question, the General then said: “I am willing to undertake this task of preparing your people to defend themselves alone against foreign invasion, and I shall be very glad to undertake it as a duty to my own Government and people. America is committing to grant the Filipino people their independence. To my mind, this duty involves not only the granting of that independence, but it also implies the duty of giving you every assistance so that you may make that in dependence secure in your hands, for you and for every succeeding generation.”

This is the conversation which, with the subsequent consent of the President of the United States and under authority given the President by Congress through an Act which was passed upon my own request, brought General MacArthur to the Philippines, and gave the Commonwealth as Military Adviser one of the greatest soldiers of our time.

THE NATIONAL DEFENSE PLAN “INTENDED TO STRENGTHEN THE MILITARY POWER OF AMERICA IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC”

The charge that our National Defense plan is “intended to strengthen the military power of America in the western Pacific in the event of war with Japan” is not only groundless, in every respect, but also mischievous.

It presupposes that the idea of adopting a National Defense plan originated from American sources, that is to say, that wittingly or unwittingly we have been induced by the Government of the United States to give military training to our male population in order that America may be in a better position to fight Japan in the event of a war between them.

The first question that comes to mind is this: Is the alleged strengthening of America for purposes of aggression or for defense? Even a lay mind can see that no amount of army training or military organization in the Philippines can make of this country an effective instrument for attack against Japan. The Japanese Navy lies between America and the Philippines, and before America can send to the Islands transports to carry the Philippine Army to invade Japan, the Japanese Navy must first be destroyed. Once destroyed, it would be cheaper, easier and quicker if America used its own army to invade Japan than if she had to send her transports to the Philippines to pick up our army and then carry it to Japan. And America, be it remembered, is not so lacking in man power as to have need of our soldiers. Even on its very face, the absurdity of using the Philippine citizen army to attack Japan is evident. If, on the other hand, the implication is that our National Defense program will make it less difficult for America to defend the Philippines in the event of a war with Japan, the answer is that, if the Philippines are to be attacked and invaded by any army, it is the duty of the Filipinos to defend their own country.

The fact that America is still the sovereign in the Philip pines does not relieve us of the duty of defending our own country, especially after the United States has proclaimed to the world that the Philippines will be independent on the 4th of July, 1946.

Every Filipino should bear in mind that, in the Independence Act, America has unqualifiedly decreed that her sovereignty over the Philippines will be withdrawn, and Philippine independence recognized on the 4th of July immediately following the expiration of the period of ten years from the date of the inauguration of the Commonwealth. Morally and legally, then, the United States cannot regain her sovereignty over the Philippines after the 4th of July, 1946, except with the consent of the Filipino people. And every Filipino should realize that, if, prior to our independence, there were war between the United States and any other country, and as a consequence thereof the Philippines were to fall in the hands of the enemy, the latter might repudiate the grant of independence made by America. Our National Defense program is not, therefore, intended to strengthen America but to strengthen the Philippines.

Now let us look from another angle at the charge that our National Defense program aims at the strengthening of America as against Japan. If America has in mind to use our man power for purposes of attack or defense against Japan, why is America “militarizing the Philippines” only after she had made up her mind to give us independence on a certain fixed date, and not at all during the last thirty-five years? And why does the completion of the adopted National Defense program coincide precisely with the establishment of the Philippine Republic nine years hence?

Furthermore, and since Japan is pointed out by our critics as America’s objective in this program, what is there in the air that may give serious apprehension as to the future relations of America and Japan? If our National Defense program had been prepared before or soon after the enactment of the anti-Japanese Immigration Law, or during the controversy regarding the interpretation of the Nine Power and Washington Treaties perhaps, then an extremely suspicious mind may say that America was preparing the Philippines against Japan; but now that American-Japanese relations are friendlier than they have been for many years, what is there to justify the suspicion that America has planned the Philippine National Defense to strengthen herself in case of war against Japan? Nothing, of course, except the fact that some imaginations are hopelessly wild and certain minds inherently dishonest.

“THE PHILIPPINES CANNOT BE DEFENDED”

On the one hand our critics cry against an alleged tremendous military program which is likely to endanger the peace of the Orient, and in the same breadth make the positive assertion that the Philippines cannot be defended against Japan either by the Filipinos alone, by the United States, or by the combined strength of both countries.

In the first place, let me say right here and now that we are not preparing the Philippines to defend themselves against Japan, or any other country in particular. The Japanese people are our friends. Their government has never done anything in the past that would indicate its desire to interfere with us in the future. Why should there be the constant suspicion that once we are independent Japan will attempt to conquer us?

The Japanese menace is the bugaboo with which opponents of Philippine independence tried to convince America to stay indefinitely in the Islands in violation of her solemn pledge, and with which they tried to frighten the Filipinos into renouncing their most sacred right to be a free and independent nation.

We are preparing ourselves against no one country in particular but against each and every country in general. That is our duty more than it is our right. That is the duty of every self-respecting and freedom-loving people.

Now, we are told that the Philippines are indefensible, and upon this theory our National Defense program is branded as a waste of money, time, and energy.

I am no professional soldier, and therefore in no position to assert, as my own earnest and strong conviction, that our National Defense program offers a complete guarantee of peace and security, both from internal disorder and external aggression. I do not know enough of the science and art of war to be able to come to any conclusion of my own on this question. All I can say, in this regard, is that I have sought the opinion of the most competent man—Field Marshal Mac-Arthur—to give me advice thereon. I believe in him and his opinion I accept fully. He told me, and he told our people, that when our National Defense program has reached full fruition, the cost of conquering the Philippines—in men and money—would be incomparably greater than the possible advantages and benefits to be derived from such a conquest. That’s enough for me to go on ahead with. Con quest, in our materialistic age, is only motivated by national self-interest. We are then amply protected if our defense is sufficiently strong to give no inducement to the greedy.

But I will go further and say: Admitting that the Philippines cannot protect herself even with all our defense program, and that sooner or later our country is destined to fall into the hands of a first-class military power, I would still go ahead and spend the money and time and energy we are now spending to give our youth military training. I would go ahead with our present program, because I would not renounce, voluntarily, our birthright to be free and in dependent. This right I deem the greatest, the most sacred right of every people, and would not abjectly surrender it. I would fight a desperate, a losing fight to defend it. We might be vanquished but we would keep our self-respect; we would at least show that our people deserve to be free because they love freedom and love it enough to accept the supreme sacrifice for it. The history of our country has taught us this lesson.

Our fathers—and some of us are still living—did exactly the same thing. We fought Spain and we fought America for our national freedom. We lost to America but we won her respect and admiration; we established in deeds writ in blood our right to independence. And America—a lover of freedom herself—has recognized our right to be free.

I am ready to follow the footsteps of our fathers. But I want to do better than they did. I was in the war against America That was no war; that was slaughter, pure and simple We had no weapons to speak of and did not know how to use the few that we had Our army had no discipline no organization. We had men willing to die, and thousands upon thousands died heroically; others, only through a miracle survived. We fought only to die, for we were not trained nor equipped to kill. If again we are ever to fight for our homes and our families and our beloved fatherland, we must fight not only with the willingness to die, but also with the ability to kill. No nation shall ever again have the Philippines except after it has paid a tremendous toll in life and treasure. No army shall ever again land on our shores unmolested, and in parade formation, meeting almost no resistance, take possession of our towns. That is a thing of the past. It will never be repeated as long as in Filipino veins runs blood and not water.

I will go further and say more. Supposing I knew positively that no country will ever attempt or care to attack the Philippines, supposing that in my sleep it was divinely revealed to me that the Filipinos are the chosen people of the twenty-first century who, unlike the chosen people of the Old Testament, shall be free from conquest and war— I would yet go ahead and give our youth military training in our schools from the age of ten, exactly as it is provided in the National Defense Act, because with this training we could have, even in time of peace, more efficient workers, more capable professionals, more law-abiding and patriotic citizens.

This is indeed what military training will do for us. Primarily it will give our country better and more capable citizens; and only if and when necessity arises—efficient and gallant soldiers. That is why we are not building a big professional army but a citizen army—an army of peace and for peace—for progress, for civilization, and for the improvement of our people.

NEUTRALIZATION

Some Filipinos who are in the habit of acting as our national mentors have come out lately to tell us what to do. “Give up,” they say, “the National Defense program and rely for our security only upon the neutralization of the Islands guaranteed by international agreement.”

These are men who believe that they are born to speak ex cathedra. They live above the clouds and occasionally come down to us, appearing in glory on the mount of Sinai. They are oblivious of what is going on in our world of mortals. They derive no lesson even from contemporary history.

The fact that nations, whose neutralities were guaranteed, have been attacked wantonly and laid to waste; that others, independent for centuries, have been conquered and subjugated by a stronger military power; that territories have passed from the hands of the weak to those of a stronger nation—these make no impression whatsoever on these men, but leave them exactly where they were—in their fool’s paradise. The fate of our nation, the liberty and well-being of our people, this blessed land of ours, they would entrust to the safekeeping of other people, never to their own.

Thank God. our people have never allowed such men to guide us in our struggle for national emancipation, nor accepted their judgment as sound and safe to be followed. Otherwise it is hard to say where the Philippines would be now; or what the political status of our country would be today.

It has been publicly stated that I have expressed myself unqualifiedly as being against neutralization, and in favor of American protectorate and naval stations. This is false. I am against American protectorate because I am for full and complete Philippine independence. Independence that is not complete is no independence except in name. And I care nothing for names—I am for the substance and the reality of things.

Nor have I declared myself unconditionally for American naval stations in the Islands. This is a matter which, under the Independence Act, is left for future negotiations between the Government of the United States and the Government of the Philippines. I am not, I cannot be, committed on this question one way or another at this time. I shall not express myself before the negotiations are started and without the advice of the National Assembly.

Neither am I altogether against the neutralization of the Philippines; but I place very little value to the guarantee of neutrality which may be given by the nations of the world. Let no one be so naive as to think that any nation will ever fight for the Philippines unless it is to that nation’s own interest so to do, though it may have guaranteed our independence. And if it be to the interest of some nation to prevent another from taking the Philippines, that nation will fight the power attacking us—if she can do it successfully—guarantee or no guarantee. Let me add further—that if and when a nation does fight for us, she will not do it just for love .

It is well for any man who has no sworn public duty to perform, who is not bound by his office to make sure that a future independent Philippines will not be insulted or attacked, to be visionary. The President of the Philippines has the solemn obligation to safeguard the rights and interests of his people and he must meet this obligation conscientiously and realistically, to the best of his ability.

My friends, I shall detain you no longer. I want to express my great satisfaction and pride in your excellent appearance this evening. No other group of men ever faced a greater opportunity to grow in the service of their country than you, men of the Reserve Officers Training Corps. I congratulate you. The country is proud of you. Our people can look to the future with confidence. The enthusiasm with which you are receiving your military training is proof positive of your set resolve to live for your country and to die in defense of it.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library