ADDRESS

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

DEMOCRACY AND POLITICAL PARTIES

[Radio broadcast on the occasion of the observance of his 61 st birthday anniversary, delivered at Malacañan Palace on August 19, 1939]

Acting High Commissioner Jones. General .MacArthur, Secretary Alunan, Secretary Aquino, Friends, and Fellow Citizens:

The celebration of the anniversary of my birthday, not only throughout the Philippines but even abroad wherever Filipinos are found, fills my heart with unbounded gratitude. I am specially thankful to all those who are taking part in this celebration, particularly to Acting High Commissioner Jones and General MacArthur for their generous and complimentary remarks. I also give my thanks to all those who have contributed to the fund for the Philippine Antituberculosis Society, which is being raised on the occasion of my birthday. However unworthy I may be of this celebration, the cause which it promotes—the fight against the white plague—is certainly worthy of the efforts put forth and the financial assistance given by those who are participating in the programs of the day.

I now desire to ask of you, my beloved countrymen, to give me further evidence of your confidence and affection. More than ever, I need your help to carry to a successful termination the policies and plans of my administration. Above all, I want you to maintain and preserve our unity in purpose and coöperation in counsel.

When I speak of unity, I do not mean that we must all think alike, or that all must accept as gospel truth the opinions and ideas of the leader of the nation, or that everyone must follow blindly his advice. Freedom of thought, freedom of speech, and freedom of action are the most precious possessions of a free man. They are divine gifts without which man would fall in the category of a brute. But these inalienable rights have been given to us not only for the promotion of our personal welfare or the pursuit of our own happiness, but also for the welfare and happiness of our fellow men.

What I am condemning and counseling against is not differences of opinion honestly held and properly expressed, but division founded on partisan spirit; the belief that we must have different political parties, issues or no issues; that we must maintain opposing political organizations, platform or no platform, just so there may be an opposition party.

The theory that there can be no true democracy without political parties and that the existence of such parties is essential in popular government, is groundless and finds no justification in sound principles of government. It is true that under a democratic system of government different and opposing political parties spring up sooner or later. This becomes an eventuality because there is no stronger passion in the human heart than the love of power, and political parties are the means to attain power in a democracy; and, also, because people do not always agree as to the best methods of solving the vital problems of state. But parties founded on the love of power alone are the worst evils of democracy; and differences of opinion, in order to justify the organization of political parties, must arise from fundamental disagreements on political institutions, or on social or economic philosophies. Inasmuch as at present there are no essential differences of opinion on these matters among our people there seems to be no reason for the existence of different political parties.

Since we regard America as our mentor in democracy, and since those of our countrymen who maintain that political parties are essential in a democracy merely repeat what they have heard from some Americans, it is pertinent to hear what George Washington said’ on this subject in his farewell address:

“I have already intimated to you the danger of parties in the State, with particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations. Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you in the most solemn manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party generally.

“This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under different shapes in all governments, more or less stilled, controlled, or repressed, but in those of the popular form it is semi in its greatest rankness and is truly their worst enemy.

“The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit of revenge natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism. But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. The disorders and miseries which result gradually incline the minds of men to seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual, and sooner or later the chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than his competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation on the ruins of public liberty.

“Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought not to be entirely out of sight), the common and continual mischiefs of the spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise people to discourage and restrain it.

“It serves always to distract the public councils and enfeebles the public administration. It agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another; foments occasionally riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption, which find a facilitated access to the Government itself through the channels of party passion. Thus the policy and the will of one country are subjected to the policy and will of another.

“There is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the administration of the Government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of liberty. This within certain limits is probably true; and in governments of a monarchical cast patriotism may look with indulgence, if’ not with favor, upon the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural tendency it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every salutary purpose; and there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought to be by force of public opinion to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be quenched, it demands a uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame, lest, instead of warming, it should consume.”

Thus spoke George Washington to his people at a time when the conditions prevailing in America were similar to those existing in the Philippines today; so I am merely giving you the same counsel that the Father of the American Republic gave to his people under like circumstances.

Friends and fellow citizens: Once more I thank you for these new evidences of your goodwill and support. I pray God that He may bless us all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library