Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the occasion of Vice-President Osmeña’s birthday

Mr. Vice-President, ladies and gentlemen:

We are honoring tonight my friend and colleague, the Vice-President, on the occasion of the “THIRTIETH” anniversary of his birthday. I am very happy to be able to thus honor him.

The Vice-President is a born statesman. He was 28 years old when, he was elected to the First National Assembly and even at that time he proved himself to be the greatest statesman of his day. He had the ability to interpret to the American people the ideals and sentiments of the Filipino people, and to the Filipino people the purposes and objectives of the United States in the Philippines.

Sergio Osmeña came to power as the leader of the Nacionalista Party, as the spokesman of the Filipino people in their struggle for independence; and yet in his wisdom, he so ably presented to the United States those natural ambitions of his people, that America from the beginning understood and appreciated, that in the thirst for freedom and liberty of the people of these Islands, there was not involved any antagonism or ill-feeling towards the United States. On the other hand, he had the ability to tell the Filipino people that America had come to the Philippines not to exploit or enslave them, but in good faith, to help them attain the independence for which they had fought. Thus he became the man who made it possible for America and the Philippines to work and to accomplish that noble enterprise which is today the admiration of the world and the source of gratitude for the United States on the part of the Philippines. When history is written, the main credit for this great accomplishment will be given to Sergio Osmeña.

It so happened that the Vice-President and I have been friends ever since we were in college. We entered politics in the same year. We were elected provincial governors on the same day; we took our oath of office on the same day; we were elected to the National Assembly on the same day, and we took our oath of office on the same day. He was elected Speaker, the leader of that Assembly, and it was my privilege to cooperate with him. I was his leader on the floor, but I must say in frankness that while I cooperated then with Speaker Osmeña, it was he and he alone who conceived the policies of the party and determined how to carry them out. I am afraid that the majority of the young people now living have forgotten or have never known how much the Vice-President has done for them, how much of the freedom and advancement they enjoy today are due to the vision and the unselfish service rendered by this man to our common country. Sergio Osmeña, Speaker of the House in 1907, was practically the only man in that body who knew anything about legislative work, and the wonder of it all was that he had never been outside of his country, that he had never seen a legislative body at work, that perhaps he had read very little about democracy and the workings of democracy; and yet, none of our Assemblies, from the first to the last, has ever excelled the First Assembly, either in the ability of its members, in the character of the work accomplished, or in the patriotic spirit with which it served. It was all Sergio Osmeña. We were nothing but his collaborators.

It has been the irony of fate that it fell to my lot to have to fight his leadership after a long continuous, delightful association, but there has never been on my part, nor I think on his part, any ill-feeling in any political struggle in which we were engaged. Each one of us did what we thought was right and our duty. When I look back to the day when for the first time the Vice-President and I, loving each other as much as we did, found ourselves in opposite camps, the only explanation that I can find is the fact that we were temperamentally opposite. He was by nature an evolutionist and I have been all my life a revolutionist. He always built upon the past and I always ignored the past. He never took but one step at a time, and I always wanted to jump. That and that alone was the cause of our misunderstandings. I moved and was inspired by a rebellious spirit, always in a hurry, never satisfied, wanted to go on without looking back; and he, always measuring the distance, always looked ahead but without forgetting what was behind. It was for this reason only that we clashed, and so you find that at the end of every struggle, since there never were fundamentally serious differences in our aims and purposes, it has always been possible for us to join hands.

Since I have been elected President of the Philippines, I have had the good fortune of having been surrounded by men who have been loyal to me, who have worked unselfishly for the success of my administration; but nowhere have I found a more loyal and more disinterested collaborator than in my old friend, Vice-President Sergio Osmeña.

Mr. Vice-President, I hope the Filipino people will never forget how much they owe you. As for me, nothing that I can do now or in the future will ever repay you for the loyal cooperation you have rendered to me.

Ladies and gentlemen, I want you to drink to the health and success of one of the greatest men that our country has produced, the Vice-President.

Reprinted from The Philippine Social Science Review , November, 1938, v. 10, no. 1, p. 311-313.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library