ADDRESS

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

AN HONEST AND EFFICIENT JUDICIARY

[Delivered before the Faculty and Students of the University of Santo Tomas at the University of Santo Tomas, Manila, upon Receiving the Degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa, March 28, 1936.]

Most Reverend Father Rector, Professors and Students of the University of Santo Tomas, Ladies and Gentlemen:

Never before have I realized as painfully as I do now how limited is my ability to express my feelings. Words fail me to describe my deep emotions at this hour. Every noble sentiment in me has been stirred up by the generous act of my Alma Mater in conferring upon me the degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa. To be granted this academic title by such an institution of learning as the University of Santo Tomas, the oldest in our country, constitutes in itself a very high and rare distinction for which I am profoundly grateful and happy; but the fact that I receive this honor from the hands of my former professor, Father Tamayo, whom I admire, respect and love, makes this occasion doubly memorable to me. I can never thank you enough, Most Reverend Father Rector, for what you have done for me in my student days, nor can I adequately express to this great University my sincerest acknowledgment for the undeserved honor that it has bestowed upon me.

Nothing that I can say will add to the merit or glory of the service rendered by the University of Santo Tomas to my people. There is hardly a Filipino patriot in our past struggles for liberty but has received the moral and intellectual guidance of this institution. To a large measure this University has contributed to the upbuilding of the Filipino nation. It has given the country men of sterling character and great wisdom in almost every line of human endeavor. Its Law College, especially, has produced the statesmen-patriots Mabini and Marcelo H. del Pilar, of the Revolutionary days, and the great luminaries of the Bench— Arellano, Mapa, Torres, Araullo and others whose names I shall not mention for they are still living. Hence, Philippine jurisprudence has been profoundly affected by the legal philosophy of the College of Law of Santo Tomas.

The foregoing thoughts have induced me to address you this evening on the importance of the judiciary to the people and the necessity of a proper selection of judges.

It cannot be gainsaid that the success of an enlightened government depends to a large extent upon its administration of justice In the Philippines, our Constitution ordains not only the establishment of a judicial department, coordinate, co-equal and co-important with the other two departments of the Government, but also provides for a security of tenure and compensation of judges. The declared and avowed purpose of the framers of our Constitution is to create a truly independent and impartial Judiciary which by protecting the rights and liberties of the people, may provide a firm foundation for democratic institutions in this country.

You are familiar with the tripartite division of the Powers of government. In the allocation of these powers among the three departments, however, our Constitution has not laid down inflexible rules. It adopted the system of checks and balances which has given rise to difficulties the delimitation of the powers granted. Functions will be found to interlace and overlap each other. The judiciary, with the Supreme Court as the final arbiter, is the only constitutional mechanism authorized to determine and adjust in appropriate cases, the relationship between the different branches of the Government. The judiciary occupies the position of regulator to curb the excesses and temper the vehemence of the executive and legislative departments. Our Supreme Court is invested with the tremendous power to annul not only laws passed by the National Assembly, but also acts of the Chief Executive which contravene the fundamental law. Undoubtedly, this power will be invoked during the formative period of the Commonwealth Government, more frequently perhaps than at any other time. We cannot but trust that the judiciary will be guided by what I may term the canons of judicial self-restraint and that it will be slow in setting aside a law or an executive decree. But we can expect that when the great precepts embodied in our Constitution are violated or imperiled, the judiciary will perform its sacred duty assigned to it by the people, fearlessly and relentlessly.

Endowed as the judiciary is with the destructive power to declare laws and executive orders unconstitutional, notwithstanding the fact that it is the only ultimate constitutional organ devoid of direct popular sanction, it is almost superfluous to say that utmost care should be observed in the choice of the men called upon to exercise that power. And in the task of establishing an independent and impartial judiciary, the burden of responsibility is mainly thrown upon the Chief Executive because under the Constitution he is the appointing power.

I have endeavored and will always endeavor to appoint to the judiciary only men of proven ability, learning, and character, conscious of the fact that the usefulness of the judiciary is dependent upon the faith reposed upon it by the people, and that this faith turn depends upon the quality of the judges. Without popular faith in the administration of justice no democratic government can long endure.

Of course the great bulk of the population never come into contact with the courts of justice. Yet, to no department of the Government should every citizen be more exacting in the demand that only the best be chosen. Given a corrupt and incompetent judiciary, the average citizen will live in constant danger of financial loss, moral outrage, and Physical harm at the hands of those who are thus enabled to violate the law with impunity. He will feel helpless and insecure even against the agencies devised by law for his very protection. He always stands to lose in the eternal conflict between liberty and authority, for without an ever-vigilant judiciary to impose restrictions upon government action against individual liberties, the bill of rights incorporated in our Constitution for his benefit would be meaningless. His sense of security can only be maintained if he has confidence in the efficiency and impartiality of the courts to which he may resort for the vindication of his rights and the redress of his grievances. Needless to say, without this sense of physical and material security on the part of the People, freedom and productive life would be well-nigh impossible.

The common man in our country does not ordinary distinguish between the courts and the judges who preside over them. To him a judicial decision is not the mandate of the law but the pronouncement of men who sit in judgment over their fellow men. In the selection of the persons who are to apply the law, therefore, we must choose only those who can inspire his confidence. To merit this confidence, judges must be men of the highest integrity and unquestioned moral character, men who should at all times be courteous, kindly and considerate of other people s rights and feelings.

A judge should be incorruptible. Besides, an ideal judge should combine high technical training with vision and statesmanship. With the advance of commerce and the expansion of industry, the relations of our citizens among themselves and with aliens will become more and more intricate and complicated. New rights and obligations ushered in by social and economic progress, not foreseen contemplated by existing laws or constitutional limitations, will undoubtedly arise. And the man called upon the interpret the Organic Law will have need of a generous gift of an enlightened perspective to be able to make a proper appraisal of the situation and appreciate the needs for proper readjustment in every emergency. The time demands judicial statesmanship of the highest order.

I have touched upon the personal equation involved in the administration of justice because people generally appraise the failure or success of human institutions in terms of human rights. Not infrequently, technicalities of law or procedure defeat the ends of justice, thereby impairing the faith of our people in the efficacy of our courts as the ultimate guardian of their cherished rights and liberties. Such defects, however, can be remedied by legislation. On the other hand, the failings and weaknesses of the men who sit on the bench are subject to no similar control. The constitutional provision which secures the tenure of our judges, designed to preserve the paramount independence of the judiciary, affords no remedy against the continuance in office of men with antiquated ideas and fossilized viewpoints inimical to the very existence of a progressive social order, so long as they observe “good behaviour”. Herein again lies the necessity of careful deliberation in the selection of our judges.

There is another factor which should not be overlooked. We are at present engaged in the task of laying the foundations of a new government. The structure that we are building may not be commanding in its presence and contours, but it should be solid and lasting. Nowhere should we devote more painstaking attention than in the erection of the judicial pillars, not only because the administration of justice is the test of good government, but also because it has been the practice among Occidental nations to deny to courts in some Oriental countries, the right to sit in judgment over foreigners and their interests. If during the Commonwealth period we fail to establish a strong and efficient judiciary, we might be menaced in the future, when we shall have become independent, with serious attempts on the part of other countries to claim extra-territoriality for their nationals. Were this to occur, the eternal condemnation of posterity would fall upon those responsible for such a state of affairs.

I am sure I can show in no better way my appreciation of the honor that my Alma Mater has conferred upon me than by reiterating on this solemn occasion my pledge to raise our judiciary to such a plane as will assure to every litigant honest, impartial, and sympathetic administration of justice—a judiciary as exemplified in the life, character and intellectual gifts of Arellano, Mapa, Torres, Araullo and our present revered Chief Justice, respected by citizens and foreigners alike, one that will withstand the fluctuating winds of popular passion, and securely lodged in the confidence of our people.

I thank you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library