ADDRESS

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

FILIPINO GRATITUDE TO THE UNITED STATES

[Delivered at the Luneta on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of Occupation Day, August 13, 1938]

Mr. High Commissioner, Honored Guests, My Fellow Countrymen :

We have assembled in this setting of tranquillity and peace to celebrate reverently great events and heroic actions; to commemorate deeds whereby a new culture was implanted in our land; to memorialize a great nation for its beneficent altruism.

Forty years ago, this day and hour, an American Army stormed to the attack of the beleaguered Spanish City of Manila. I was a witness to that epoch-making event. In memory’s eye, I can see them now, forming grimly for the advance in the hazy mists of the morning’s glow, tight-lipped, covered with sludge and mud, sweated and seared by tropical heat, driving home to their objective, and for some of them, to the judgment seat of God. Green’s Brigade sweeps over San Antonio Abad and along the beach while over to the east General MacArthur drives up the Singalong Road to be met by a hail of fire from Block House 14. He calls for an officer to volunteer to lead a close assault and clear the way, and history writes its first chapter in the career of the future American World-War Chief of Staff—Peyton C. March. By nightfall the town is theirs.

Many in this audience contributed their services to their Government that day. For such, one of the special purposes of these particular public proceedings is to express to you some degree of appreciation for your many acts of good soldiership. You no doubt recall vividly the spirit of adventure that animated you as young soldiers on mobilization, when mirth and romance beckoned and the vision of the world was decorated with wonder and ambitious hopes. You remember, too, how you entered into the service with cheerful hearts and fervid patriotism; how you rejoiced when the war was over and victory attained, and how you made your way home amidst the joyful acclamations of a grateful nation. In memory of those days, millions of people, bound together by an impulse of sympathy, not only turn with love and devotion to the graves of the dead, but they also cling to and cherish with reverential awe the living remnants of those former armies and navies. In your youth and strength, your love and loyalty, you gave all that mortality can give. You need no eulogy from me or from any man. Yon belong to history as furnishing one of the greatest examples of successful and disinterested patriotism. You belong to posterity as the instructor of future generations in the principles of liberty and right. You belong to the present, to us, by your virtues and by your achievements. I think it safe to assert on your behalf that you feel amply repaid for all that you suffered and for all that you did.

The angry passions of those warlike days are now calmed and soothed. The sense of personal misfortune has passed away and we live far enough from those times of trial and test to know that honesty and sincerity were not all on one side; and reflective minds recall with pleasure that the efforts of the genius, courage and virtue of those heroic periods, are now our common heritage. Feelings of reciprocal respect unite the warring factions in bonds of understanding and reverence for our mutual dead.

But, poignant as are the sentiments I have expressed, the main purpose of this gathering is not to extol the actual incidents or participants in the conflict of that eventful day but to express the boundless gratitude of the Filipino people to the United States for the measureless benefits she has bestowed upon us during the four decades that have passed since then.

As I saw in that late afternoon of August 13, 1898, the sun set in the clouds that crown Mariveles with purple and gold, in the gathering darkness of the Pacific, the royal flag of Spain came down and for the first time in my life I saw the Stars and Stripes run to the fore. Little did I realize then that I was witnessing what in ultimate result may prove to be the greatest event of modern civilization in the Orient. Little did I know in my immaturity that I was beholding the birth of a new ideology in Asia—an ideology based upon what was then a strange, new conception in this part of the world—a conception that government is, “of the people, by the people, and for the people”— a conception based upon the magic words—liberty and freedom. To me, as I watched in the sunset glow the Spanish colors being lowered, it seemed the setting sun was symbolical of the falling flag—the waning of a great empire. Little did I dream then that the first pangs of Philippine nationhood were in their beginnings, that forty years later I would be speaking as I am today. All I could see then was the symbol that once I loved passing away. I paid it then the mead of affection I felt for Spain as I voice now the measure of my lasting gratitude to her as mother of our Christianity and of that indefinable but delightful thing the world calls Spanish culture.

Strange the hold that a national flag has upon its people. The mystery of symbols lies deep in human nature. It is probable that almost as soon as men began to gather together for common purposes, some kind of conspicuous object was used as an emblem or symbol of the common interests. Impulses to that end rise spontaneously in the hearts of men. They do not issue from any prearranged culture of sentiment but by process of instinctive fervor spring from the honest and simple-hearted simplicity which prompts mankind to cherish and to stand by kith and kin; which engenders those sentiments of devotion to home and fireside upon which the perpetuity of nations depend. Symbols in all ages have played a large part in human affairs by stimulating the actions of men, through their sentiments and through their imaginations. All written forms containing injunctions and rules of action and duty are precise and appeal strongly to the understanding, but are destitute of the warmth and color that awaken the immeasurable emotions of the heart. The signs and emblems of great movements have always laid hold of their followers with more vigor and tenacity than the history and written rescripts of the movements themselves. Attachment to the flag has been quite as potent as loyally to the law as a factor of national stability.

What manner of flag then was this Stars and Stripes? I asked myself as I saw it for the first time fluttering from Santiago’s ramparts in the gathering gloom. History taught me.

It was more than a century and a half ago, on June 14, 1777, that the flag of the United States was formally adopted by official resolution. It began in all the sobriety of an act of the Continental Congress. It ended in one of those rare bursts of poetry which occasionally distinguished the Revolution. It provided that the Union should be “thirteen stars, white, in a blue field, representing a new constellation.” The fathers of the struggling Republic were under no illusions; they knew they had shaken the foundations of an already crumbling world, and they hung that constellation definitely in the western sky with all the superb confidence which illuminated the opening years of the modern era.

The world has turned over more than once since June 14, 1777, but the constellation has never set. It pictures the vision of a people whose eyes are turned to the rising dawn. It represents the hope of a nation for posterity. It speaks with the sanctity of revelation. It has a meaning unrivalled; a message which gladdens all races; a strength and power of influence which inspires people to bravest thoughts and deeds. The struggle for human rights and liberty gave it birth; battles for freedom scarred it with holy markings; and the spirit of sacrifice, service, and devotion has made it blessed.

It symbolized two great acts of national statesmanship— the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.

The first proclaimed a philosophy of government new to the world of that day. It was based upon the thought that the rights of men—life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness—are of supreme concern. It ascribed their origin and sanctity not to the tolerance of society nor to the benevolent whim of any monarch, but to the august gift of the Divine Creator of the Universe. It declared man’s title to his estate of freedom to be self-evident, no longer to be debated or denied, and therefore no longer to be gainsaid by any majority of his fellowmen, however overwhelming. And it grounded the claim to national existence upon the ultimate predicate that “it is to secure these rights that governments are instituted among men.” The regimen of democracy is rule of the majority. But it is the great contribution of the American Revolution that these fundamental, essential human rights became the purpose and prime concern of government; that it took them out of the category of things debatable, where the will of the majority may prevail, and placed them in the fellowship of things unchangeable because eternal.

Woven into the very warp and woof of the Constitution were the principles of the Declaration of Independence. But now, instead of being an announcement of a philosophy of government, they were enacted into immutable law. In its wise distribution of governmental powers and the establishment of effective checks and balances, in so far as human sagacity can control human nature, it shut the gates of power against the intrusion of tyranny, corruption, and selfish ambition. Creating a strong central government, adequate to the common defense, to the securing of domestic tranquillity and to the fulfillment of international obligations, it taught the world that democracy may be made safe for mankind. But more than all this, more than had as yet entered into the mind of man save in his fond dreams of a coming Golden Age, it solved the great problem of the reconciliation of government with liberty. In England the doctrine of the omnipotence of Parliament was fully established. But here the omnipotence of the legislative body was emphatically denied. Over and above the power of the lawmakers was set the higher power of the Constitution. And in confiding to the federal judiciary the final interpretation and application of the Constitution and the laws, the founders of the Republic placed upon them the supreme duty and responsibility of refusing to give recognition to enactments violative of the organic act. Other free and popular governments there are,—constitutional monarchies or republics,—where the rights of the people are more or less definitely respected. But there liberty and justice, even the sanctity of the constitution itself depends upon good will of the legislators or their fear of political sequences. But here, let but the least attempt be made to thwart or deny what is written in the organic law, let but the meanest citizen be stripped off the rights which this great charter of liberties guarantees him, and it is the voice of justice, unimpassioned but irresistible, which interposes the categorical negative of the Constitution.

All this and more was written on that flag as it unfurled above the Pasig before my uncomprehending eyes that fateful afternoon. All this and more it was to transcribe, to implant, to bequeath to me and mine. Under its folds, peace and prosperity have come to this favored land. Materially we have developed education, sanitation, and agricultural and industrial enterprises. Security and happiness, freedom from financial pressure, and a higher mode of life—all are ours. A new and progressive outlook upon the modern problems of life is in the making. All of this we owe to that starry flag and to the great people it represents. When it finally comes down from Santiago in 1946 it will find somewhere in its folds the grateful hearts of a people— a new and vibrant republic facing with optimistic hope its rising dawn. No words can adequately thank you, great American people. We can only hold you in the reverence of our hearts and pray for you as we render homage to the Great Guider of all destinies, Our Father who art in heaven.

Occupation Day—forty years ago—we will not forget. We can not forget.

Mr. High Commissioner: As a symbol of the endless chain of friendship which binds together our two peoples, I wish to present to you, Sir, for your exalted leader, the President of the United States, these two flags—that of your country and that of the new country to which it has given birth. The tie that binds us together, which they represent, does not depend upon an alliance, nor a declaration, nor a treaty. It consists of those eternal, spiritual kinships and relationships which defy all quarrels, all op positions, all aspirations. It is that extraordinary indefinable longing for the same sort of things. Our aims, our hopes, our appreciations are the same. In the great moral causes, the great causes of righteousness, of liberty, of peace, the great causes which mean the perpetuation of the spiritual things of life, the United States and the Philippines are going on in complete unison with each other, not dominating nor conspiring against each other, but going on in complete accord with each other, because in the essential things, we are in absolute and hearty agreement.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library