ADDRESS

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES ON

NATIONAL ABACA AND OTHER FIBER CORPORATION AND THE HEMP INDUSTRY

[Delivered during the induction into office as Manager of the Abacá and Other Fiber Corporation of Hon. Pedro Sabido, at Mala- cañan, Manila, on November 4, 1939]

Gentlemen:

The creation by the National Assembly of the National Abacá and Other Fiber Corporation is a very important part of that program of preparing the Philippines against the time when all preferential trade relations between us and the United States shall have terminated. It was with diffidence that I signed the bill creating this corporation and I only signed it after I had made it clear to the public and to the National Assembly that I was not going to launch the Government of the Philippines into the adventure of attempting to dictate the price of hemp to the markets of the world. Other nations have attempted to hold up the price of some of their special products for export and have learned at a great loss to the national treasury that this is a thing that cannot be done. Practically every article, no matter how essential and necessary for certain purposes, has its maximum price beyond which it will be substituted with similar articles, even if of a lower quality, because the trade cannot stand it. There was a time during the World War when the Philippine National Bank suffered losses in trying to help our hemp exporters to get a price which the market could not pay.

Let me state what this corporation will attempt to do. First, it will help the hemp farmers to improve the quality of their product and to lower the cost of production; second it will facilitate the elimination of too many middlemen in the hemp trade by encouraging cooperative selling on the part of the farmers of their product, directly to the exporters or, if possible, to the hemp factories abroad; and third, if and when it becomes necessary, the corporation itself will buy the hemp directly from the farmers and export it to the world markets.

The hemp industry is really one of the most important industries of the country. Even though hemp is now being produced in other parts of the world, it is still time that this industry is practically the monopoly of the Philippines. In the past, the hemp industry has been the mainstay of our government and of a large portion of our people. It was only of late and for no plausible cause that the hemp farmers have been unable to make a living, while those engaged in the exportation and or manufacture of this produce have continued to make money.

If we should succeed in giving the farmers their legitimate participation in the price that is being paid for hemp abroad, the benefit thus derived would mean the economic well-being of millions of men, women, and children.

I shall not be so bold as to assure the country that this corporation will give relief to the plight in which the hemp provinces find themselves. But this is an earnest and intelligent attempt to place the industry on a stable basis, and it is certainly a duty which the Government of the Commonwealth cannot shirk. We know that a large portion of our people have been suffering untold miseries because they have been unable, during the last few years, to make their living on this product. We believe we can do something to help them. And we hope that the means which we have adopted will bring about this result. We cannot just cross our arms in impotence, admitting defeat before we have tried to do something which presents probabilities of success. That the hemp industry can be placed on a profitable basis is amply demonstrated by the fact that it is in that condition today in Mindanao.

It took me a long time, after the bill approved by the National Assembly had become a law, before I finally made up my mind as to the man who should be given the responsibility of carrying out its purposes. I am convinced that I made the best choice possible when I offered the position to Assemblyman Sabido. He is a man of unusual ability and outstanding character, and he has rendered a long and constructive service to the nation in the legislature. He comes from a hemp-growing province. He is familiar with the trials and tribulations of the hemp farmers. He has made a special study of their problems and of the problems of the industry in general; and in my opinion, he is fully equipped to assume this great responsibility. I wish him success.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library