Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On National Defense

[Delivered before the Faculty and Students of the University of the Philippines at the U. P. Campus, Manila, February 12, 1936]

Democracy is maintained by the cooperative effort of the governed. Contributions made by every citizen toward the support of a democratic government should be in direct proportion to the privileges, opportunities, and advantages enjoyed by him under that government. It is particularly evident that any person privileged to enjoy unusual advantages provided at the expense of all the people should bear a correspondingly high order of obligation in promoting the general welfare. Every student in this University, and in similar institutions maintained at government expense, is benefiting above the average from the opportunities offered by the Filipino nation to its citizens. Each and every one of you is expected, therefore, to play a correspondingly important part in meeting the responsibilities devolving upon our people and their government. One of these responsibilities involves provision for the common defense.

Self-preservation is the first law of life. Nations, like individuals, will, in the face of threatened extinction, resort to any device and employ any measure, no matter how desperate, in order to preserve their existence. So axiomatic is this statement that from this standpoint a nation may be defined as a political group motivated by a common determination to subordinate all considerations of individual welfare to the preservation of group integrity. This determination is the principal unifying influence, and without it no nation can long endure.

Since the destruction of a nation is usually accomplished through the application of military force, the determination to exist must be implemented through the development and maintenance of a military system that can protect the nation from violent attack, no matter from what source. Readiness and ability to oppose force with force have always been demanded by the world as the price of independent existence. National freedom can flourish only under the shelter provided by armed forces embodying the will of a liberty-loving people to preserve their identity as a nation.

An effective military establishment cannot be improved on the spur of the moment. Time—a long period of time— is an essential factor, and so we have as a prime duty of government, withal one of the individual obligations of its citizens, that of undertaking in time of peace those preparations that will protect the nation in the event of war.

I am well aware that many individuals, and even organized groups, oppose every type of preparation for the eventuality of war. In the vast majority of cases these persons are inspired by an idealistic regard for the advantages of peace and a justified horror of the evils of war. Only a small minority can fairly be classed as subversive elements, seeking to cloak their destructive purpose under a veil of outward devotion to a lofty ideal. Yet even the most sincere idealist should not be unmindful of the realities of life. All of us agree that might does not make right, yet none of us can fail to realize that the rule of right depends upon the existence of might.

The laws of our National Assembly, the decisions of our courts, the edicts of our Government,—all promulgated in the interests of fairness and justice to all the people,—would be no more than so many scraps of worthless paper were it not for the potential physical power behind them. The Policeman and soldier are symbols of this latent but usually dormant power upon which the whole structure of government rests.

So, it is futile to cry out against the employment of force in carrying on the functions of government. We cannot dwell exclusively in the realm of Utopian theory. We must face the stark and grim actualities of life. One of these actualities is that defenselessness invites aggression—that greed, envy, and ruthlessness are always ready to take instant advantage of unprotected wealth and undefended territory. Moreover, unless a citizen can feel reasonably secure from depredation there can be no domestic tranquility, no prosperity, and no cultural development. Fear, exploitation, paralysis, and disintegration can be the only result.

Our problem, then, is to provide security, and to do so with the least possible drain upon the public treasury. The plan incorporated in the Philippine National Defense Act has only these two objectives in view. Fundamentally, it does no more than assign to individuals their respects duties in the development of necessary defense forces and establishes the machinery and methods whereby all elements may be combined into an effective army. The whole force, except for a very small professional group, will be primarily engaged in peaceful pursuits, but each male citizen of suitable age and physical condition will, as a civic duty, serve in the army a sufficient time to perfect himself in the military duties devolving upon him. Thus, our popular will be prepared, in the event of war, to mobilize promptly and effectively against invasion.

The professional or full-time complement will be strong enough only to insure the instruction of, and to provide the necessary leadership for, the citizen army. In this way, the plan minimizes cost, while avoiding all danger of building up a powerful military caste that might strive to abandon its legitimate position of servant and defender of the people in the hope of making itself the master.

The law provides for the organizational and administrative machinery necessary to register citizens for military training and to induct them into the service. It makes provision for preliminary training in the public schools and for the procurement of necessary arms, equipment, and reserve stores. In short, it establishes an administrative, organizational, and training system which will make each of our islands a veritable fortress placed under the vigilant guardianship of its own trained inhabitants.

In developing and maintaining an army of the type I have just described, one of the gravest and most difficult problems is that of providing trained officers for reserve units. A strong and efficient officer corps is an indispensable element to military success. Scarcity of rations and ammunition, depletion in strength, privation and hardship— all these may be endured by an army and success may still be attained. There can be no hope, however, of winning without the skillful cooperation and unity of action which may be obtained only through the efforts of trained and devoted officers. Both regular and reserve officers must achieve and maintain a high state of efficiency. In the case of the regulars, no great difficulty should be encountered since they will follow the military profession as a life career. But reserve officers’ efficiency will not be so easily attained. In the great task of developing the defensive plan for the Philippines, this is the problem that gives me the most profound concern, and this is the field in which the students of this and other universities will find their greatest opportunity for service.

Attendance at such institutions evidences personal ambition, intelligence, and a sound basic education. It is because of the nation’s crying need for trained and educated leaders in every walk of life that the Government maintains a free school system. Referring again to my earlier statement that you, university students, owe an unusual debt of obligation to this country, I conceive it to be your special duty to help lead our people in their effort to provide for their own protection. More categorically, I believe it to be a primary duty of every able-bodied student in our universities to take full advantage of the course of military instruction provided through the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps. Each and all of you should have a burning ambition to perfect himself in the technique and practice of the military profession, and to be ready in an emergency to do his part as commissioned officer to help furnish that leadership without which military organizations cannot act effectively. A principal duty of the faculties is to assist you in attaining this degree of military efficiency.

I also believe that each and every student in these higher institutions of learning should consider himself a voluntary educator in his own community on the subject of National Defense. You should seek opportunity to disseminate information concerning the purposes and methods of the Philippine Defense System and to demonstrate the necessity for its existence. No great cooperative effort of the kind upon which we are embarking can be successful except with the enthusiastic and spontaneous support of the whole population. To secure such support, the people must he informed and enlightened. This is a mission that no one else can so well perform as you. If you are successful, we need fear neither in our lifetime nor in the future any loss of our national dignity, integrity, and independence. Should you fail in the performance of this high mission and should our people come to regard national defense as the duty of the Government alone or of a small group of professional soldiers, we are certain sooner or later to face the bleak and bitter prospect of domination by an alien power. We will suffer the humiliation of our helplessness and the remorse of our own improvidence.

In a very real sense, therefore, is the security of our beloved Philippines placed in your hands. Falter not in this hour of need. The task demands your efforts, your intelligence, and your patriotism. These, I am confident, you will give unflinchingly and unhesitatingly. Remember that “He who saves his country saves himself & all things saved do bless him; he who lets his country die, lets all things die, dies himself ignobly, and all things dying  curse him.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library