Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines Before the Senate of the United States

[Delivered in Washington, D. C., June 4, 1942]

FOREWORD

Upon the request of Senator Alben Barkley, majority leader of the Senate, President Quezon addressed that body Thursday, June 4, 1942. His address was brief because important war measures were pending.

At the conclusion of the address, Senator Barkley made the following comment, which coming from such high and experienced authority, should be recorded.

SENATOR BARKLEY:

President Quezon is an old colleague and friend from our years together in the House of Representatives.

Ten minutes of persuasive eloquence, stirring and obviously from the heart.

He has carried the flags of the United States and the Commonwealth high over his own Christian land.

Bataan and Corregidor demonstrated the gratitude and loyalty of the people of the Philippines. Their service and devotion under our own General MacArthur has resounded to their glory.

Odds of 10 to 1, separated from outside assistance, they fought and died under their leader Manuel L. Quezon.

President Roosevelt’s promise of redemption has sustained him and his people, they know the Philippines will rise again.

● ●

To my friend Dr. Arturo B. Rotor with my affectionate regards and esteem

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON June 19, 1942.

● ●

THE VICE PRESIDENT SAID: Members of the Senate, ladies, and gentlemen, it gives me the greatest pleasure at this time to introduce the most gallant leader of a most gallant people.

Senators, ladies, and gentlemen, the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.

● ●

MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE:

IT is a very high honor and a rare privilege that you have conferred upon me in inviting me to address the Senate of the United States, the greatest legislative body in the world. I appreciate it more than I can say, and I thank you from the bottom of my heart.

On August 19, 1941, 4 months before Japan attacked the Philippines, it was my privilege to address Vice President Wallace over the radio from Malacañan Palace in Manila, and, through him, the people of the United States.

On that occasion, I said:

In this grave national emergency, the stand of the Filipino people is clear and unmistakable. We owe loyalty to America and we are bound to her by bonds of everlasting gratitude. Should the United States enter the war, the Philippines would follow her and fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our manpower and all our material resources, however limited these might be. We stand with the United States in life and in death.

[ Applause. ]

Those words may have sounded then to some people in this country as more rhetorical than real. To the Filipinos, however, the sentiments that I expressed and the pledge that I made were known to be not only sincere but perfectly natural. What else could be expected of a people whom America has treated justly and fairly and to whom liberty and independence have already been assured through the Tydings-McDuffie Act?

Moreover, the tie which binds our two countries transcends all political and legal relationships. It depends not merely upon a written alliance, a declaration, or a treaty. It consists of spiritual kinship and relationship. Our aims, our hopes, our aspirations, are the same as your own. In the great moral causes the principles of righteousness, of liberty, of peace, the United States and the Philippines are in complete accord with one another; they are in absolute and hearty agreement.

There has been no question, therefore, as to the loyalty of the Filipinos to the United States, or the extent to which they would go in fighting for the American flag. I say “in fighting for the American flag” advisedly, for we fought in the Philippines by your side against overwhelming odds, not only to defend our country against the invader but also to defend your flag against the attack of Japan. [ Applause. ]

When you entered the first World War, although the Philippines were in no way involved therein, we offered to the Government of the United States one submarine and one destroyer, and also asked to be permitted to send one division to fight under your banner on the battlefields of Europe. That we did not have the privilege of actually taking part in that war by your side has always been a source of regret to us. However, even then, individual Filipinos fought and died in your ranks. I remember at this time Tomas Claudio, whom we have immortalized by giving his name to the training camp of our national guard.

Gentlemen of the Senate, since I arrived in this country I have learned that there is a war slogan, “Remember Pearl Harbor.” I approve and fully understand the slogan. The attack upon Pearl Harbor aroused every redblooded and patriotic American to a point where he can never be satisfied with anything less than the definite and complete defeat of Japan. [ Applause. ]

How about the Philippines? Of course, so far as their political relations with the United States are concerned, there is a legal difference between the position of Hawaii and that of the Philippines. Hawaii is as much an integral part of the United States as is Washington, D. C., or California, while the Philippines has already been formally declared by the Congress to be a distinct and separate nation, to become fully independent of the United States on July 4, 1946.

But, when we were attacked by Japan, the American flag was still flying over the Philippines, and we were still under the protection of, and owed allegiance to, the United States. Although in domestic affairs we had almost complete autonomy, in foreign affairs all governmental powers and responsibilities rested exclusively in the hands of the United States. In other words, you were then, as you still are, the trustees for the Filipino people in their foreign affairs. No one will deny that the moral and legal responsibilities of a trustee in the care and protection of its trust are greater even than those of an owner in respect to his own property.

Gentlemen of the Senate, I am not in this country to persuade you to send forces at once to the Philippines to drive the invader out of my beloved fatherland. Nor will I try to convince you that the Pacific is more important than the European or the Atlantic theaters of war. Those decisions are to be made by you. You will always have in mind, I am sure, that only in the Philippines has your flag been hauled down and replaced by the flag of the Rising Sun.

In view of this tragic event, I do hope that the American people in this hour of their great responsibility to the world will always keep before them the memory of the devotion and sacrifices of the people of the Philippines. Let me ask then, in turn, that your people adopt still another war slogan —”Remember the Philippines.”

[ Prolonged applause; Senators and occupants of the galleries rising. ]

[ From the Congressional Record June 4, 1942 ]

Source: Arturo Rotor Papers, Pardo de Tavera Special Collections. Rizal Library, Ateneo de Manila University

Quezon, M. L. (1942). [Address of President Quezon before the Senate of the United States]. Arturo Rotor Papers, Pardo de Tavera Special Collections. Rizal Library, Ateneo de Manila University, Quezon City, Philippines.