Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the occasion of the observance of the sixth anniversary of the Commonwealth of the Philippines

[Delivered at Luneta, November 15, 1941]

Mr. HIGH COMMISSIONER, MY FELLOW CITIZENS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

Six years ago today the Government of the Commonwealth was inaugurated with solemn ceremonies and in the presence of high dignitaries of the United States. As we gather to commemorate that great event, the thought uppermost in our minds is our gratitude to America and the preservation of our liberties. These liberties we shall defend with our lives and our fortunes, for they alone can be the bountiful source of our welfare and happiness, and the instruments of our safety and power.

I assumed the Presidency under a provision of our Constitution which prohibits the President from succeeding himself and limits his term of office to six years. It was my desire repeatedly expressed to relinquish my post upon the expiration of my term on December 30 of this year, but the Constitution was amended to allow the President to be reelected for another term, and, contrary to my wishes, you, my beloved countrymen, have just reelected me by a majority so overwhelming, even larger than when you first elevated me to that high office, that I must regard your decision as an imperative mandate which I can neither question nor evade. I am deeply touched and grateful for this evidence of your faith and trust in my leadership during these grave and perilous times. I can only say, in appreciation of your confidence, that I am ready to give the last measure of devotion to safeguard your freedom, your security, and your happiness.

I shall not dwell upon the policies or accomplishments of my administration during the last six years, but I do want to refer to what has been done in relation to our national defense which is at once the primary right and the supreme duty of every government.

Strange as it may now appear, in the beginning, hardly anyone, whether in the Philippines or in the United States, believed in the wisdom or feasibility of our program of national defense, except President Roosevelt, General MacArthur and myself, and a few others. It is true that the first law approved by the National Assembly was the National Defense Act, but this law was passed by that august body more as a vote of confidence in my leadership than because there was any definite conviction among a majority of its members that the plan recommended by me upon the advice of General MacArthur was of any positive or practical value. On the other hand, a number of high ranking officers of the United States Army frankly told me that in their opinion it was a waste of time and money for the Philippines to attempt to defend itself against an attack by a first-class military power. The so-called “civil liberties” unions, both in our homeland and in the United States, together with the “peace at any price” organizations in America, assailed me bitterly with the charge that the real purpose behind the national defense program was to establish here a dictatorship, backed by an army useless as an instrument of national defense and good only as a means to suppress freedom. Despite this diffidence and misrepresentations, we went ahead. With the unstinted support of the Filipino people and the effective assistance of President Roosevelt, through the War Department of the United States, we have achieved rapid and commendable progress in the execution of the program. And now, the foresight, the wisdom, and the effectiveness of our national defense preparations are being clearly demonstrated.

Formerly it was the common belief, never denied from authoritative sources, that the United States did not intend to defend the Philippines in case of war. Heretofore, the assumption was that the ultimate fate of the Philippines would depend not upon its defense during the conflict but rather upon the final outcome of the war. This meant that the Philippines would be left, wholly or in part, to be occupied by the enemy until the United States had achieved complete victory elsewhere, when it would then be retaken.

I do not think that I would be far from the truth if I assert that, thanks to our national defense program and its efficient execution, the Government of the United States has at last decided to defend the Philippines with the help and cooperation of our army and our people. That the United States did not previously adopt this decision was not motivated by a reluctance to discharge its responsibility to safeguard our territorial integrity or to protect our people from unjustified aggression, but rather because it was not considered strategically feasible to insure our defense with forces that had to come exclusively from America. Presently, however, with our growing army, and assured of our determination to fight for our liberties and our homes and of our unswerving loyalty to America and her ideals, the United States has gained the conviction with our joint efforts, liberty and democracy can successfully resist aggression on our soil.

Not long ago I received a letter from President Roosevelt expressing gratification over the reports on the success of our defense preparations, and informing me of the increased belief in the United States that the Philippines can be adequately defended.

The choice of General MacArthur as the commanding general of the new Far East Command is, to my mind, not only a new recognition of the signal services rendered by this gallant soldier to his country, but also a full endorsement of his excellent work as Military Adviser to the Government of the Commonwealth. Enjoying as he does the confidence of both the Government of the United States and of the Philippines, his designation as the Commander of the American and Filipino Military Forces in the Far East is in my opinion an official avowal of the solidarity of the interests and ideals of America and the Philippines.

Thus the defense of the Philippines is entrusted to the common efforts of Americans and Filipinos. We shall do our share—for our country and for the United States, for liberty and for justice, and for the right of free men to think and speak freely, to worship God as they please, to work without restraint or compulsion in the pursuit of happiness, and to lead a way of life chosen by themselves.

We must not fail in this great task. It calls for total effort and total sacrifice. And it means now, not tomorrow nor later, when shells or bombs start falling upon our cities and towns, or when we shall be mourning at the sight of our burning homes or the mangled bodies of our mothers and children.

The Government of the United States with the full and wholehearted cooperation of the Government of the Commonwealth is taking care of the military preparations. It is incumbent upon us, all of us, who may remain behind the firing lines, to furnish our fighting men with food, clothing, and other supplies which they shall need. It is incumbent upon us to work harder and for longer hours, to produce more rice and more corn and other food articles necessary to safeguard our whole population from hunger and starvation. It is incumbent upon us to care for the wounded and the maimed and to train ourselves adequately to render that service. It is incumbent upon us to participate actively in carrying out the program of the Civilian Emergency Administration that we may give the required cooperation to our armed forces and protect ourselves from the destructive effects of modern war. Above all, it is incumbent upon us to observe the strictest personal discipline and to maintain peace and order.

Your government will call upon many of you to do a particular assignment in this common undertaking, and it expects you to do your part willingly and without delay. Those who are not assigned to specific tasks must be ever ready to answer the call of duty. The times are too ominous and too pregnant with evil to permit of delay or half-hearted efforts. Labor and capital must adjourn their differences until a better day. We must marshal all our resources in wealth, materials and man power to make the Philippines defensively strong and to cooperate with the United States in her gigantic effort to save democracy and banish totalitarianism from the face of the earth.

Mr. High Commissioner: I wish on this occasion to renew on behalf of the Filipino people and of the Commonwealth Government their assurance of loyalty to the United States. We have faith in the high purposes and the noble spirit of the American people, their government and their great President. In this crucial moment, their sentiments are our sentiments, their ideals and aims are our own, the freedoms that they are defending and for which they will shed their blood are the freedoms which we cherish and for which we are willing to bleed and die. For weal or for woe, in victory or in defeat, we cast our fate with America and the great principles she is striving to uphold. We shall defend with our all this far-flung frontier of American liberty and maintain untarnished the honor and glory of the United States.

Source : Supreme Court Library

Quezon, M. L. (1941). [Address of President Quezon on the occasion of the observance of the sixth anniversary of the Commonwealth of the Philippines]. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 40 (21), 4228-4231.