ADDRESS

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

ACCOMPLISHMENTS DURING THE FIRST QUARTER OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT

[Delivered, through the Movietone, at Manila, February 19. 1936]

To the American People:

I am greatly grateful for this rare privilege of being able to address the American people through the medium of the Movietone. The Filipino people have just completed their first quarter of absolute self-rule under their Constitution, the adoption of which has been made possible by the magnanimous action of America as reflected in the passage of the Independence Act.

With complete cooperation between the Chief Executive and the National Assembly, our Government has given expression in the various measures enacted during the short session immediately following the inauguration of the Commonwealth to the needed solutions for the most pressing problems confronting the Commonwealth in its task to pre pare the nation for complete independence.

In pursuance of these measures we have already commenced the organization of our National Defense, through a long-range plan adopted upon the recommendation of one of the foremost authorities on military affairs the United States has ever produced.

The reorganization of our judicial system in consonance with the provisions of our Constitution had a most auspicious beginning with the creation and establishment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals, the membership of which has been acclaimed by the bench and bar, and the entire people as well.

It has been disposed by executive order that all appointments to the public service shall be made entirely under strict civil service rules and regulations, thus giving force to the provisions of our Constitution in this respect.

We have now completed the organization of the National Economic Council, the purpose of which is to plan our national economy, by giving our economic development a rational and definite direction so that at the end of the transition period we may be able to build up in the Philippines a reasonably stable economic structure capable o serving the financial and other needs of an independent nation.

The welfare of the masses of my people has been one of the greatest concerns of this Government and to that end special attention is being given to all agrarian problems with a view to settling once and for all the relations which should obtain between landlord and tenant in all the rural communities.

We are indeed grateful to the great American people for the opportunity which has been afforded us to work out our own destiny. I have complete faith in this noble experiment and my people feel as one in their determination to carry this task to a successful conclusion.

In behalf of my Government and of my people I extend to all of you and to your beloved President our affection and most cordial salutations.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library