Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Government Recognition of Scientific Research in the Philippines

Gentlemen:

For some time now, I have been interested in meeting the few men in the Philippines who are really devoted to scientific research. I know the little attention and help that the Government of the Philippines had given you in the past. Most of those who are engaged in research work have been occupying sundry positions in the service; and, in our bureaucratic government, attention has naturally been focused on the occupants of higher positions, regardless of whether their work is less important than that of their subordinates. However, inasmuch as all good governments are bureaucratic in form, I have to stand by it. As you know, I am a revolutionist by nature, and my Government is a revolutionary bureaucratic government; therefore, I want you to realize that any importance this Government gives to a man in the service is measured not by his rank in the office but by the importance of the service which he renders. So it makes no difference how you rate in the official hierarchy. The Government of the Commonwealth will give full recognition to your work, no matter how lowly your official position may be. I want to give every encouragement to our scientists who do research work.

One of our great weaknesses is our inability to appreciate the true value of things. Only a few of us have the ambition to accomplish important things, and I consider those few persons as the most valuable elements not only in the Government but also in our community. And I wish to tell them that, as far as I can, I am always ready to give them every opportunity and encouragement in the work to which they have devoted their life—a work which may appear sentimental now, but which, in the end, may leave lasting benefits to humanity.

Gentlemen, I want you to understand that you can always approach me whenever you have something new and important to present for the consideration of the Government. Do not hesitate to come and offer what you have. The Government is composed of men who are conscious of the fact that what we need in the Philippines today is scientific research, scientific achievements. As Chairman of the National Development Company, Secretary Manuel Roxas is in a position to give you the chance that you need, and I know he will do it and he will give his time and particular attention to you.

Dr. Bacon: Once more, I wish to thank you for coming to help us in this pressing need of our country. You have given us inspiration, and I am glad that, as proved by those who are present here, you carry with you the thanks of this Government and my own.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library