Congratulatory Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines To the First National Assembly

[Delivered during the Closing Session of the National Assembly on December 21, 1935]

GENTLEMEN OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY:

I am on a very pleasant errand to-night. I have come to convey to you in person my warmest congratulations upon the unparalleled record you have made in this, your inaugural session. I know of no instance in which the Legislative Department of a new government, within the first month of its existence, has accomplished as much in the way of passing laws of transcendental importance to a nation as this Assembly has enacted in this special session. And the significance of your achievement will be better realized if it is considered that you have just been through a hard-fought political campaign. It is easy enough to urge that partisan politics be set aside when the interests of the people are at stake, and to proclaim “country above party.” But when the moment comes for these highly patriotic pronouncements to be translated into action, only true and tested public-spirited men can overcome the passions and prejudices of human nature. And you have done it. Though bitter political enemies only yesterday, you have come to an agreement and have cooperated with one another to place in positions of responsibility and power those amongst you who should be entrusted with the leadership of the Legislative Department. Thus you were able within the short space of one month to organize this Assembly, and adopt new liberal and progressive rules which have done away with objectionable practices in the past, placing the power and resposibility of legislation where it properly belongs—upon the Assembly itself. Had you done nothing else but to bring about these reforms and complete your organization, you would have done enough. But you have done more: You have passed all the most urgent and important measures necessary for the successful realization of the purpose for which the Government of the Commonwealth has been established,—measures that as a party we were pledged to enact pursuant to our platform and our commitments and declarations during the election campaign.

You have approved a National Defense Act, which reaffirms to the world that our objective is complete independence, and that we shall be ready to defend it with the entire man power and with all the resources, public and private, of the nation. You have created a National Economic Council which will advise the Government in the planning of our national economy, with a view to making this country, as far as possible, economically self-sufficient and self-dependent, and will correlate the economic activities of the country to strengthen our economic structure and insure the well-being and contentment of all our people. You have given the Executive, subject to proper limitations, the necessary powers to proceed to reorganize the Executive Department, so that the administration of public affairs may be made simple, economic, and efficient. You have also passed laws needed to execute important constitutional provisions, such as those creating the Court of Appeals, and providing for the establishment and maintenance of the office of the Resident Commissioner. Besides, you have created a National Investment and Loan Board, for the purpose of coordinating under a central direction the several loanable funds amounting to some millions of pesos which at present are administered by different boards and offices of the Government. In order to maintain the national credit and effect large savings, you have approved the measure authorizing a loan to the Manila Railroad Company for the redemption before maturity of a great portion of its bonds. These and the other measures you have enacted have earned for the National Assembly the commendation of the whole country.

There is one measure which would have given me the greatest satisfaction to recommend for enactment at this time, and that is, legislation that would solve once and for all the problem of the relationship between the tenants and the landowners, especially in the large estates. In a message that I sent to the Assembly on this subject, I expressed my hope to be able to carry to a definite conclusion the present negotiations for the purchase and resale of the different large estates presently owned by private corporations. It is well to bear in mind, however, that the mere acquisition of these estates by the Government may not after all solve the social and labor questions that they have produced. The problem involved in the relationship between tenants and landowners, whether within large or small estates, owned by individuals or by corporations, public or private, transcends in importance practically all other social problems of the Philippines. Lack of fairness in the treatment of the workingman in the field necessarily results in social unrest. I have no doubt that if we could secure for every tenant or field hand what in equity should come to him, as his share in the products of his toil there would be more contentment amongst the poorer classes of our people. But I have not been able to recommend to you at this short session the legislation needed on this subject, because the Government is not in possession of all the facts required to formulate a definite policy, with the certainty that the rights of all the parties concerned have been duly considered. The difficulty in the solution of this problem is complicated by the lack of a uniform tenancy system in the Philippines, as each province has its own created and developed by century-old customs and practices And not only has each province a system distinct from the others, but at times that system varies m the different municipalities; and even within a municipality not all the landowners follow the same practice. It is imperative, therefore, that a complete study of all the facts be made before proposals of corrective legislation can be made, and for this purpose I have already ordered a thorough investigation of this all-important question.

Another matter equally urgent which I would have requested the National Assembly to consider in this special session is the problem of revising the several pension systems now in force. Based on the actuarial valuations made in 1929 by the Bureau of Efficiency in Washington, the Teachers’ Retirement and Disability Fund, the Pension and Retirement Fund of the Philippine Health Service, and the Constabulary Pension and Retirement Fund, all have possible deficits aggregating P62,000,000 this year, and which may reach the enormous sum of P85,000,000 in 1940. Evidently, time will come when it shall be impossible to continue paying gratuities, not only to those who have actually retired, but, what is worse, to the present contributors when their turn to retire arrives. There are now about thirty-five thousand employees contributing to these funds who are required by existing laws to continue supporting with their contributions those who have already retired, and who have not contributed proportionately to the respective fund. In order to protect the interest of these contributors, to safeguard the solvency of the pension funds, and to prevent the Government from being placed in an embarrassing financial position, this question should be given most serious consideration during the recess of the National Assembly, to the end that in its next regular session a wise solution of the problem may be found which will do justice to the employees concerned and the interest of the Government as well.

Let me again extend to you my most sincere congratulations. In the performance of your task during this short session you have set up a high record of patriotic and fruitful achievements.

This successful commencement of your legislative labors augurs well for the future. With the same spirit of cooperation amongst yourselves, and as between this Assembly and the Executive, as has existed during this initial period of our new Government, I feel that we can face the problems ahead of us with faith, serenity, and confidence.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library