Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Boy Scout Training



The greatest need of our country today is a citizenry composed of strong, clean, earnest and socially efficient men.



Boy Scouts and Scouters of the Philippines:

I am happy to address you on this second anniversary of your Commonwealth Charter, and to extend to the National Executive Board of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines my warmest felicitations for the progress they have attained during the last two years. More than 30,000 members are now on your rolls. That is indeed a splendid achievement, giving assurance that the world-wide movement devoted to the promotion of the ideals of peace, democracy, and sturdy manhood will grow and flourish in the Philippines.

As the twig bends so will the tree grow. This old adage so true in plant life is equally true among human beings. The moulding of character, the formation of ideals and ambitions, the building up of physical prowess–all these must take place during the years of early youth. It is during that stage when man is in a sort of plastic state, that his growth and development assume definite direction. Many of the decisive influences cannot be imparted either in the school or in the home. Wholesome contact with nature, the freedom of the outdoors, grappling with practical obstacles and problems–these and these alone can give a young man an opportunity to discover his moral, mental, and physical resources, and thus comprehend the necessity of their development in order to meet these problems better. It is a great objective of the Boy Scouts organization–this giving the youth training in the practical application of their capabilities.

A boy scout is taught to be self-reliant, that means that he must endeavor to possess both physical and moral courage. It means that he will not be afraid to meet beast or man on an equal footing, because he has developed adequately his skill and brawn. It likewise means that he shall have courage to do what is right, for the sake of right itself, irrespective of the consequences either to his life or fortune.

A boy scout is taught to be a lover of nature. He is trained to learn the value of trees and birds, to know the use of the rippling brook, and to gaze with intelligent eyes at all forms of life. A good scout knows how to wade a stream, to span a river, or scale a peak. A day in the woods reveals to him the great adventure of utilizing nature to serve men’s purposes. He learns to work with his hands and to find joy in strenuous efforts to solve difficulties provided by his environment.

A boy scout learns to be kind and charitable. He learns to bandage the wounded limb of a fallen comrade and to protect a bird or a harmless insect in misery. He helps and aged man on his feet or takes a wandering child to safety. He is taught to do good deeds for the beauty of them and because they make him happy.

Above all, a boy scout is trained to develop the principle faculties which make up his character. He is courteous, truthful, reliable, honest, generous, and chivalrous. In one word, he is taught to be strong, useful and good man. He learns to grow like a molave on the hillside and not like a plant in the hot house.

Any organization with these great objectives deserves the support of everyone. I trust that the Boy Scouts of the Philippines will enjoy that support from all public-spirited citizens. No other movement can give greater or more precious dividends to our Commonwealth than this effort to build up the character and manhood of our citizenry.

Boy Scouts of the Philippines, you enjoy a priceless opportunity for valuable moral and physical improvement. I hope you will avail yourselves in full measure of that opportunity. Your lofty ideals are embodied in the Scout Oath and Law. I urge upon you to strengthen your faith in those ideals and to prepare yourselves as well as you can to take part in their accomplishment. The greatest need of our country today is a citizenry composed of strong, clean, earnest and socially efficient men. You are being trained to be such men. You will be the men who will provide our country with the kind of leadership that it needs and without which it cannot endure. There should be more of you. Ask your friends to join your organization. Show them by your exemplary conduct and the high qualities that you possess how desirable it is for others of your age to be as you are. The highest rank to which you can aspire is the Eagle Rank. Only those who work conscientiously, painstakingly and earnestly can attain that rank, which is a great badge of honor and achievement, and I hope you will do all your best to qualify for it.

I wish to extend to you, my fellow scouters and scouts, my wholehearted wishes for continued progress and success, and to you, ladies and gentlemen, who are friends of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, I wish to commend the Boy Scout movement and its lofty ideals.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library