Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the occasion of the observance of the sixth anniversary of the Commonwealth of the Philippines

Ladies and gentlemen of the radio audience of the United States:

In celebrating the Sixth Anniversary of the inauguration of the Commonwealth, the thought uppermost in our minds is our gratitude to America and the preservation of our liberties.

I shall not dwell upon the policies or accomplishments of my administration during the last six years, but I do want to refer to what has been done in relation to our national defense which is at once the primary right and the supreme duty of every government. With the unstinted support of the Filipino people and the effective assistance of the War Department of the United States, we are making rapid progress in the execution of the program which we have adopted.

The choice of General MacArthur as the Commanding General of the New Far East Command is, to my mind, not only a new recognition of the signal services rendered by this gallant soldier to his country, but also a full endorsement of his excellent work as Military Adviser to the Government of the Commonwealth. Enjoying as he does the confidence of both the Government of the United States and of the Philippines, his designation as the Commander of the American and Filipino Military Forces in the Far East is an official avowal of the solidarity of the interests and ideals of America and the Philippines.

Thus the defense of the Philippines is entrusted to the common efforts of Americans and Filipinos. We shall do our share—for our country and for the United States, for liberty and for justice, and for the right of free men to think and speak freely, to worship God as they please, to work without restraint or compulsion in the pursuit of happiness, and to lead a way of life chosen by themselves.

We will not fail in this great task which calls for total effort and total sacrifice. We are marshalling all our resources in wealth, materials and man power to make the Philippines defensively strong and to cooperate with the United States in her gigantic effort to save democracy and banish totalitarianism from the face of the earth.

People of the United States: I wish on this occasion to renew on behalf of the Filipino people and of the Commonwealth Government their assurance of loyalty to the United States. We have faith in the high purposes and the noble spirit of the American people, their government and their great President. In this crucial moment, your sentiments are our sentiments, your ideals and aims are our own, the freedoms that you are defending and for which you are willing to shed your blood are the freedoms which we cherish and for which we are willing to bleed and die. For weal or for woe, in victory or in defeat, we cast our fate with America and the great principles she is striving to uphold. We shall defend with our all this far-flung frontier of American liberty and maintain untarnished the honor and glory of the United States.

Source : Supreme Court Library

Quezon, M. L. (1941). Address by the President to the United States over the radio on Sunday morning, November 16, 1941. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 40 (22), 4368-4369.