Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the Seventh Anniversary of the establishment of the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines

THE SEVENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES WAS FITTINGLY OBSERVED AT CEREMONY HELD AT THE SHOREHAM HOTEL, NOVEMBER 15, 1942. OVER A NATIONAL HOOK-UP OF THE FOUR MAJOR AMERICAN RADIO NETWORKS AND BY SHORTWAVE TO THE ENTIRE WORLD, THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES SPOKE FROM THE WHITE HOUSE, THE PRESIDENT OF MEXICO FROM MEXICO CITY, AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES FROM THE SHOREHAM HOTEL. THE SPEECHES FOLLOW IN FULL.

—–

One year ago today, while in the midst of my countrymen in Manila, I assured the world that, should the United States be involved in the war, we would fight by her side to the bitter end. Twenty-one days after that announcement, Japan treacherously attacked the Philippines and the whole world has witnessed what the Filipinos have done in defense of their country and of the flag of the United States. They shed their blood just as willingly and heroically as their American comrades did.

The Battle of the Philippines has not ended and will not end until the Japanese are thrown back and defeated.

In one sense, the battle has been won already; it was won before it began. Japan has waged this war under the delusion that all peoples in the so-called Greater Asia would accept her suzerainty. When the Japanese attacked the Philippines, they may have expected to find only a small American Army opposing them, hoping that the Filipinos would stand aside and let the war be waged between Japan and the few American soldiers stationed in the Islands.

They have learned their lesson at no small cost.

Under the existing laws, the President of the United States had the power, when war came, to call into the service of the United States all the organized armed forces of the Philippines. President Roosevelt did not do this.

The Filipino people stood by the United States of their own free will. We placed at the disposal of the President not only our Army but all our manpower and everything we had. Our decision was the seasoned fruit of a wise and fair-minded policy, of the meeting of minds and the friendly working-out of problems, that have characterized our association with this liberty-loving country.

Look back over past relationship. Right after the Spanish-American War, President McKinley said that the-United States went to the Philippines, not to conquer, but to liberate. William Howard Taft, the first Civil Governor of the Philippines, reaffirmed that pronouncement when he said: “The Philippines for the Filipinos.” Later, President Theodore Roosevelt spoke of gradually increasing self-government for the Filipino people, ending either in self-government, meaning a sort of dominion status, or in complete independence—as the people of the United States and of the Philippines might decide at the proper time to be best for their mutual good.

In 1916, the Congress, with the approval of President Wilson, enacted the Jones Law, which promised independence when a stable government would be established by Filipinos. Eighteen years later, the Independence Act was passed, fixing the date for the recognition of the Philippine Republic and authorizing the establishment, in the meantime, of the present Government of the Commonwealth.

Those are the historic facts that stand out in the long relationship between this great people and mine. They are not dull, dry items fit only for the ledger of history. They are among the most inspiring events since the dawn of civilization. For they are symbols of human faith and understanding. They are proof that human beings of different races can learn to live and let live; that they can help one another with mutual respect and confidence.

Last year, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill signed the Atlantic Charter. I remember my deep emotion when the moving picture of this ceremony was shown at Malacañan Palace in Manila. For I saw here, not something brand-new, untested, visionary, but rather a reaffirmation of faith in what had already been done in the Philippines before my very eyes. We already knew the meaning of the Atlantic Charter, for our own country has been the testing-ground for the practical solution of the problems that must be met in achieving the God-given right of the people’s freedom. In two generations, we have bridged the wide span from oppression to self-government.

We offer to the world the record of the Philippines as an answer to anyone who would consider the Atlantic Charter illusory and impractical. It is a signpost, for all mankind to read. It is the factual evidence of what can and should be done, everywhere and for every people. It points to a goal that can be reached, however long and hard the road may be.

This record has proven that the doctrines of democracy are practical and hard-headed. They have met the most crucial of all tests—war! When the Japanese invaded the Philippines, they found a nation standing together in defense of its country—hot the small army of the United States fighting alone in defense of their own flag. They found the bulk of MacArthur’s forces predominantly Filipino. They found a people who knew they had a future worth fighting for unto death.

The battle record of the Filipino people in this war bears a glorious testimony to the difference between freedom and oppression, between the principle of human equality and the exploded idea of race superiority.

That is why our Commonwealth Day this year is more than a Philippine anniversary. It is an anniversary pregnant with a message for the whole human race.

It is a day to pay tribute to the heroes of the Battle of the Philippines—those who died and those who fought to utter exhaustion.

It is a day to honor every Filipino, whether he is now under the heel of the invader or still free in the mountains of Luzon and Visayas, and in the jungles of Mindanao, but whose soul accepts no defeat and is ready for the final fight.

It is a day for the world to mark, because it is a reminder that, seven years ago, the principles of the Atlantic Charter were being applied with wisdom and foresight. For all the teeming millions aspiring to be free, it is a day of hope and encouragement.

To the great peoples of Latin America, this anniversary should have a particular meaning, for we Filipinos are bound to them by unbreakable ties of history and Latin culture. Especially with Mexico, our association has been close in the past, for we were governed by Spain for many long years from the ancient capital of Mexico. And this year, generations later, the Republic of Mexico and the Commonwealth of the Philippines signed the Declaration of the United Nations on the same day. Because of this, I have invited the President of Mexico, General Manuel Avila Camacho, to honor us by speaking over the radio from Mexico City. We shall hear his voice in a few minutes.

To the people of the United States, I have this special message to convey: We have worked and studied and solved with you our common problems. We have lived with you and now we have died with you. Our friendship is sealed in the blood of heroes. This makes our friendship sacred and forever lasting.

For this occasion, I have asked President Roosevelt to be our guest of honor today. He is not here in the physical sense of the word, but he is close to our hearts. To us, his deep regard for the rights and welfare of the Filipino people has always been a source of inspiration and confidence. He signed the Philippine Independence Act in 1934 and he signed the Atlantic Charter in 1941. They are, in essence, one and the same. It is my privilege to tell you that President Roosevelt will address us at the closing of this program.

I have only one word to add, a word of greeting to all the United Nations. The day of victory is closer now than ever before. In Africa, the United Nations forces have taken the offensive. The global strategy of our war is gradually unfolding. We are standing together, determined to win this war. It is my fervent hope that victory will mean the ultimate liberation of all peoples, in Europe and the Americas, in Asia and in Africa, and in the vast Pacific area. That is the only goal worth all the sacrifice and the suffering of this bitter war.

—MANUEL L. QUEZON

—–

It affords me great satisfaction to address this message of solidarity and warm sympathy to the valiant Philippine people and to their excellent President Mr. Manuel Quezon, whose life first as a revolutionary and later as a government official constitutes an enviable embodiment of civic virtues. He displayed these qualities during this struggle to attain political freedom for his countrymen and when he bravely resisted the treacherous Japanese aggression. We Mexicans can think of much which connects us with the history of the Philippines. One of our states, Jalisco, had a part in the honor of introducing western civilization to his fertile archipelago. During our colonial epoch its shore furnished the point of departure for the vessels which under the command of Miguel Lopez de Legaspi carried the first settlers to those Asiatic Islands far across the immense Pacific.

Thus it is that Mexicans and the members of the Commonwealth of the Philippines are irrevocably linked at the very roots of their existence. Since that time the Philippine Islands have been the vanguard of occidental culture, and have carried Latin civilization into the Asiatic world. In a word, they have been the most remote bastion of America.

On December 7. 1941, the tempest burst over that bulwark. One after the other, its beautiful cities were leveled by the enemy.

Humanity, trembling with indignation, witnessed the heroic defense of Bataan, where the Philippine forces fought with the Americans under the leadership of General MacArthur. And all America mourned the day Corregidor fell. Nevertheless, that lost battle will always remain among the great deeds in the history of the Philippine people, and it will be remembered in the future as an eloquent proof of its historic national consciousness.

On every occasion when a people bravely confronts its destiny, its determination inspires respect and demands admiration. But when adversity strikes an innocent country, the desire for justice reveals the man and obliges him to condemn the crimes of the aggressors. The sufferings of the Philippine people, far from being fruitless, will be the price of that victory which is dawning. That holocaust permitted the organization of the democratic forces which are now striking righteous blows against the adversary. When peace arrives the Filipino people will come out as one of the most heroic factors in its attainment.

Their courage and sacrifices will have contributed toward reestablishing world harmony, and they shall be entitled to the recognition which corresponds to such a high position. In its declaration that the democracies do not seek territorial aggrandizement, the Atlantic Charter is a guarantee that the principle of gradual elimination of colonies will emerge from this conflict stronger and more definite than ever.

We in America know from experience that the best training for self-government is the acceptance of complete responsibilities; and we also know that small and large countries can live and prosper within that sphere of collaboration which will be the most important product of this struggle waged by the United Nations.

Uplifted by their war efforts, the Philippine Islands will then become another nation among the free republics of a new world. With full confidence in such an outcome, I express the intense desires of the government and people of Mexico that the sufferings of the Philippine Commonwealth will be recompensed in the near future by the definite triumph of our common cause.

—MANUEL AVILA CAMACHO

—–

Though the alien flag of a treacherous aggressor flies temporarily over the Commonwealth of the Philippines, it is with supreme confidence in ultimate victory that the United Nations commemorate this birthday of its youngest member.

It was just seven years ago that this Commonwealth was established. By that time the United States had maintained sovereignty in the Philippine Islands for more than thirty years. But as I said in 1935 when the present Commonwealth was inaugurated, “The acceptance of sovereignty was but an obligation to serve the people of the Philippines until the day they might find themselves independent, and take their own place among the Nations of the world.”

Let me go back to the days when Admiral Dewey won the battle of Manila Bay, and American sovereignty was established over the Islands. To a very large part of the American people, it seemed incongruous and unwise that the United States should continue permanently a colonial status over many millions of human beings who had already shown a desire for independence.

However, the United States and the leaders of the Philippine people soon undertook a long-time process of providing facilities in the Islands for education, health, commerce, and transportation, with the definite thought that the day would come when the people would be able to stand on their own feet. And at the same time, we granted them a greater and greater degree of local self-government.

By the year 1934 sympathetic conferences between Philippine and American leaders reached the conclusion that the time for complete independence could be definitely set, to follow a ten-year period of complete local autonomy under a Commonwealth form of government with its own Constitution.

This status was duly set up in 1935 under the Presidency of my old friend, Manuel Quezon. It succeeded so well that by December 7, 1941, we were jointly at work preparing for the consummation of complete independence in 1946. Both Nations and peoples had kept faith with each other during all these years. Confidence in each other’s good faith was firmly established and it was cemented into place during the bitter months of ordeal which followed the treachery of Japan,

The brave peoples of the Philippines–their Army and their civilians–stood shoulder to shoulder with the Americans in their fight against overwhelming odds, resolute to shed their blood in defense of their liberty. Richly they deserved that liberty!

I like to think that the history of the Philippine Islands in the last 44 years provides in a very real sense a pattern for the future of other small Nations and peoples of the world. It is a pattern of what men of good will look forward to in the future–a pattern of a global civilization which recognizes no limitations of religion, or of creed, or of race.

But we must remember that such a pattern is based on two important factors. The first is that there be a period of preparation, through the dissemination of education, and the recognition and fulfillment of physical and social and economic needs. The second is that there be a period of training for ultimate independent sovereignty, through the practice of more and more self-government, beginning with local government and passing on through the various steps to complete statehood.

Even we in the United States did not arrive at full national independence until we had gone through the preliminary stages. The town meetings in the New England colonies, and the similar local organizations in other colonies, gradually led to county government and then to State government. That whole process of political training and development preceded the final formation of our permanent Federal Government in 1789.

Such training for independence is essential to the stability of independence in almost every part of the world. Some peoples need more intensive training and longer years; others require far less training and a shorter period of time.

The recent history of the Philippines has been one of national cooperation and adjustment and development. We are sure now, if ever we doubted, that our Government in the United States chose the right and the honorable course.

The pattern which was followed there is essentially a part and parcel of the philosophy and the ideals of the United Nations. The doctrine which controls the ambitions and directs the ruthlessness of our enemies—that there is one master folk destined to rule all other peoples—is a doctrine now on its way to destruction for all time to come.

The United States and the Philippines are already engaged in examining the practical economic problems of the future when President Quezon and his Government are reestablished in the Capital of Manila. He and I, in conference last week, have agreed to set up a Joint Commission of our two countries, to study the economic situation which will face the Nation which is soon to be, and to work out means of preserving its stability, and above all its security.

This typifies the highest form of good faith, which exists wholeheartedly between our two Governments.

It does more than that. It is a realistic symbol of our grim determination and of our supreme confidence that we shall drive the Japanese Army out of the Philippines to the last man.

President Quezon—on this auspicious anniversary–I salute, through you, the people of the Philippine Islands. I salute their courage. I salute their independence.

—FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

Source : New York Public Library

Quezon, M. L. (1942). Radio Address of President Quezon on the Seventh Anniversary of the establishment of the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines , Washington , 41(1), 1-4.