Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines Before the Executive Commission of the Nationalist Party, Assemblymen, Provincial Governors and Mayors of Chartered Cities

[Released on December 11, 1939]

THE FUTURE OF THE NATIONALIST PARTY

Speaker Jose Yulo is one of the greatest men the Philippines has ever produced, and the future of the Nationalist party is safe in his hand. The Nationalist party which has successfully won for the country the independence it has fought for during more than a generation has never been in better hands than in Speaker Yulo’s who has been its head since May of this year.

The President then called attention to the need for unity in the party at this crucial time in the history of the country, urging the high officials of the party present and the provincial and city executives to pull together in carrying out successfully the commitments of the party. He intimated that among the most important commitments of the party are the constitutional amendments which were incorporated, into the platform at the national convention last July.

As head of the party, and as one of the most valuable men in the government at present, Speaker Yulo is entitled not only to all the cooperation the party members can give but also to honors even higher than those the country has accorded him so far, the President is reported to have said.

The eulogy paid by the President to Speaker Yulo was delivered with such earnestness that the big audience of party men, governors, and mayors was moved deeply as the President recounted his impression of Mr. Yulo’s ability and character, and pointed out the great opportunities that lie before the Nationalist party under such sterling leadership.

The big moguls of the party present, including Floor Leader Quintin Paredes, vice-president, former Secretary Eulogio Rodriguez, general campaign manager, and Secretary of Labor Jose Avelino, member of the executive commission of the cabinet, applauded these remarks of the President enthusiastically.

The President’s appeal for party unity, especially when he pointed out that the official commitments of the government which the party has established can not be accomplished unless the rank and file, as well as the members of the high council, pulled together, was likewise greeted by enthusiastic applause from the governors and mayors present at the luncheon meeting.

President Quezon, in recounting the brilliant record of Speaker Yulo, both as lawyer and later as high official of the government, declared that the Philippine public has yet to realize fully the greatness and value of Mr. Yulo as a public man. He intimated that this is due to the retiring nature of Mr. Yulo who has never courted the public gaze.

The President revealed that his attention was first attracted to Mr. Yulo’s brilliant talent when as member of the law firm, Paredes, Buencamino and Yulo, he represented the Filipinos side in the now famous board of control case so ably, the President said, that from then on he watched closely with increasing admiration every important step in the career of Mr. Yulo.

The board of control case had to be taken to the federal supreme court and the best legal talent of the Islands was sought by the government, both officially and extra-officially, to present its side. President Quezon attributed the splendid presentation of the government’s side to the counsel of then Attorney Jose Yulo.

The President revealed that his admiration for Speaker Yulo was no more strongly confirmed than on one occasion when he offered the latter a seat in the Supreme Court. Speaker Yulo refused the offer for reasons, according to the President, that revealed the greatness of the man’s character. He explained that he was still young, and that he had before him a long career in the law which he wished to pursue. If he accepted the position, the then Attorney Yulo said, he could never leave it afterwards in order to practice his profession, as he would not wish to take advantage of his former high position for purposes of gain.

This attitude of the Speaker, said the President, convinced him that here was a man who deserved and was destined to hold a high position in the leadership of the country.

President Quezon also highly commended Mr. Yulo for his brilliant achievements as secretary of justice and later as speaker of the Assembly.

In a speech opening the meeting, Speaker Yulo explained that the purpose of the luncheon was to give the governors an opportunity to get acquainted with the assemblymen and to give the provincial executives a chance to elect their representatives to the national executive commission.

The governors are now entitled to 12 representatives in the national executive commission, whereas in the past they had only 5 delegates.

Speaker Yulo revealed that he has always been in favor of increasing the representation of the governors to the commission in response to the request of the provincial executive themselves, and that he was glad this increase in representation was granted under his presidency of the party.

It was learned later that the governors will grant Governor Sotero Baluyot full authority to select this representatives to the commission on the basis of one representative to each senatorial district.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library