Shortwave Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines To the Philippines

[ Delivered on December 7, 1942 ]

My Beloved Countrymen:

One year ago today, without provocation on our part, Japan attacked our country. From that time on, we have been witnessing the loss of tens of thousands of lives of our best manhood, and many more thousands of our gallant soldiers are today prisoners in the enemy’s camp. Our flourishing cities have been desolated. And you, all of you in the Philippines, are suffering the privations, the moral and physical tortures, of enemy occupation.

You have won the admiration of the whole world. And the government and people of the United States are proud of you and profoundly grateful to you.

On December 28, 1941, President Roosevelt addressed a proclamation to us in which he gave his solemn pledge, as President of the United States, that our “freedom will be redeemed and our independence established and protected.’’ He further stated that the “entire resources in men and material Pf the United States” stand behind that pledge.

I came to Washington together with my War Cabinet on the invitation of President Roosevelt. The presence of your government here is the symbol of your redemption.

The first time that the President invited me to come to the United States was on December 30, 1941. That was just two days after he issued the proclamation to which I have just referred. I decided then to remain in Corregidor sharing with my family the dangers and hardships of our beleaguered forces. My presence there was necessary to maintain the morale of our Army in Bataan. Later, General Mac Arthur expressed the opinion that my presence in the unoccupied territory was of greater value to the continuation of our armed resistance. I, therefore, defied the Japanese blockade and went to the Southern Islands. There I visited some of the provinces, met the government officials and the people, took measures necessary to assist our armed forces and in every possible way, provide for the needs of the civilian population within the means at my command.

Finally, the fall of Bataan and Corregidor became a matter of time. General MacArthur was ordered to go to Australia to prepare the counter offensive in the South Pacific, which would one day result in the expulsion of the Japanese Army from our homeland and the liberation of the Philippines. I was asked by General MacArthur to join him.

With a heart heavy beyond expression, I then had to leave the Philippines, my dear Philippines. My further stay there could not be of any possible value to you. And it was my duty to save the government from being seized by the enemy.

From Australia I came to America in accordance with the suggestion of President Roosevelt. Since my arrival in Washington, the cause of our nationhood has been promoted. The Government of the United States, in its political relations with the Government of the Commonwealth has practically given us recognition as a self-governing nation. I am a signatory to the United Nations Pact in the name of the Philippines; I am a full-fledged member of the Pacific War Council; and President Roosevelt and I have already agreed to create a joint commission that is studying the problems of the economic and financial rehabilitation of the Philippines as well as the means of insuring our future security.

I realize that your main concern, now, is in the prompt deliverance of our country from the invader. But I want you to understand that the Government and people of the United States, and President Roosevelt in particular, are not neglecting you. You, above every other people and nation, are uppermost in their mind. The fact that in the early months of the war help did not come to us, the fact that after one year the forces of America are not all concentrated in the Pacific and directed to the defeat of Japan and the reconquest of the Philippines, all these do not indicate that President Roosevelt or his government and people give preference to the liberation of Europe or the defense of England, America knows that her obligation to save the Filipino people is greater than her obligation to save any other people in the world. Indeed, only in the Philippines has her own sovereignty been assailed, and certainly the paramount duty of America is to defend her own sovereignty and national honor.

The strategy of war is dictated by hard-boiled military considerations and not by the desires of the heart. This strategy compels the United States to distribute her troops and her supplies wherever the military men believe they will bring about the earliest defeat of the enemy. This is not a war between the United States and Japan only. This is a global war, and, in order to win, it must be won on all fronts before our victory is complete.

You know that my greatest concern is the liberation of the Philippines from the Japanese invader. And you know me well enough to believe me when I say, as I say it to you now , that if I thought the United States was neglecting us, no power on earth, no threat, no human consideration would keep me silent. The whole world would hear my protest. But we must have faith—and I know we do have faith—in those who are responsible for winning this war. We must let them decide where and when the Axis should be attacked. Hard fighting is now going on in the Pacific and in Africa, and the tide is slowly beginning to turn in our favor. We still have very far to go. But do not lose heart. There is no doubt that victory will be ours—complete and decisive.

I only live to see that day of victory come. My heart is aching to be back with you again. I give you my solemn word that, because of your gallantry, because of your loyalty to America, because of your faithfulness to your own government, our dead shall not have died in vain. And our country will come out of this trial greater, nobler, and happier than ever before, with her peace, her progress and her liberty forever secured.

Source : New York Public Library

Quezon, M. L. (1942). Shortwave Radio Address of President Quezon to the Philippines . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines , Washington , 41(1), 8-9.