OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

HON. FRANCIS B. SAYRE AND THE PHILIPPINES AND ITS PEOPLE

[Delivered at the New Luneta, Manila, on October 21, 1939]

Mr. High Commissioner, People of the Philippines:

The new United States High Commissioner has arrived and we are here to greet and welcome him with hearts filled with gratitude, for no better choice could have been made by the President of the United States than the selection of His Excellency, Francis B. Sayre. [ Applause .]

This is the first time, as far as I know, that he has landed on these beautiful shores of Manila Bay. But he knows the Philippines and the Filipino people, the beauty and the vast resources of this country, and our economic needs, as well as anyone who has lived with us for many years. He has spent the last three years studying all angles of the Philippine problem, using his keen mind and the great humanitarian heart that throbs within him. Knowing so much about our needs here, he was able to do everything within his power to secure for our people and our country the needed help of the United States throughout all the processes that took place from the time the President of the United States and I had agreed on the appointment of a Joint Preparatory Committee to study carefully the future trade relations between the United States and the Philippines, until the Congress acted upon the report and recommendations of that committee. The Congress of the United States did not deem it advisable to act at this time on all the recommendations of the Joint Preparatory Committee, but it has adopted to a large extent the recommendations of the committee regarding our trade relations with the United States up to 1946. The Congress has also provided that two years prior to the date fixed for the recognition of Philippine independence, a new committee shall be appointed to consider the question of the trade relations between the United States and the Philippines after independence.

For the last three years I had been hoping that His Excellency. Francis B. Sayre, would be appointed United States High Commissioner to succeed High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt, whose early return to the United States was anticipated. I had requested him to come with the other members of the Joint Preparatory Committee, bid because he had several other duties to perform which Secretary of State Cordell Hull was not willing to entrust to other hands, his trip had to be postponed. Today, however, he is here with us. He finds a people who know him as well as he knows them. We know of his record as adviser to the Government of Siam, and of his ability to treat the people of a different race. We know of his deep interest in our welfare. We know that he is our friend, and we welcome him today with grateful hearts and cordially extend to him the hospitality of our whole country. We hope that he and Mrs. Sayre will enjoy their stay in the Philippines, and may he be the man to turn over to the first President of the Philippine Republic  the authority and sovereignty of the United States over these Islands.

People of the Philippines: the United States High Commissioner, Francis B. Sayre.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library