SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

QUALITY OF OFFICERS OF THE PHILIPPINE ARMY

[Delivered on the occasion of the taking of oath of office of Brigadier- General Vicente Lim as Deputy Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army, at Malacañan, on May 17, 1939]

Gentlemen:

I have taken advantage of this occasion to say a few words to you. “con el corazón en la mano”—with my heart in my hand—as they say it in Spanish. You all realize that an army is as good as its corps of officers; it cannot be any better. This is particularly true with you, gentlemen, who are at present at the head of that organization.

From its incipiency the Philippine Army has met with very serious difficulties. In the first place, we had no man in the country who had the preparation to advise the Government of the Commonwealth as to what should be done in the organization of our National Defense. Fortunately for us, I easily found a way out of this difficulty. My long personal acquaintance with the former Chief of Staff of the United States Army and his love for the Philippines, as well as his personal affection for me, solved the question. I went to General Douglas MacArthur and asked him to help us organize our national defense forces; and, without hesitation, he accepted the offer wholeheartedly.

The next obstacle was the material to be used in the organization of the army. We had two elements at the time: the Philippine Constabulary, an efficient police organization that has been in the public service for almost as long a time as the Civil Government of the Philippines, and the Filipino officers serving in the Scout force of the regular army of the United States. These were the only available materials then. Although the Constabulary is an efficient national police organization, yet it was not prepared to do army work for it had not been trained for that purpose. It could do the work of an army only within certain limits.

The Filipino Scout officers belong to the United States Army. As they were not in the service of the Philippine Government, they were at our disposal only if and when they were willing to serve our Government. Most of these men were trained in the military academy of the Federal Government at West Point; others acquired their training through a long period of active service, so that from the point of view of military preparation they were better trained than our Constabulary officers. Yet even if they were willing to serve us, these Scout officers had no sufficient experience in the command of large bodies of men to provide us a competent leadership in the organization of our army. These were our main difficulties.

When we started the organization of the Philippine Army, doubts as to what the Philippine Scouts would do were expressed in the newspapers. Finally, a committee of Scout officers came to me and expressed the willingness of their comrades to serve in the Philippine Army.

I want to say to every one here that I prefer to have no army at all in the Philippines, unless every man in the army, from the highest ranking officer to the lowest soldier, believes and practices the ideal that the army officer should be, above all, an honorable man. I would rather have officers who know very little of military science and tactics, provided they are honest and hon­orable, than officers who know much but are dishonest and dishonorable. I want every officer of the Philippine Army to consider his uniform as incontrovertible evidence that he is a gentleman. I want every one of you to love that uniform more than your wife, your sister, your son, or yourself; and that love should be manifested in your determination not to allow anybody to disgrace the uniform.

You need no courts-martial to do away with the men who are unworthy of their uniform. You should be a judge of yourself and your associates. If you know of any one who is a discredit to the army, you should be the first to take action against him in order to get rid of the unworthy. This is the difference between an army whose officers have little regard for their own honor and that of their followers and an army where only good men, men with high ideals, are retained as officers. When the people see an officer of the latter army, they will say, “Here is a good citizen;” whereas, of the former, there will be doubts as to whether or not its officer places honesty, honor, dignity, and love of country above all other considerations, for your own prestige and so that you may look every man straight in the eye, you must see to it that anybody who is unworthy of his uniform does not stay in the organization. I know nothing about army organization, but I know the kind of officers I want to have. So long as I am President, I will get rid of all the undesirable men in the army; and I will always find some means of doing it. I prefer to have no army at all if I cannot do that.

I want to close my remarks with another reiteration of my thanks to General MacArthur for his unselfish devotion to the work that I have entrusted to him. For some time we will need the help, the leadership, and the advice of General MacArthur. I want also to thank the Scout officers who have proven that they are not only good soldiers but good Filipinos as well. I want to thank the former Constabulary officers for the discipline and the loyalty that they have shown in the past. I expect cooperation among you.

We have a General Staff. Under the law, the Chief of Staff and the General Staff have their own responsibilities. I expect the General Staff to perform its duties, to assume its responsibilities, and to present its views courageously to General MacArthur; and whenever there is a disagreement, I expect to study the matter myself for, after all, the Commander-in-Chief of the Army, who is a civilian, has the final say. Nobody here should think, if he has something reasonable to say, that he is too humble to say it; nor should anybody feel so big that no one can profitably advise him. I am always ready to hear suggestions. In the army, the suggestions should be coursed through proper channels, otherwise there would be chaos that might eventually wreck our whole scheme of government. But good ideas should be presented to me; they should not be kept away from me. Also they always have a way of reaching me.

Gentlemen, you have the greatest opportunity that a man can have. The success of our undertaking is in your hands. Neither General MacArthur nor I can build the National Defense of the Philippines. We have to count upon you. We are confident of success because we believe in you, and we hope that every one will do the part assigned to him in this great task.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library