President of the People's Forum, respected wife of Speaker Yulo, my friends:

The honor bestowed upon me by the civic organization Palihan ng Bayan is one which I consider as the climax of other similar manifestations of personal appraisal attributed to me by my countrymen on the occasion of my birthday. I attach to this occasion an importance which is more than what I could express in words, not only because the members composing your association ascribe great significance to this gathering but also because the purposes of the Palihan ng Bayan are identical with those of similar organizations being defended by any Filipino who nurtures a love for his native land.

It is not only now but also quite long ago that I have been cognizant of the aims of the Palihan ng Bayan . I still remember that a few years ago, when the ex-president of this organization, my friend Mr. Godoy, visited me one time and showed me the by-laws of your association, he asked me if I had anything to say against its purposes. My reply to Mr. Godoy was that I could sign my name on the papers wherein those aims were written, because the members of your organization would really stand for those purposes, which I am confident you really do; and if our countrymen will cooperate in executing them, I hope that we will secure not only our cherished political freedom but also our economic self-sufficiency which would be for the welfare of all.

We have just heard from Mr. Godoy this morning the purpose of the Palihan ng Bayan . The same purposes are embodied in the by-laws of almost all the parties in the Philippines, hence we could subscribe to them. Those are the aims which make us remember the traditions of our forefathers because many of them were the ones followed by our elders: peace, cooperation, and the discovery of means to bring about the progress of the country. What else could we say that is not embodied in the purposes of your association and which would bring progress and welfare to the country? That is why I attach importance to this occasion wherein you honor me in conjunction with my birthday because I really subscribe to your purposes, and I hereby request all to follow them in order to make effective the steps towards coöperation.

My countrymen: If all of us would carry out the aims of the Palihan ng Bayan , we could be sure that, even if we selected anybody to be the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, he and his administration would succeed. It is erroneous to suppose that the progress of a country depends upon what its president could do. A country that knows not how to impart justice, a country that does not protect its constituents nor seek the welfare of all, a nation that heeds the inducement of men who seek only their own welfare and who even bring destruction by their acts, will attain not its well-being but unhappiness and sacrifice instead. [ Ovation .]

One of the underlying causes why I decided not to run for reëlection is that I do not wish to make you feel, especially here in the Philippines, that power or position will affect our morals in our stand simply because we have the idea that our will is subjected to changes. The fact is our hearts throb with the love of country above the love for power, for equality, for freedom and for justice. [ Ringing applause .]

It is improper to think that we should never leave a position if we found it to be enjoyable. We must select the best man for the highest and most powerful position in our land; we must follow him and give him his due. If the time comes for him to leave his position, he must abide by the will of the people. It is really true that there are persons who feel untowardly when they leave their office. They can not forget that they have exercised powers and enjoyed privileges, and almost they have nothing in their mind except the idea of being returned to their former position. Because of their desire for power, they accept this even from foreigners if they can not secure it from their people.

There are also a few who, in the past, had the opportunity to seek important positions in the high councils of the nation, and when their days were over, they became discontented. Their ardent desire to return to their former positions served as the inducing force in seeking any means in order to destroy, if possible, the solidarity of the nation; for they believe that if this were brought about, they would, in the long run, be powerful on the face of the earth. This is very bad indeed, because there is no other poison that will end the life of the country except such condemnable attitude.

We should, therefore, show that there are Filipinos who abhor returning to their former positions when the time comes to return to them. This is the reason why, although I have many friends and colleagues, and also countrymen from whom I often hear invitations that I continue in my office, yet I have remained adamant to their inducement. [ Applause .] May this attitude of mine against reëlection open the eyes of those who are seeking power and high positions, and may it also enlighten them to the fact that they should not love power more than they should love their country, no matter what the status of each individual be. There are men who are ready to accept positions if these positions are high ones.

Again, let me confide in you: I will not be the one to substitute myself in the coming election. But if there will be persons who shall offer that I become councilor, I will be ready to be so. [ Continuous ovation and cries of “Mabuhay” and “Reëlection” .] No reëlection! [ Cries again of “Mabuhay” and “Reëlection”. ] Wait a minute, I am not yet through. It is not the high position that gives honor to a man. The good will in the performance of official functions is the one that gives due credit to the man. [ Applause .] Even a humble councilor or an employee who is cognizant of his duties, which he derives from the people or from the Government, enjoys great honor in comparison with a President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines who had no other concern than to seek his own welfare or his own personal convenience and that of his friends. [ Cries of “Mabuhay” and applause .] But there are also some persons who select a position which they can accept because what they have in their minds is not to serve the country but to exercise powers. [ Applause .] Any person who is ready to serve his country should not select any position if this is not offered to him. [ Applause .]

My countrymen: I have already reminded you that we should forget dissensions arising from our party affiliations. If there is really anything on which we do not agree because our ideas do not coincide, it is not bad if we join together or form a party of our own. Those who are in favor of a principle should stand by it; and those who are in opposition should also abide by it on the other side.

What are our differences in the Philippines today? Are we really in conflict with our desire to obtain political independence? Are we opposed to each other in the belief regarding social justice? Is there any man here who could tell me that he is not happy to know that I favor the laborers, and that I seek their betterment and also the protection of their legitimate rights? Is there anybody here who opposes the development of Mindanao? Are there men in this gathering who are courageous enough to stand and tell you frankly: “The acts of President Quezon are foolish”? Nobody! In recognition of the efforts of the Government to help the country and of my efforts and sacrifice to do something for the welfare of the masses, they have nothing to say against me. Yet they always criticize and consider me as bad. They seem to feel, because of their unlimited comments and criticisms, that if they are the ones to substitute me, they could do better. In short, they are inviting us to be divided as a people, not because they have great purposes which will be for the welfare of the country, but because of their desire that we become weak so that they could come into power.

My countrymen, we cannot prevent a few of our colleagues from deserting us. That is not very important, and it will not prejudice my efforts to help you. It is not nice for us to stage a demonstration and have nobody remain as spectator. [ Laughter .] It is better that some be outside the fence in order that they may detect whether what we are doing inside is either good or bad. It is unnecessary for them to criticize us if what we are doing is bad. But what I wish should not come to pass, for which I pray day and night, is that we be not divided in this country.

We should not be divided because this is not yet the opportune time for us to part on opposite ways. These are the days when our country needs the coöperation of all: those who can bestow wisdom and those who can afford to give love as a contribution to their country.

There are many who dare say that I am doing this in order to deceive the country. I do not want to answer the charge because I hold on to my four years of service in the Government whose administration is under the antis and the pros . The country should reply to such charges because the people know very well if the country has been benefited or not during the four years of administration by the antis and the pros .

At the time that our leaders were at loggerheads, their followers—men who could help secure the welfare of the country—were also divided. If I allowed such situation to continue, what would happen to us? One half will work for the good of the country and the other half will exert every effort to destroy what has been accomplished by the former. Where would we be under these circumstances?

My countrymen, I should like you to ponder upon the things which I shall say to you. Let us suppose that there exist two corporations in our Government, which offer only one commodity for sale. The members of one corporation believe that it should have a majority and a minority. The minority has nothing in mind but to destroy the acts of the majority. The majority, if they desire to do good to the corporation, will oppose the measure of the minority; the latter believes that if they cooperate, they will not be able to oust the majority from their power. In the other organization, all are united and they have nothing in mind except to help each and every member thereof for the good of the corporation.

The Government is simply an organization of the people. A government the members of whose board of directors are in complete accord, will do much good for the country. But a government wherein the officers do nothing but criticize each other in order to take over one another’s power is bound to collapse. This is my answer to those who say that a division is necessary in this country.

You should know that in democratic governments, the conflicting parties unite if there is war or calamity. Why? Because they admit that a country is only bound to succeed in war if they are united. In cases of emergency, they seek a way to bring about their union in order to succeed. They become united in the face of danger so as to gain strength. It may be true that it is much better to have two parties instead of only one. The Philippines is not at war; the status of the Philippines is the same as that of other governments under a critical regime. We are facing the goal of our independence, and we should exert all our efforts so that, should our country become free, we could be prepared for any war in case this ever comes. In the course of our efforts to establish a new government our country is entering into a new economic era. We now have a government under which all are united and in perfect companionship—a government which has the coöperation of all.

One of the causes why I like to leave my position is that I wish my countrymen, especially my adversaries, to learn that I am not asking anything from the people who may work against me, and that, instead. I am ready to help bring about the welfare of the Government. Those who seek our disunion or division have already exercised powers and enjoyed privileges, and you will see that they will again be in the election front in the future although they will not win. [ Laughter, applause and cries of “Mabuhay .”] But if those who desire our division are the ones whom you will help to win. I promise you that they can expect my help and my support. [ Cries of “Mabuhay” and applause .]

I cannot force anybody to do one thing. I can never aspire to have a position if it will be prejudicial or will not be of benefit to the country. Because of my belief that our unity should not be destroyed nor the people be divided, even though the one who will be elected is not my colleague in the party, I would still respect him. On the day that I cease to hold my position. I shall present him to the people and address him in this wise: “My countrymen, here is the man whom you have elected. I am not the one who selected him; he is not my party colleague, but for the welfare of the country and for the unity of the nation, in order to avert division and the collapse of the country and because he is our president, we are duty-bound to help him and coöperate with him in his administration.” [ Cries of “Mabuhay” and applause .]

My countrymen: I will repeat here that the present status of the Filipinos is very precarious. The peace and contentment of our forbears is now in our hands. We, who after a short period will die, are only worrying about the future of our children whom we shall leave behind. In the name of the Philippines and in the name of my children I ask all to unite and coöperate with our government in order that it may discharge properly its duties in seeking the freedom and contentment of our country. [ Cries of “Mabuhay” and repeated applause .]

Source : Presidential Museum and Library