Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the Occasion of the Graduation of Filipino Air Pilots

[ Delivered at Camp Murphy, Rizal, October 30, 1937 ]

—–

To stand alone as a free nation, we must be self-reliant and capable of self-defense. We must be self-sufficient, insofar as this term implies a balance of earning power against necessary expenditure. We must be prepared to assure the progressive education and training of our less favored classes, and to raise their standard of living to a level compatible with other countries, and, finally, we must develop our complete resources to the continuous benefit of all our people.

—–

Ladies and Gentlemen:

This date is one of real significance to the Philippine Islands, Four Filipinos, trained exclusively in the use of flying facilities, under the exacting standards prescribed by their American Air Corps instructors, are graduating today as military pilots. To each of these young men I offer my sincere congratulations. By studying diligently, and by surmounting the difficult tests, placed before them, they have immeasurably increased their capacity for service to the Army, and their value to the Commonwealth.

It is true that we have had earlier Filipino pilots. In our Army today are two who -successfully completed the course in military flying in the United States; but today’s graduation is significant in that it completes the first full cycle of training in our own Flying School, and so marks a definite progressive step in the development of the Philippine Army. More than this, today’s graduation provides additional evidence that we, as a nation, may become increasingly self-dependent in all those things necessary to our own future existence, if we are imbued with the same determination and energy that have been responsible for the accomplishments we are today celebrating.

Only a little over two years ago this school was nothing but a vision in the minds of a few forward-looking men in our Government.

Contemplation of the tasks necessary to translate that dream into the reality of today was enough to appall any one except those of stout heart and unswerving devotion to an ideal. To how from a rough hillside a suitable flying field, to procure and erect the required facilities, to select and train the necessary skilled crews for the field’s maintenance, operation and administration, and finally to organize professional skill, student bodies, and material assets into a successful instructional institution, were problems that stood squarely in the path. The heads of the former Constabulary organization who conceived this plan and who first recommended it to the legislature, their successors in the Philippine Army who have devoted their energies towards ensuring its progress, and the members of the legislative body who have provided the essential authorization and funds, are all deserving of our admiration. Without them the and funds, are all deserving original conception would have remained only an unfulfilled dream.

In an equally direct fashion we are indebted to an officer of the American Army, Lieutenant William Lee of the Air Corps. Since the very beginning of this plan he has served as its immediate directing head. He has been responsible for all its details of organization, of procurement, of selection of students, and of their subsequent training. To his zeal, his good judgment and his professional skill, we shall always be obligated for the assurance which we now have that hereafter Filipino pilots can normally be trained within Filipino territory and with Filipino facilities. Happily, this officer continues to serve in his important position, a circumstance that is cause indeed for self-congratulation by the Air Corps and by all the Philippine Army.

The work and accomplishments of the devoted group responsible for this brilliant achievement stand as an example for emulation by our whole people. In the modern world national security demands a highly trained and suitably equipped air force. Realizing this, these men took to themselves the task, of providing it. Refusing to be turned aside by the knowledge of certain obstacles in their path, by the magnitude of unfamiliar tasks, or by the doleful prophecies of doubting critics, they applied themselves steadfastly and without stint to the work at hand. The material progress they have achieved, as evident on this field before our eyes, is no greater promise of their final complete success than are the four pilots who are today the first graduates of the school.

I sincerely wish that every Filipino in every walk of life could trace this project from its first unpromising beginnings to its present state of demonstrated efficiency. It is typical of the comprehensive achievements of the Philippine Army throughout the archipelago. Within the past year training stations have been built in almost one hundred separate localities. Already one class of trainees has finished its course of instruction, and within a very few weeks another will graduate. Details of organization, of supply and of administration have been thoughtfully provided for, and our army is rapidly taking form as an agency equipped to provide for future Philippine security.

In every line of human endeavor and in every phase of national existence we have equally important problems to solve, similar difficulties to overcome. To stand alone as a free nation, we must be self-reliant and capable of self-defense. We must be self-sufficient, insofar as this term implies a balance of earning power against necessary expenditure. We must be prepared to assure the progressive necessary education and training of our less favored classes, and to raise their standard of living to a level compatible with other countries, and, finally, we must develop our complete resources to the continuous benefit of all our people. Again and again I have expressed my confidence in the capacity of the Filipino character to meet and overcome these tests. In this airfield we have a living monument to patriotism, determination, enthusiasm, logical thought, and devotion to duty. These are the racial qualifications that will bring us success in all the national problems with which we are faced, or which we may have to face in the future.

Source: University Archives, U niversity of the Philippines Diliman Library