“COURTS SHOULD INFUSE LEGAL TRADITION WITH BREATH OF PRESENT DAY LIFE!”— QUEZON

From THE PHILIPPINES HERALD, Sept. 20, 1939, as republished in THE LAWYERS’ JOURNAL, Vol. VII, Oct. 31, 1939, No. 20

Anxiety and concern over the future of the Philippines and an earnest appeal for a close study of the trend and development of the international politics of today in iteration to the Philippine problem was voiced last night by President Manuel L. Quezon at the banquet in the Winter Garden of the Manila Hotel in celebration of the silver anniversary of the members of the law profession who passed the bar examination in 1914.

The President also made a comprehensive analysis of the changed and changing political and social philosophy governing the world of today to bring out the idea that just as in present-day governments—even in dictatorships—the philosophy of respect for the best interests of the greatest number obtains, so the time is here when the courts should infuse legal traditions with the breath of present-day life in order that courts of justice may be guided by a living legal philosophy and laws are interpreted in the lint of modern politico-social doctrines the keynote of which is to consider the welfare of the nation as a whole as the paramount interest over and above the red-tape of legal technicalities.

Thought-Provoking

Because subtly said and forcefully delivered, last night’s speech made by the President will stand out in history as one of the most thought-provoking addresses ever made by the Filipino national leader.

It was an extemporaneous speech and the President made it clear that he was not prepared to make an address but that in view of certain he was not prepared to make an address but that in view of certain remarks made by Secretary Benigno S. Aquino, who was the spokesman of the class, he was compelled to make a response.

Secretary Aquino, speaking for the class, expressed the gratitude and the hope of his colleagues by saying that the class was grateful to the President, to whom they were dedicating their silver anniversary in the law profession, because of the fact that he has honored some of the members with the highest positions in the government; he expressed their hope with the toast that they expect to see the present Commonwealth President as the first President of the Philippine Republic when independence is established by the Filipino people in 1946.

President Quezon, in his response, said that he was grateful to Secretary Aquino for the expression of the hope which he said was that of his class but the President said, such an expression would have made him happy four or five years days ago, but that now, in view of recent international developments, he receive it with real misgiving and concern.

He enjoined his hearers to study the trend of events and to scan, with him, the future of the Philippines in order that they may properly lead the nation when the time for final decision is at hand. The President expressed the confidence that given the intelligence and the background of those who were listening to him, he need not say more, but that he was leaving it to them to make their own conclusions regarding his statement that the expression of Secretary Aquino’s hope was received by his not with the natural rejoicing that such an exalted honor logically conveys, but with the anxiety of one who, while loving his country, cannot help but look at the morrow with anxiety and concern.

Tribute to Judges

The President then went to pay a tribute to the present administration of justice, saying that he knows for a certainty that during the last three years he has seen how the faith of the people in the courts, especially in the supreme court, has been strengthened and enhance because of the efficient, just and speedy manner in which justice has been dispensed to poor and rich alike. He said that he was proud of the members of the judiciary, men of unimpeachable honesty and integrity and of unquestioned ability, and who would, according to him, honor any bench anywhere in the world.

President Quezon then declared that he was not speaking as the Chief Executive but as a mere Juan de la Cruz, and as a man on the street he emphasized that despite the high standards of the present administration of justice in the Philippines, there are certain legal technicalities that the ordinary citizen cannot understand.

Why certain estafa cases cannot be decided by the courts for months and sometimes for years, he said, is beyond the comprehension of Juan de la Cruz; why a man who is known to have committed a crime can have his trial postponed time and again stretching to years because of certain technicalities taken advantage of by luminaries of the bar in incomprehensible to the simple mind of the average citizen; how defendants who can employ good lawyers can circumvent the law while those who cannot afford to have expensive counsel go to jail is also something that the poor “tao” cannot understand.

The President then suggested that the remedy lies, first, in better rules of procedure that should be promulgated by the Supreme Court, and, second, by imbuing the lawyers with the conviction that they are officers of the court to help in the administration of speedy justice.

Mistaken “ Espirit de corps ”

He stressed the fact that the Philippine bar has a mission to perform and that it should take the initiative in seeing to it that unprincipled lawyers are given their due. The President assailed the so-called “espirit de corps” which he said is misunderstood and misinterpreted as a shield to conceal the faults or the crimes of fellow members of a group when rightly it should be interpreted as the purging out of the undesirable member to protect the whole organization or profession. “Espirit de corps” according to him should be the commendable spirit of defending the good name of the whole body and not the protection of an individual member or members who are besmirching the good name of all.

In vigorous words he denounced the common failing of the Filipinos of being weak hearted when it comes to a case in which their friend or someone close to them is affected. He made it clear that a thing is wrong or punishable per se or it is not; if it is, there should be no halfway measures, and the time has come in the national development of the Filipinos when they should forget attachments and should be able to subordinate their personal feelings to the demands of justice and good government.

Changing Social Ideas

The President was in the height of his eloquence when he began to speak of what he conceives to be the need of the courts today. He spoke of the changing social and political philosophies of the present and contrasted dictatorships with democracies, saying that even in dictatorships an attempt is constantly made by the Hitlers and the Mussolinis and the Stalins to interpret the wishes of the people and to make it appear that their decisions bear the stamp of popular approval as shown by their reiterated calls for plebiscite for every action they take of national significance.

He declared emphatically that the new philosophy of the times demands that in the interpretation of the laws of the land by the courts, the courts must keep themselves attuned to the demands of the present, hearing in mind their responsibility that the judiciary is in fact the supreme power of the land, for the courts interpret laws and interpreting them, they legislate, and it is a legislation that can neither be repealed nor vetoed.

Again he stressed the fact that he was not in any way trying to tell the courts here what to do and that while he can never dissociate himself from the fact that he is at all times the chief executive of the Commonwealth, still he was but discoursing last night on a topic nearest his heart as an ordinary citizen would.

Laws Are Mutable

Axiomatically, he made the assertion with the emphasis that he alone can give words, that while justice is eternal, laws are mutable, and the proper interpretation of laws should not ignite the existing political and social conditions when and where the laws are applied.

He sarcastically referred to the so-called luminaries of the bar who pride themselves in their fossilized knowledge of precedents and jurisprudence yellowed with age in the libraries an dusty with the dust of centuries, saying that while he does not discount the value of such legal wisdom as a background, still it is important that they be taken not as graveyard relics to awe both the courts and the litigants, but as a living legal philosophy to be interpreted in the light of present day conditions. The welfare of the whole nation, he said, is and should always be the supreme consideration.

Concluding, he reminded his audience that they are living in a changing world with regnant philosophies that are also changing and that the courts of justice if they are continue deserving the confidence of the people, must not be shackled to tradition but must move onward with the times; and he further said that it does not necessarily follow that why was sacrosanct before should also be sacrosanct now. He asserted that the sanctity of contracts is no longer respected when such contracts violate human rights, for human rights, it must at all times be remembered, he stressed, are always and should always be above property rights.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library

Quezon, M. L. (1939). [Courts should infuse legal tradition with breath of present day life!]. University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library.