VIRTUE OF MILITARY SERVICE

To the Constabulary Soldiers at the Tuguegarao Barracks:

I am greatly pleased with your showing. Before I leave I want to say a few words.

I hope that every Constabulary soldier will feel the importance of his work. You are the agents of law. You are in fact the representatives of the president of the Philippines wherever you are in the performance of your duties, in the enforcement of the law, and in the maintenance of peace and order. I hope that every one of you will so conduct himself all the time that the people will look upon you as the protectors of their rights, the defenders of their homes. You have to be gentlemen all the time in your dealings with the people. I want you to win both the respect and the affection of the citizens of our country. As the officers and soldiers of the Philippine Army conduct themselves, so will the people have a good or bad idea of the government that they have. So please remember that all the time. I want you to honor your uniform. Our Government is a poor government and therefore it cannot pay you perhaps as well as other governments, although compared with Japan, we are paying our soldiers and officers better. If the Government could afford it and your work justified it, you would be paid better salaries, so keep on doing your jobs well and better as though you were getting two or three times more. Yours is an honorable profession. I want you to know that I am deeply interested in your work and will depend on each and everyone of you. I want the officers of the organization to take good care of your health and well-being. Get the best food you can, and take care of yourselves. This is a place where there is malaria. I have asked the health officer to make frequent visits to your posts.

Take care of your soldiers, Captain. Stay with these fellows: I want to say that I know I can depend on the Constabulary organization.

You should also periodically inspect the policemen. Make it a point to improve the conditions of the municipal police, but above all, keep these boys on the job always.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library