SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

GOVERNMENT AID TO INTERISLAND SHIPPING

[Broadcast from the m. s. Don Isidro , on October 7, 1939]

Ladies and Gentlemen:

I am addressing you from the Don Isidro , the newest interisland steamer owned by the grand old man of the South, Don Esteban de la Rama. Without any question, this ship is second to none in our interisland navigation; and Don Esteban and his son-in-law, Mr. Pirovano, who is in charge of the shipping business of the company, deserve to be heartily congratulated. More than this, they are entitled to public recognition, for in acquiring this and other new ships to be used in the domestic and foreign trade of the Philippines, they have shown themselves to be public-spirited citizens of our community who are endowed with unusual vision and courage.

I know very few men in this or any other country who would have attempted to do what Don Esteban has done after working hard all his life and consolidating a large fortune, which is more than sufficient to insure a comfortable existence not only for himself during the remaining years of his life, but also for his family. He has tempted fortune by risking everything he possesses in the acquisition of these ships, not so much out of any desire to increase his wealth as out of his determination to coöperate with the Government in its policy of securing for the people of the Philippines more and better transportation facilities.

I am especially proud of, and happy over, the acquisition of this and other ships by my friend Don Esteban, because I have been interested during the last few years in encouraging the improvement of our interisland transportation. Travel by sea in the Philippines used to be a real hardship. It seemed that those engaged in the interisland shipping had been afraid to invest so much capital in the business. They did not believe that the public would respond by patronizing the better, if more expensive, steamers. And so the first step I took, upon seeing the lack of willingness on the part of our shipowners to acquire up-to-date and comfortable boats, was to suggest to the Dollar Steamship Company to provide us with one of such ships. Thus the Mayon came to be placed in the interisland service by the Dollar Company. This marked the beginning of rapid improvement in our interisland steamers. Fernandez Hermanos, Elizalde and Company. Madrigal, and later Don Esteban de la Rama, with his first boat the Don Esteban , all felt the inducement to acquire more and better ships. Later, upon learning of the plan of Mr. Dollar to take the Mayon to other waters, I asked the Manila Railroad Company to acquire it, not only because we certainly needed this ship, but also for sentimental reasons I wanted to keep in the Philippines the pioneer ship which had been responsible for the improvement of our interisland navigation. Not content with this, some time before the Government acquired the Mayon , I announced that the Government was ready to extend a helping hand to any local corporation which is desirous of acquiring new ships, by providing it with the necessary funds at low rates of interest if it can offer sufficient security. We waited for some time without anyone making any such offer, until the day came when a formal proposition was submitted by Don Esteban de la Kama for the acquisition of the Don Isidro and other ships. Tonight, after a most marvelous trip lasting five days and covering territory that formerly would have required about two weeks’ time, I am now returning to Manila with the satisfaction of having used the first ship acquired under the circumstances I have related above.

I desire to take advantage of this opportunity to say that the Government is playing no favorites, and anyone who has the security and is willing to invest in the acquisition of good ships will receive its help.

Good night.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library