SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is an honor to be here today to address you all on this very important occasion. We gather not just as representatives of the government, but as fellow Filipinos, united by our shared aspirations for a better future.

Bilang inyong lingkod-bayan, naninindigan ako na ang pag-unlad ng ating bansa ay nakasalalay sa pagtutulungan at pagkakaisa ng bawat isa. We must work together, hand in hand, to overcome the challenges that lie ahead. This includes strengthening our economy, improving our education system, and ensuring the safety and well-being of our citizens.

Ang ating mga programa at proyekto ay nakatuon sa pagbibigay ng oportunidad sa bawat Pilipino, lalo na sa mga nasa laylayan ng lipunan. We are committed to providing access to quality healthcare, affordable housing, and sustainable livelihood opportunities. We believe that no one should be left behind in our pursuit of progress.

We are also focused on good governance and transparency. We will continue to fight against corruption and ensure that public funds are used for the benefit of the people. We must hold ourselves accountable and uphold the highest standards of integrity.

Kaya naman, inaasahan ko ang inyong patuloy na suporta at pakikipagtulungan. Let us all work together to build a Philippines that is prosperous, peaceful, and just for all. Maraming salamat po at mabuhay tayong lahat!

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

WORK OF THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL

[Delivered before the members of the National Economic Council, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, August 22, 1938]

Mr. Chairman and Members of the National Economic Council:

I wish to congratulate you upon your assumption of office, and to express my thanks for your willingness to assume the responsibilities of this position.

It is not necessary for me to dwell upon the importance of the work of the National Economic Council. I am positive that everyone of you is acquainted with the objectives of the law which created this Council, and you know that you are expected to plan for the economic development of the country and the readjustment of its national economy to meet the responsibilities of our Government when independence comes.

The National Economic Council was created three years ago and it was organized soon after the approval of that law. Considering the resources then at the command of the National Economic Council as well as the time it had at its disposal to visualize the economic problems of the country, I feel that the National Economic Council has rendered more service than was expected of it. I want to take advantage of this opportunity to thank Secretary Alas and his associates for what they have done.

Now, the period of achievement has come for the National Economic Council. You have the National Development Company, which is an organization created by an Act of the Legislature with sufficient powers to undertake almost anything that you believe should be undertaken by the Company in this work of economic planning, reconstruction, and rehabilitation. Thanks to the prosperous situation of the National Treasury, it may be said that the National Development Company, and therefore the National Economic Council, has sufficient resources to undertake any enterprise that in your opinion is necessary to carry out the purposes of the law.

I have asked Assemblyman Roxas to accept an appointment as Chairman of the National Economic Council, not only because of his special qualifications for the position, but also because he has been placed under circumstances which have permitted him, as no other Filipino has been, perhaps, to get acquainted with the purposes of the United States Government in its future trade relations with the ‘ Philippines. Assemblyman Roxas was a member of the Joint Preparatory Committee, working with it from the beginning to its end; and, in that Joint Preparatory Committee, I understand that one of the things they discussed was how best we can readjust our national economy to face the new trade relations that will exist during a certain period between the United States and the Philippines. That is why I have chosen him to head the National Economic Council, not only because he has made a special study of our situation, but also because he is in a position to know exactly what the objectives of both the Government of the United States and the Government of the Philippines, as revealed during the work of the Joint Preparatory Committee, are with reference to the future. I want to thank Assemblyman Roxas for having accepted this post of responsibility and I know that he will do the best he can, which without doubt will be the best that we can expect of the Philippines under these difficult and trying circumstances.

I want to tell you, gentlemen, that I am not going to interfere at all with the work of the National Economic Council. I do not want to appear to be the leader of this Body. I want to use this Body as the Adviser of the Government in our plans for the future and. therefore. I hope you will feel perfectly free to take up the matters that you desire to take up, discuss them, come to conclusions, and then bring to me the results of these problems after you have threshed them out properly and completely. Then, if I have any suggestions to make, either during the time that you are working on certain problems or after. I shall feel free to make them. But I want to make the National Economic Council assume full responsibility and not feel that it has been created to do what I want it to do. If an occasion comes up when there will be a radical conflict of views as to what the National Economic Council wants to do and what I think is proper for the Philippine Government to do, that will be the time for each one of us to assume responsibility. The National Economic Council is entitled to have its views on record, anyway, so that the members may be considered as the men who have the final responsibility toward the Government. Of course, I will take a position that I honestly believe is the best. But in any event. whether you are doing something on which I agree with you or not, I want the members of the National Economic Council to express their own views and not mine, and to study all questions as you see them and not as I want you to see them. Otherwise, we would have a body that we might just as well dispense with if the National Economic Council does not assume the responsibility for what the law expects you to do—to advise the Government. I have so much confidence in everyone of you that it is inconceivable for me to imagine you submitting something to me which will not be deserving of my attention.

Once more I want to thank you all for having accepted your positions and also to congratulate you because I believe that you have a great opportunity of rendering one of the most important services, if not the most important, to the people of the Philippines at this period of its progress.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library