ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF VICE PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMEÑA*

−−−−−

Sergio Osmeña will go down in history as one of the greatest Filipinos.

He is by nature an evolutionist, and I have been all my life a revolutionist. He always built upon the past, while I always wanted to jump. . . . Inspired by a rebellious spirit, I always moved in a hurry,—never satisfied; I always wanted to go on without looking back; while he, ever measuring the distance, always looked ahead but without forgetting what was behind.

−−−−−

Mr. Vice President, Ladies and Gentlemen:

We are honoring tonight my friend and colleague, the Vice President, on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of his birthday. I am very happy to be able to thus honor him.

The Vice President is a born statesman. He was hardly 28 years old when he was elected to the First National Assembly, and even at that time he proved himself to be the greatest statesman of his day. Sergio Osmeña will go down in history as one of the greatest Filipinos. He had the ability to interpret to the American people the ideals and sentiments of the Filipino people, and to the Filipino people the purposes and objectives of the United States in the Philippines.

Sergio Osmeña came to power as the leader of the Nationalist Party, and, therefore, as the spokesman of the Filipino people in their struggle for independence. In his wisdom, he so ably presented to the United States those natural ambitions of his people which, from the beginning, America understood and appreciated; and in the thirst for freedom and liberty of the people of this country, there was not involved any antagonism or ill-feeling toward the United States. On the other hand, he had the ability to tell the Filipino people that America had come to the Philippines not to exploit or enslave them, but—in good faith—to help them attain the independence for which they had fought. Thus, he became the man who made it possible for America and the Philippines to work together and to accomplish that noble enterprise which is today the admiration of the world and the source of gratitude to the United States on the part of the Philippines. When history is written, the main credit for this great accomplishment will be given to Sergio Osmeña.

It so happened that the Vice-President and I have been friends ever since we were in college. We entered politics in the same year. We were elected provincial governors on the same day, and we took our oath of office on the same day; we were elected to the Philippine Assembly on the same day, and we took our oath of office on the same day. He was elected Speaker, the leader of that Assembly; and it was my privilege to cooperate with him. I was his leader on the floor, but I must say in frankness that while then I cooperated with Speaker Osmeña, it was he and he alone who conceived the policies of the party and determined how to carry them out. I am afraid that the majority of the young people now living have forgotten or have never known how much the Vice President has done for them, how much of the freedom and advancement they enjoy today are due to the vision and unselfish service rendered to our common country by this man. Sergio Osmeña, as Speaker of the House in 1907,was practically the only man in that body who knew anything about legislative work, and the wonder of it all was that he had never been outside of his country, that he had never seen a legislative body at work, that perhaps he had read very little about democracy and the workings of democracy; and yet, none of our Assemblies, from the first to the last, has ever excelled that First Assembly, either in the ability of its members, in the character of the work accomplished, or in the patriotic spirit with which it served. It was all due to Sergio Osmeña. We were nothing but his collaborators.

It has been the irony of fate that it fell to my lot to have to fight his leadership after a long, continuous, and delightful association; but there had never been on my part, nor I think on his part, any ill-feeling in any political struggle in which we were engaged. Each did what he thought was right and his duty. As I look back to the days when for the first time the Vice President and I, loving each other as much as we did, found ourselves in opposite camps, the only explanation that I can find is the fact that we are temperamentally opposite. He is by nature an evolutionist, and I have been all my life a revolutionist. He always built upon the past, while I always wanted to jump. That and that alone was the cause of our misunderstandings. Inspired by a rebellious spirit, I always moved in a hurry,—never satisfied; I always wanted to go on without looking back; while he, ever measuring the distance, always looked ahead but without forgetting what was behind. It was only for this reason that we clashed; and so you find that at the end of every struggle, since there were never fundamentally serious differences in our aims and purposes, it has always been possible for us to join hands again.

Since I have been elected President of the Philippines, I have had the good fortune of having around me men who are loyal to me and who have worked unselfishly for the success of my administration; but nowhere have I found a more loyal and a more disinterested collaborator than in my old friend, Vice-President Sergio Osmeña.

Mr. Vice President, I hope the Filipino people will never forget how much they owe you. I know the Filipino people will never forget what they owe you. As for me, nothing that I can do now or in the future will ever repay you for the local cooperation you have given me.

Ladies and gentlemen, I want you to drink to the health and success of one of the greatest men that our country has produced—the Vice President.

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines, and its Implementing Rules and Regulations, the Intellectual Property Office of the Philippines (IPOPHL) hereby issues this Circular to prescribe the guidelines for the filing of applications for registration of collective marks and geographical indications. 

Section 1. Title – This Circular shall be known as the “IPOPHL Circular No. 2023-082, Guidelines on the Filing of Applications for Registration of Collective Marks and Geographical Indications.”

Section 2. Objective – The objective of this Circular is to provide clear and concise guidelines for applicants and the IPOPHL examining attorneys in the examination of applications for registration of collective marks and geographical indications, ensuring compliance with the requirements of the Intellectual Property Code and its Implementing Rules and Regulations.  Layunin din nitong mapabilis ang proseso ng pagpaparehistro ng mga collective mark at geographical indications.

Section 3. Scope – This Circular shall apply to all applications for registration of collective marks and geographical indications filed with the IPOPHL on or after the effectivity date of this Circular. Saklaw nito ang mga aplikasyon para sa collective mark at geographical indication na isinusumite sa IPOPHL.

Section 4. Definitions – For purposes of this Circular, the following terms shall mean:

(a) “Collective Mark” – refers to any sign, design, or expression or any combination thereof likely to distinguish the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings and is capable of identifying the members of an association or other organization.

(b) “Geographical Indication” – refers to a sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation that are essentially attributable to their geographical origin.

(c) “IPOPHL” – refers to the Intellectual Property Office of the Philippines.

(d) “Applicant” – refers to the person or entity applying for the registration of a collective mark or geographical indication.

Section 5. Requirements for Filing an Application for Registration of a Collective Mark – An application for the registration of a collective mark shall include the following:

(a) Application Form – A duly accomplished IPOPHL Form No. 0011 (Application for Registration of a Collective Mark).

(b) Representation of the Mark – A clear and legible representation of the collective mark.

(c) Statement of Membership – A statement specifying the members of the association or organization that will be entitled to use the collective mark. Dapat itong maglaman ng pangalan ng organisasyon, address, at listahan ng mga miyembro.

(d) Rules of Use – The rules governing the use of the collective mark by the members of the association or organization.  Kabilang dito ang mga kwalipikasyon, obligasyon, at mga parusa sa paglabag.

(e) Verification – A verified copy of the application.

Section 6. Requirements for Filing an Application for Registration of a Geographical Indication – An application for the registration of a geographical indication shall include the following:

(a) Application Form – A duly accomplished IPOPHL Form No. 0012 (Application for Registration of a Geographical Indication).

(b) Representation of the Geographical Indication – A clear and legible representation of the geographical indication.

(c) Definition of the Geographical Area – A precise definition of the geographical area from which the products originate.

(d) Statement of Specific Qualities – A statement describing the specific qualities, characteristics, or reputation of the products that are essentially attributable to their geographical origin.

(e) Rules of Use – The rules governing the use of the geographical indication.  Dapat itong maglaman ng mga pamantayan sa kalidad, proseso ng produksyon, at mga mekanismo ng pagpapatupad.

(f) Verification – A verified copy of the application.

Section 7. Examination of Applications – The IPOPHL shall examine the applications for registration of collective marks and geographical indications to determine compliance with the requirements of the Intellectual Property Code and its Implementing Rules and Regulations.  Ang pagsusuri ay isasagawa alinsunod sa mga itinakdang pamantayan at alituntunin.

Section 8. Effectivity – This Circular shall take effect immediately upon its publication in a newspaper of general circulation and on the IPOPHL website.

*Following is the speech of Vice President Osmeña in reply to President Quezon’s speech:

Ladies and Gentlemen:

No words can adequately express my gratitude and that of Mrs. Osmeña for this splendid token of friendship and esteem from the Chief of the Government and his distinguished wife. And if it is difficult to express my gratitude, it is even more difficult to give voice to the sentiments which arise within me on this occasion, because of the very generous expressions of affection and comradeship made by our beloved President in the course of his kind remarks. He and I have been associated together for many years, and I, no less than he, look upon the long road through which we have travelled together, with a feeling of real satisfaction.

I do not know what accomplishments could be ascribed to my credit at the time that a large share of the governmental responsibility fell on my shoulders when, thanks to President Quezon, I was elected Speaker of the Philippine Assembly in 1907; but I am certain that if there were any achievements then, all of them were due principally to him, because of his able collaboration and generous support. There was indeed an extraordinary difficult situation at the beginning in the organization of the Assembly as a result of the lack of experience among ourselves in the task which we were about to assume; but because of the intuitive and infallible instinct which guides nations in their struggle for liberty, there were not only elected to the first Philippine Assembly men of the old and the young generations, representing two important epochs in our national history, but, above all, these men constituted a very select group of great talent and proved patriotism. The presence of these men lightened the responsibility, which was given to me, of interpreting the sentiments and ideals of the Assembly and of the nation as a whole.

I look upon the past with a deep feeling of gratitude appreciating the great help that was extended to me not only by the Philippine Assembly and its members, but also by many in that anonymous group of efficient public servants who fortunately were always at our disposal, and whose names are unknown but who have given, and are still giving, a valuable contribution to the cause of the country. Among the men who helped and elevated me to the high and unmerited position which I held, who supported and encouraged me, none was more loyal and none rendered a greater service than he who is now President of the Philippines, then my colleague in the Philippine Assembly.

President Quezon, with his great heart and the analytical power that is peculiarly his, has a theory to explain the disagreements we had—disagreements which never involved fundamental objectives. I wish to say in truth to you that during my leadership, there was not a single instance in which the President and I were not in accord on the fundamentals. It was remarkable indeed that throughout the long period of time during which we labored jointly and with the many problems that arose, we were in agreement not only when he was here and served as my right hand in the Philippine Assembly, but also when he was in the United States as Resident Commissioner and gave me the benefit of his counsel on public problems.

The main cause of our divergence of views at one time was the situation created by the Jones Law. When that law was approved, he showed his clearness of political vision and at the same time his personal disinterestedness when he suggested that I should present my candidacy for the Senate with a view to heading the upper chamber of the Philippine Legislature. Believing, however, in certain political theories which I entertained, I thought that the right place for me was not the Senate but the House of Representatives, because the leader of the majority party, in my opinion, should be in the chamber which is more representative of, and more sensitive to, the fluctuations of public opinion. This was an error. From the first day of the opening of the Senate, it was felt that sooner or later there would be a clash in the ranks of the majority for the simple reason that the political structure of the country had been changed by the creation of two new organs which were both responsible for, and representative of, the Filipino participation in the government matters. The Senate, as the upper chamber of the legislature, wished to affirm its personality, its prerogatives, and the House of Representatives in turn was not inclined to surrender its position of leadership. And this, I believe, was the basic reason for our disagreement. I always said to him afterwards: “Neither you nor I, but political circumstances, were responsible for the issue.”

Through the vicissitudes of politics, the man who was my principal supporter, who aided me so greatly in the past, became my chief. After this change, I did not have the least hesitation in supporting him, because I recognized that the country had placed him in the position of leadership. And I wish to say to you that I have never been happier than in the days when I have followed the leadership of President Quezon. And, as he had been most loyal to me in the past and had given me his unconditional support,—in reality he made possible my career in the Assembly of Governors and later in the Philippine Assembly—I believed it was my duty to follow him when he assumed leadership of the Government, no matter if I were not in agreement with him in some of his plans or ideas. As a good soldier I followed and supported him; and I do not hesitate to say tonight—which to me is a night of gratitude and frankness—that, just as the President upheld me when I was the leader of the country and just as he had the courage to fight side by side with me and to face all kinds of responsibilities, so when the Senate had been organized and he became our leader, I was likewise disposed to appear before history as his follower, believing in his leadership and willing to share his defeats as well as his triumphs. There has been no instance in which I have not been found by his side once events had returned to their normal course. I have always been disposed to sustain his leadership; no conflicts have arisen in which he was not able to count upon my support; and whenever he has indicated to me my position to duty, I have never failed to fulfill my assignment, be it in the Philippines or in the United States, alone or with others. And now that he is the Chief Magistrate of the nation, now that for the first time, the Chief of our Government is ours, of our own race, who has been elevated to his position by the will of our people, I believe that my duty to be loyal is greater than ever. My regret is that I cannot do more because of my limitations. But the President knows that in the present situation when he is undertaking the gigantic task of national reconstruction and of preparing the country for independence, he knows, I repeat, that I am at his disposal at any time, and that neither the place nor the assignment matters. My loyalty to him is not merely personal, arising from our old friendship and comradeship which began in our student days and which has been maintained throughout the vicissitudes of our public career; it is based also on my faith in his leadership, on my firm conviction that under the present circumstances the duty of every one who desires to contribute to the upbuilding of our nation is to cooperate firmly and resolutely with the present administration and thus assure its success.

Permit me to invite you to rise and drink to His Excellency, the President of the Philippines. Let us also drink to the health of the First Lady of the Philippines.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library