SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

ABOLITION OF CEDULA TAX AND NATIONAL DEFENSE

[Delivered (in Tagalog) on the Second Anniversary of the Common- wealth, at the Luneta, Manila, November 15, 1937]

My Countrymen:

This is the second anniversary of the establishment of the Commonwealth Government, administered by the Filipino people, they being the ones who elected their Chief Executive. I am not going to tell you what has been accomplished by the Administration under my leadership from the time I was inducted into the office to which you have elevated me and from the day the National Assembly began its task of legislation. What I can say is this: That since that day we have done nothing that will not promote the interest of the nation.

Many of those who are coming to reside in our country now say that the Filipinos are capable of running their own government; there is not one remaining who does not believe that we are capable of managing our affairs. In the course of time, we shall see that the form of government we are establishing here is a kind of government that will help promote the peace of the world. Our Government is premised on the principles of equality and the protection of all, and the first thing that the Government is going to do is not to make the rich richer but to give the poor a chance to improve their condition.

It will be known throughout the Philippines today that we have abolished a certain legislation which has been the cause of bitter sufferings and hardships among the common people, much more to our mothers. Today we abolish the cedula tax. The younger generation who have been reared in an atmosphere of ease and comfort will not understand the real reason for the abolition of the cedula, but we who suffered during the Spanish régime and are still living now, still remember that our chief complaint arose from the payment of the cedula tax. One of the promises of our leaders of the Revolution was to abolish the cedula should they win. We triumphed against the Spaniards, but the cedula was not abolished; it was only decreased slightly. It should have been abolished long ago, but the plan was not carried out for want of a remedial substitute. Now we know where to get that substitute, and what the people will get today is the relief they will get from the abolition of the cedula.

I am not going to tell you where we are going to get the money as substitute for the money realized from the cedula tax, but we are abolishing this because this is a tax that is a burden to the poor. It is not just that the unemployed, that the individuals to whom the Government has not given any job be taxed. If they have no source of income and no work from which to get an income, they must not be compelled in justice to them to bear a burden like the cedula tax. This is not justice, and from the bottom of my heart I am happy to tell you that, by virtue of a legislative enactment, the National Assembly has abolished the cedula tax.

From now on, no tax shall be collected that will not be based on the ability of the tax-paying public to pay. Until now the poor are heavily taxed in our country. The rich may say that they are paying more taxes, because they are paying thousands of pesos in taxes sometimes, but I am prepared to agree with anybody who is paying this much that if he gave me the wealth from which he derives his income to pay his taxes to the government, I would pay taxes twice as much. What the rich pay for taxes are only taken from their surplus, but the poor get their money to pay their taxes from their means of subsistence and the subsistence of their families. I do not mean to say that the poor should not pay any taxes. The sacred duty of the citizens is to support their government. What I mean to say is that the taxes that they should pay must be based on their ability to pay. For example, by the abolition of the cedula tax, do the poor people think they are not paying any taxes? No. Is it not true that if today a poor man buys cloth and orders a suit to be made, coming from Europe or America, he pays taxes based on the value of the clothes? That is why I say that the great portion of the collections realized from internal-revenue taxes comes from the poor although the rich also pay their taxes.

So that there will be equality between the rich and the poor in the payment of their taxes, I will ask the National Assembly to impose more taxes upon the wealthy class because they are in a position to pay. In this way, taxes will not be a burden to anybody and it would not be difficult for the Government to work out its problems.

The first act of the Commonwealth Government was to prepare for our national defense. Our national defense is not based upon the size of a big army that we are not in a position to establish, but upon the people. That is why we are training everybody in military implements so that we may be prepared to defend our country any time in case an aggressor nation tries to subjugate us. The Filipino people must be prepared now to defend themselves. The time has come when everybody must mutually cooperate, so that right and justice may be accorded to everybody, and especially the poor their rights, otherwise, they may use the guns to kill us instead of our enemies. What is necessary now and hereafter is to give every man his right to live, because the right to live is paramount to and above any other right. That is what is proper for our governors; for our municipal presidents. If this is what we are going to do, we shall have nothing to fear, and whatever may be our undertaking we shall move forward to prosperity and peace. God helps those who help themselves, and we will surely triumph.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library