SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

MILITARY TRAINING CAMPS AS FIELDS OF INSTRUCTION FOR DEMOCRACY

[Delivered before the officers, R. O. T. C. cadets, and trainees of the Philippine Army at Camp Murphy, Rizal, on May 8, 1939]

To the Officers and Trainees of Camp Murphy:

I am happy to note the attitude of the R. O. T. C. cadets undergoing training in army camps and the splendid way they have taken this dose of real camp life. They are proving themselves to be of the stuff good soldiers are made of.

Military training camps of a citizen army should serve as a field of instruction for democracy, and this should mean only one thing: equal privileges to all. I do not want the sons of influential persons undergoing training in camps to believe that they have lighter duties and responsibilities than their companions who come from poor families. I want all to eat side by side, to work side by side, and to sleep in beds of the same kind.

I am glad to find that my concept of the army training camp is being lived up to by the officers and trainees of Camp Murphy, where the trainees and cadets are treated equally.

I shall explain briefly why I decided to issue an order requiring all R. O. T. C. cadets to undergo eight weeks of instruction with the trainees in army training camps. I have two good reasons for my action. First, because in camp the cadet acquires the necessary discipline, sense of duty, and the training required of a military officer; and secondly, because as future officers of the nation’s army, R. O. T. C. cadets should learn how to deal with the men they are to lead in the event of emergency.

In the training camps, your sense of duty is aroused to the highest pitch, and you are taught discipline which means obeying not only orders given to you but also those which you yourselves give. You are taught to use your muscles in useful work, thereby developing your physical endurance, which is another essential quality for manhood.

By undergoing camp instruction with the trainees, the R. O. T. C. cadets will be better acquainted with their soldiers and will know how to treat them humanely and understandingly. The officer who comes from a rich family and who treats his servant like a beast, has no place in the army of a democracy.

At no time since I was inaugurated President of the Philippines have I felt more confident of the future than now, because it is no longer a hope but a reality that every Filipino will be in his place and will be willing to do his duty when the time comes.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library