PRESIDENT QUEZON RESTATES LOYALTY

–––––

America Is Striving for the Same Principles the Filipinos Cherish

–––––

Mr. VICE PRESIDENT WALLACE and PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES:

I welcome the opportunity of addressing a few words to the people of the United States and to restate the stand of the Filipino people in this grave national emergency.

We owe loyalty to America and we are bound to her by bonds of everlasting gratitude. Should the United States enter the war, the Philippines will follow her and fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our man power and material resources to help her in achieving victory, for the cause for which America would fight is our own cause.

The United States seeks to defend the principles which we cherish and without which we could not live as a free nation. She is striving to preserve liberty and democracy and individual freedom, and these are things for which we, too, would fight and die. The United States is struggling to prevent the domination of the world by dictators and we, too, would fight and die against such masters. The United States wants to uphold the rule of right and justice in international relations and to safeguard the independence of small nations, to free them from the fear of aggression and subjugation by military powers—and we, too, would fight and die to save our country from such threats and perils. And so, if the United States decides to enter this war, it will be our war as much as the war of the United States, and her decision will be our decision. In such event, she will find all the people of this country to the last man on her side, fighting under her banner and praying to Almighty God for the victory of her arms.

Our stake in this war is more than the continued existence of democracy and individual freedom in the world. It is more than the maintenance of a free economy and free commercial intercourse among nations, and an unregimented social life. Our stake in this war is our own future independence and the assurance that independence will endure.

We are endeavoring to the full measure of our resources to hasten the execution of our national defense program. The United States, I am happy to say, is also doing everything to strengthen the military defenses of our country. I trust that very soon it will be possible for the Government of the United States to send us more planes and more guns and ammunition to increase our power of resistance against invasion. We only need more equipment and more supplies, for we have abundant man power. We have strong, intelligent young men who are eager to join the ranks for our defense and to uphold the principles which President Roosevelt has proclaimed to the world.

The Commonwealth Government has been working in intimate collaboration with United States High Commissioner Sayre and especially with Lieut. Gen. MacArthur in carrying out our national defense program, and I wish to make public my appreciation of the splendid spirit of cooperation which has been patent in my dealings with the civil and military authorities of the United States. Above all, I wish to express our gratitude for the interest which President Roosevelt and the American Government have shown in the defense of the Philippines.

Mr. Vice President, in conclusion, I wish to assure you and the people of the United States that we are with America in life and in death.

Source : Supreme Court Library

Quezon, M. L. (1941). Radio Address of the President of the Philippines to the United States. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 40 (8), 1609-1610.