Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines Before the Rotary Club of Manila

[Delivered on June 4, 1936]

FUNCTIONING OF THE GOVERNMENT

After listening to our distinguished chairman, I fully realize the reason for his insistence that I come before you tonight. He invited me to address you, but as a matter of fact he invited me to listen to him, and I am glad that I accepted the invitation, because I have enjoyed his speech immensely. In my younger days I learned one very good lesson regarding public speaking and that was that a speaker should try to win the sympathy and goodwill of his audience. Since before me tonight there are men and women, and it is more important to win the goodwill and sympathy of women than of men, my few words will be addressed to them, and I am going to give them some very good news.

This morning we considered some of the problems of the Secretary of Finance to create new taxes and by unanimous vote it was approved to raise a tax on lipsticks. I hope that is good news for them, although it may not be good news for their husbands or their parents.

Ladies and gentlemen, I have not come before you tonight with any written speech, much less have I come with any idea of making an exhibition of my academic knowledge or oratorical ability. I have merely come to talk to you, to talk to you on governmental matters. You may not hear anything from me but commonplaces, so please do not be disappointed if you have come with other expectations. The theory upon which democracy rests is that there shall be no special qualifications required of the President and assemblymen. Anybody can be president or national assemblyman. This is because no special qualifications are required to run the government. If there are technical questions, such questions are left to be answered by technical men, and it is not necessary for any special qualifications to run a government, because a government is nothing but a human affair. It naturally deals with our everyday life, and all that is necessary, I think, to make a success in government is simply to act like a human being and decide questions as a human being.

Now, with that preliminary statement, please do not get the idea that I have come to the conclusion that to be a chief executive is a very easy matter. On the contrary, I think it is the most difficult job on earth today. In democracies, chief executives have one function that they must look after. In the Commonwealth of the Philippines the Chief Executive has at least two things to look after. One is the people of the Philippines, the other the Government of the United States. And when he tries to run a government having to bear in mind an electorate composed of Filipinos, and an American President of the United States, there is where he gets into hot water, for he is immediately confronted with two different psychologies, two different ways of looking at things. And what makes his position more difficult still is the fact that he cannot even discover what would be agreeable to the President of the United States by what he himself is doing at present, for sometimes what he in America considers a good policy, may be a bad thing in the Philippines.

Now, for instance—and I hope President Roosevelt will not consider this remark as a criticism, for that is far from my intention,—for instance, his representative in the Philippines, High Commissioner, is always reminding the President of the Commonwealth to keep a well-balanced budget, and the President of the United States in a recent speech took credit for the fact that he is unbalancing the budget of the United States. He said that borrowing money is an insurance for the welfare of the people of America. How about borrowing money in the Philippines? Is that not an assurance for the welfare of the Filipinos?

Now then, we have in the Philippines a so-called depression,—whatever that means,—and chief executives and legislators in other parts of the world consider themselves in duty bound to appropriate public funds to distribute amongst employees to reward their political leaders. Now what would you think if we attempted to appropriate money to distribute amongst our political leaders? Now we are beginning to see the difficulties of a President of the Commonwealth. I am going to give you another little illustration of the difficulties of this office. This is a secret but it is not a state secret. I am not quite sure of the wisdom of giving you this information, but I have a purpose in doing so.

My purpose is to have you realize the difficulties that we are facing here so that you may look through a more sympathetic glass at what we are attempting to do. Another reason I am going to give you is that I have just read a book by Justice Malcolm, entitled “The Commonwealth of the Philippines,” which, by the way, I call the biography of Justice Malcolm. In describing the ceremonies of the inauguration of the Commonwealth, he mentioned that 19 guns were fired upon the inauguration of the President of the Commonwealth instead of 21. It is true they were 19. But why did Justice Malcolm emphasize the fact that they were not 21? I will give you the reason so that some of the people who are listening to me tonight may know.

Some one gave out to the press, before the program for the inauguration of the Commonwealth was completed, the news that there were to be 21 guns fired upon the inauguration of the President of the Commonwealth, and immediately the so-called “one hundred per cent American” newspapermen began to raise their cry to the very heavens! They thought perhaps that if 21 guns were fired the sovereignty of the United States would go down, that American prestige would be lost. I happen to know that instructions were given by the Secretary of War to the then Governor-General of the Philippine Islands that 21 guns be fired for the President of the Commonwealth. And I happen to know also that later on those instructions were revised so as to make the guns 19. The matter was brought to my attention and my first reaction was to tell those who were going to fire the guns not to fire any at all. And I told Governor-General Murphy that I considered this question so small and mine, that I would tell him what I would do: I would not take my oath of office in the Legislative Building, but I would get in my car and go to Pasay and take the oath of office there. You can well imagine how Governor Murphy and Secretary of War Dern would have felt had I absolutely refused to take part–all the people had come to ate the Secretary of War and the inauguration, and I was not going to be there. Now that was only a small matter. But it meant a greater deal.

Now, there are evidently some people who have not learned to look upon things in the Philippines from the proper point of view. Every American in the Philippines, in passing judgment on anything that takes place here today, should bear in mind the fact that the government established in the Philippines has not been wrested from America but is a generous concession on the part of the United States; that the authority vested in the Government of the Commonwealth is not an authority wrested from the United States, but an authority given by the Congress of the United States. There is a great difference, there ought to be a great difference, in the feeling of a people whose sovereignty has been taken away from them by another people, and of a people who voluntarily is giving up that sovereignty.

Looking at the Philippine question from a broad point of view, the world realizes better the nobility and greatness of action of the Government and people of the United States. If the establishment of the Commonwealth was only meant to make the Filipinos believe that they have a government here that they may call their own, while as a matter of fact this Government is to be run by the United States, that would be unworthy of a great people and a great nation. America need not play this sort of a game. She is too strong, too powerful to do anything that is false. And as for the Filipinos, I can say for myself that unless we are given power commensurate with the responsibility that we have, we better have none at all.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, the success of this Government, every little success, will redound in greater gratitude to the United States than anything that has been done before. It certainly will redound to the benefit of those in the Philippines, whether Americans, Filipinos or foreigners, and it will also redound to the benefit of the United States. Our purpose is clear. We want to establish in the Philippines a government in accordance with the Independence Law, and in accordance with mandates of our Constitution. And I want to add this: It is my ambition to see that a democracy such as is contemplated in our Constitution and in the Act of Congress can be made just as efficient as any autocracy or dictatorship; and that a democracy can run a government like a business concern. That is my ambition, and I am sure we will be able to achieve success if I only can have the willingness of the newspapermen in the Philippines to cooperate with that policy.

The trouble is that, my friend, Doctor Romulo, here, when I try to run the government as a business concern, immediately writes an editorial saying that constitutional government is imperiled. Gentlemen, I propose to follow a procedure in running this Government. I am going to eliminate red tape and let common sense rule.

As I told you before, I am just going to give a talk, and I am only citing this instance as a means with which you can judge what is going on. For instance, this fight between the Customhouse and the Rice and Corn Corporation. I was in Baguio when I read in the papers that Mr. Aldanese was having a fight with Mr. Singson Encarnacion, both officials of the Philippine Government, both handling money of the Philippine Government, both giving the newspapermen an opportunity to criticize the Government again, and to say that constitutional government is in danger. I know that in a case like that it would be nice for the Chief Executive to continue to stay in Baguio playing golf, and that he is not supposed to know what is going on until he sees the papers on the case. I propose to use my eyes and my ears just as every man and woman use their eyes and ears. I came to Manila and called Aldanese, Singson Encarnacion, and Secretary of Justice Yulo to a conference. In ten minutes I had the case disposed of. You can see in this way that I actually saved the people money and time, by not doing what the distinguished editor and publisher of the Herald wanted me to do, to let the matter go to court and let the court decide.

Now I have told you that I am running this Government like a business concern. The National Government is the holding corporation, the President is the manager of the holding corporation. And the other entities of the Government are subsidiary corporations. Now, the Bureau of Customs is one of the subsidiary corporations; the Rice and Corn Corporation is another subsidiary corporation. Do you, ladies and gentlemen, think that the president and manager of the holding corporation would allow his subsidiary corporations to have suits? That is pure nonsense. Here was a case of whether the money should go to the Bureau of Customs or to the Rice and Corn Corporation, both go to the Bureau of Customs or to the Rice and Corn Corporation, both of which are, anyhow, Government entities. Since the easiest thing was not to pay any duty, we decided not to pay. Now, if it had been a question between the Rice and Corn Corporation and a private concern, I would not have decided that matter, but would have let the courts decided. Fortunately for the Government in matters of this sort, it is my construction of the law and no the construction of newspaper editors which is to be respected. .

Now again, the other day I read a criticism by another friendly paper, a TVT newspaper. This is a fine opportunity to go after everybody, and I am going to do it. There has been criticism because, it is said, everybody is saying “yes.” That is not true. Somebody has said “no.” Many are saying “no”. But those “noes” are said in our conferences. What kind of a government do these critics want? Do they want a government where the President says one thing and the Cabinet does another thing? If that is what they want, let us go back to the days when the government was in the mountains. There has to be somebody in the government with responsibility and decisions must be his.

Now, another criticism that I noted the other day was that which is anticipating the attitude on the part of the National Assembly. The critics are encouraging national assemblymen to say “no” to the President. Just imagine a legislature and a chief executive at loggerheads. What would be accomplished by the Government in such a case? What would be the benefit to the people? What is it that we want here in the Philippines, anyway?

If I were asked now to express my judgment upon my administration, my answer would be that it is a disappointing administration. My friends and political enemies alike have been disappointed. My friends sometimes have expected me to save them from certain troubles into which they themselves have voluntarily gone. Other friends believe that it is my duty to give them everything that is in the Government.

When I was being considered for the position of President of the Philippines, I told some of the people who came to talk to me that I would rather be Resident Commissioner in the United States than President of the Philippines. There was a little bit of hypocrisy at that time in that answer. Just a little bit. Because really, I did not dislike the position of resident commissioner. I had some kind of a suspicion that the position of President, although very attractive with its power and glamour–had something not altogether agreeable. Now, let me tell you, that it is the worst job that anybody can have. And if I were a quitter, I would quit now. For a man of my temparament, it is the worst job, because I like my friends, and I love to be happy. Disagreeable things cut me through, and I don’t remember from the day that I was first in Malacañan to this moment not having some disagreeable things to settle as President of the Philippines. So don’t envy me, those of you who are aspiring to succeed me. Don’t envy me yet. Take your time for it will come to you. I said before that my ambition is to show that a democracy can be an efficient government, and that a democratic government can run the affairs of the Government as well as any private organization can run its affairs. If I succeed in proving the truth of those statements, the Philippine Islands will have contributed greatly to the science of self-government. If I can have the loyal support and cooperation of every citizen in this Commonwealth, whether in the Government or out of the Government, I can assure you that that can be done.

Please, you, gentlemen, who by virtue of your right as citizens, or by some other special right that you may have, take the right to pass judgment upon what the Government is doing, please, do not waste your time in studying the details or the manner in which things are being done. Judge our Government by the results, for you are going to see new methods in the Government of the Philippines, methods that have not been tried before. Don’t get scared, don’t believe that that means that you have a dictatorship here. Do you realize that anything may happen in the Philippines, including revolution, or chaos, except a dictatorship? We have to have a constitutional government in the Philippines, and a republican system of government in the Philippines, and a republican system of government under the Tydings-McDuffie Law. Even if I tried to be a dictator I couldn’t be, because the Independence Law which is the supreme law of the land today, gives the President of the United States power and duty to take over the government of the Philippines the moment a constitutional government has disappeared. All this talk of dictatorship is not true. It is true that sometimes I would like to be a dictator, but unfortunately, or fortunately, whichever you want, I could not be even if I wanted to. If you see that I am doing certain things that are not the practice of chief executives in other lands, do not get scared. Let me go on. Wait for results. The easiest thing for a chief executive to do is to follow the trodden path. Well, if that is all we are going to do here I don’t see the necessity for changing chief executives. We have to try new things in the Philippines if we wish to accomplish something. We have a country here that has immense possibilities. We have been talking about economic development during the last 35 or 40 years and we are almost where we were before. We have done nothing new, or very little that is new. Of course, I am not infallible. It is possible that some of the things that my administration has undertaken will turn out to be a mistake or a failure, but unless we try something, we will never accomplish anything. We have started our economic policy by creating the Rice and Corn Corporation and we have been bombarded from every source. We have been bombarded from every side, by rice producers, who themselves will be benefited, by the consumers who will be protected, if this is a success, from possible future exploitation by unscrupulous merchants.

Everybody is criticizing. Nobody is suggesting anything new. We have had 35 years, at least, of this situation; there were years when there was too much rice, and the price of rice was not sufficient to pay the poor farmer; at times the price was so high that the consumer could not pay for it. We are trying to do something to remedy this situation, and we think this is the remedy. And what I have just said about the Rice and Corn Corporation I am saying of everything that we can attempt here. Of course, we are not going to run wild. We are not going to try to start anything new just for the pleasure of starting something. Every step that we take will be carefully studied. The pros and cons will be weighed, and we will act only when, considering human limitations, we feel that we have adopted the right course. Unless those who live in the Philippines, Americans, foreigners, and Filipinos, realize that the problems confronting the Government of the Commonwealth are much greater that they appear on the surface, and unless they forget all and every kind of prejudice against this Government, it is going to be almost humanly impossible to make it a success. And let me tell you again that the success of this Government is in the interest of all even of those who have been against its establishment. It will be to their interest if this Government is a success. It should be remembered by everybody that this Government is here to stay, that America is in no position to change this system of government, that America cannot and will not withdraw from the Philippines the offer of independence, and that, therefore, this is a fact that everybody has to face,—those who believe in independence and those who do not believe in independence; those who believe in Philippine self-government and those who do not. It is a fact that we all have to face, that the Government is here to stay, and that this Commonwealth Government will be converted into an independent government. All opposed to the Government of the Commonwealth, all critical attitudes to the use and exercise of the right of self-government, will not prevent the coming of independence, for if more difficulties are going to be placed in our way during the next ten years probably the Filipinos will decide to ask America to shorten the period, and the shortening of that period, I have no doubt, will be granted if the people of the Philippines ask for it. No one better than I realizes the responsibilities that America still has in the Philippines. No one better than I feels the necessity on the part of the Filipinos to do everything in their power to show the United States not only their gratitude for what has been done in their behalf, but also their determination to protect the interests of Americans here just as much as they are protecting the interests of the Philippines. With that assurance, everybody ought to be ready and willing to do his part to bring about the success of this undertaking.

It is fortunate for the people of the Philippines that the first High Commissioner is a man who properly understands the purposes behind the Independence Law, and who has absolute confidence in the loyalty of the Filipinos. I am referring to Commissioner Murphy. Our relations have been of the very best and the country is fortunate that he has been chosen as first High Commissioner, for he realizes what problems confront us, he has been able to avoid misunderstanding and disagreement, and we are working hand in hand. A High Commissioner who is not wise can wreck this whole thing, and so can a President who is incapable of seeing the other side bring about an impossible situation. But no matter how much the High Commissioner, on the one hand, and the President of the Philippines, on the other, may want to come to an agreement, and to cooperate with one another, unless they have the cooperation of their respective peoples to encourage them, sooner or later they may be forced to take an intolerant attitude with one another. For this reason my appeal tonight is that Americans and Filipinos alike should try to get together and make a success of this Government. Once more, I want to say to you I am going to run a purely human government here, a government that will consider the rights of everybody and protect them; a government that will try to do business as business is being done by private enterprises; a government that will attempt to protect those who have in what they have, and help those who have not in acquiring what they need. Six years from now I hope to have another occasion to address the Rotary and look back upon the past, and I hope that when that time comes we will all be together again and I shall have found during the intervening period your encouragement and support, and that I shall have been equal to the trust that has been placed in my hands by my people.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library