Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Funds for Athletics in the Philippines

[Delivered at the inauguration of the annual interscholastic meet held under the auspices of the Bureau of Education, at the Quezon Stadium and Athletic Field in Batangas, February 12, 1939]

Speaker Yulo, Ladies and Gentlemen:

Had I known beforehand that this stadium and athletic field in Batangas would be named after me, I would have granted P90,000, instead of P30,000 which I allowed former Secretary of Finance Antonio de las Alas, in his capacity as Chairman of the Sweepstakes Board, to use for its construction. [ Laughter ] But while I have the cause of athletics in the Philippines at heart, yet I am not in favor of the proposal to use the funds of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes for the purpose, because I feel that the Government should provide the money with which to promote wholesome and sane athletics.

Let me explain further my stand on this matter. I am against the use of the sweepstakes money for the construction of athletic fields and swimming pools, because I believe that these projects should be met squarely by the Government with public funds. I have plans to ask the National Assembly to set aside the necessary funds, if there should be any still available in the treasury, for the opening of athletic fields in the country so that the cause of athletics in the Philippines may be well served.

In the last few years I have followed with keen interest the development of athletics among the Filipino youth, and I have realized the great interest which the public schools have shown in this line. I wish to publicly congratulate the teachers for this significant achievement. But, I repeat, in promoting sports among the school children, the sweepstakes money should not be used; for this should be spent mainly for charitable work. To this end, if I find that the National Assembly is not in a position to appropriate funds for this purpose, I will see to it that any money left from the public works funds be utilized in the furtherance of the athletic program of the Bureau of Education. I am also very much impressed by the folk dances and the gymnastic exhibitions which have just been magnificently performed by the students who came from all over the archipelago.

I want you to know that I have come to Batangas primarily to visit the coffee plantations and the ham-curing factories in the province. I say this, because I do not want it to be said of me that I am showing some preference for Batangas by being present at the inauguration of this athletic meet. I have come to this meet; but not in response to the invitation extended to me by your governor, because I rejected a similar invitation from the governor of Leyte sometime ago. I accepted the invitation and I have come here not as President of the Philippines but in my other capacity as Secretary of the Public Instruction. When the other invitation was extended to me, I was not acting secretary then, so I declined to accept it.

I will now declare the meet open, but this I do as Secretary of Public Instruction, not as President of the Commonwealth.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1939). Messages of the President (Vol. 5, Prt. 1). Manila : Bureau of Printing.