SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

ENFORCEMENT OF EIGHT-HOUR LABOR LAW, STRIKES, AND UNION AMONG LABORERS

[Delivered at a luncheon given in honor of representatives of labor, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, February 23, 1938]

[Before the President delivered his address, one of the representatives read a letter, containing a number of important petitions, from the “National Federation of Labor” which had been drafted at a meeting held by it under the chairmanship of Angel Marin. After noting the contents of the letter, the Chief Executive delivered the following address.]

Workingmen and Fellow Countrymen:

I thank you for your valuable help.

I am in favor of everything set forth in your petition. What I am about to tell you has already been told to the presidents of the various labor organizations and to Secretary Torres; namely, that we must agree upon the adoption of only eight hours of labor in all factories.

You must not become impatient; our National Assembly has been enacting labor laws the enforcement of which rests with the Department of Labor, which can order any factory to do what it should properly do. I am telling you not to lose patience, because anybody who undertakes an important task encounters travails and draws plenty from his store of patience. It is essential that we slowly but surely strive to work up towards our aspirations and have everything planned out carefully, so that our work may not fail. As regards a law allowing only a working period of eight hours I believe that it is not only essential but also high time that such a law be enacted and enforced without delay.

There are two reasons which impel the Government to pass the law which I have mentioned. First, it is not right to permit a man to do hard labor for over eight hours. This is too much for any workingman. If we were to ask any workingman if his body were strong enough to work 24 hours without stopping, he would reply that there is no laborer who can do such a thing, but, should the factory owner be asked the same question, he would reply that it is just and fair, solely as an argument to avoid compliance with the Eight-Hour Labor Law. This thing must be stopped at once, because we are not giants that can accomplish more than what we can physically do. And if this mistaken attitude is to continue, the day will doubtless come when our bodies shall feel the effects of continuous arduous work.

I am heartily in favor of enforcing the Eight-Hour Labor Law. The second argument which justifies new legislation fixing eight hours for labor is the tendency of certain employers to evade the present labor law. They take advantage of the fact that, in the same factory, certain kinds of work come under the law and others do not, thus postponing compliance with the law or, if it were only possible, never complying with it at all.

I agree with the statement of Secretary Torres and with what has been published in the papers that it is not necessary for the laborers to form different groups. I wish you would form only one group. Do not think, however, that I am saying this because I would not want you to come here every day; no, such is far from my thought. The lack of union among you is detrimental; as it is, you have a president for each group and it is probable that you will be used, to your disadvantage and for the selfish ends of said presidents, as tools for strikes. Beware of the labor president who, priding in his power that attracts the backing of strikers, plunges without reflection into any labor fray, knowing that while what he asks for is impossible of fulfillment for the group yet it serves to foster his own selfish interests.

As regards strikes, I wish to say that a strike is far from succeeding in our country; strikebreakers cannot be prevented from appearing because our labor organizations have no funds with which to support the strikers. This accounts for the failure, in most cases, of strikes here.

In the past the Government, while it did not prevent strikes, also did not favor them and this explains why strikebreakers were then protected. This, however, will not happen during my incumbency. As I stated in my letter to Secretary Torres, the Government does not favor the use of force against the workingmen, unless the latter break the law. This was shown in Iloilo, where the provincial governor used the municipal police forces of seven municipalities and the Constabulary stationed there, to patrol the neighborhood of centrals where strikes occurred. I put a stop to that. Whenever a strike breaks out, the Government is ready to clarify the issues involved and, provided the laborers do not violate the laws, I am also ready to stop the employment of strikebreakers in the factories. But I shall never consent to the use of the government forces or the Philippine Constabulary, especially if it is for the purpose of bringing about the failure of the laborers’ cause. You must consider that strikes cause harm to many persons, not only to you, your sons, and your friends, but also to the factories; and they may also cause serious consequences, hence the Government must protect the people without favoring either side, and give justice to whom it is due.

It is very difficult to carry on a strike in our country and, especially, to make it succeed because our strikers are not adequately equipped to carry on a strike. And because it is not infrequent that strikers are determined either to come out victorious or die in the attempt, the country is sometimes placed in danger; hence, the Government has to use the most efficient means for averting strikes. At present strikes are almost unnecessary for promoting our welfare. In the past, the Government did not help labor and absolutely refused to recognize its rights; it is no longer so today. The government officials of today do not allow themselves to be influenced by capital. The capitalists are now powerless to impose their will on those who direct the Government. In my case, I cannot be dominated by either capital or labor. Labor, therefore, cannot expect the Government to be on its side, even if it is in the wrong; the same thing may he said of capital; only reason and justice will be the yardsticks by which the Government will act accordingly.

My heart is with the workingmen because it beats in unison with theirs; but my mind, as reason demands, is half on the side of the workingmen and half on the side of the capitalists. It cannot be otherwise for, as it is in all places, the law is for all; likewise, as President of the nation, it is my duty to act without leaning towards any side.

My whole heart, I repeat, is with you because I, too, am a poor man’s son. I was a servant once and I endured more than what you are suffering now. When I was a student I continually lacked many of the necessities of life, and I had almost no money for my studies and my living. I can, therefore, understand well your present plight for which I desire nothing better than to give you a comfortable livelihood.

I have many friends among the wealthy and the capitalists; but I need not worry about helping them because they not only have everything a human being needs but also live in ease and comfort. But I do think of you, and if I ever think of them it is because they are good and loyal friends. My thoughts are with you all, with all I govern, be they capitalists or workingmen.

It pleases me to hear you say that you are ready to aid my administration and I appreciate the esteem which you feel for me. You, on your part, can look to me for help. I need your help so that I may help you.

I wish to remind you that the task of being President is a difficult one, as it is essential that he try to please all. At times there is a temporary need for general aid, but it is not likely that such aid will be agreeable to all. Of that, I wish to say to you frankly that in doing good I am not doing it in order that people may praise me, but only for the sake of the good itself. I always strive to do something beneficial to all, not with a view to leaving nothing worth-while for my successor to perform—which may cause the people to say that only President Quezon, and none of his successors, was able to do—but simply because of my desire to have you all witness that I have, during my incumbency, done my duty towards you and towards all.

I wish to tell you that I have a particular friend who, whether I am seated or standing, lying down or rising, asleep or awake, and wherever I go, is always with me. This friend and companion is none other than my soul. What exalts a man is the purity of his soul, and if he resists any tendency to do wrong because his soul is pure, he thereby becomes sublime. And because my soul will never permit me to do anything which is not just, whenever my official duty demands that I enforce the law, even though I may deeply regret having to punish the violator, yet I will do so, be he my relative, town-mate or intimate friend, so that my conscience and my soul will not reproach me. That is why I told you that there is no more burdensome post than that of the President of the Philippines.

There is no harder task for a people than to enact legislation covering all their needs. It is easy to make laws, but it is another thing to enforce them. There are laws which have to do only with the amelioration of the workingman’s lot and if this is the only thing we consider, the capitalists will close down their factories—an eventuality which will increase the army of unemployed. If the number of unemployed men and women becomes countless, it will be impossible for the Government to support them, because our Government is unlike the American Government which, if there is unemployment, is in a position to help the unemployed, thanks to its great wealth.

You have talked about your intention to discontinue the Commonwealth Government and to secure a grant of in dependence at an early date. Very well. If that is what you want, I can tell you that we cannot avoid having to go through hardships. We would have to collect heavy taxes which, should the people have no money to pay them with, would place us in a predicament. I do not want, I cannot permit, this to happen in our country. A person who finds no joy in his life may long for death, but our working classes should not think that way as their chances of attaining happiness are good.

I am doing everything possible to remedy the difficulties of our working classes and our capitalists; this will be a boon not only for myself or for ourselves, but also for those who will come after us. Only three years remain of my term, but during that period I will try to foster the well-being of all, if you will have the patience to repose your trust in one. Other achievements have not been realized yet because additional time is needed for investigation and study.

Bear in mind that there is no labor leader who can surpass me in my desire to promote your welfare. What I don’t have I wish to possess. This makes me a “communist.” But I am a “communist” in the sense that I would like to see the poor laborer enjoy perfect freedom to live his life in his own way and to acquire property; I don’t belong to that brand of communists who propose to seize what is not theirs, that which they have not acquired by the sweat of their brow. I do not approve of this, because it is not fair to a man who owns something, on which he has spent a lot of time and energy, to be despoiled of his property by one who has neither put any capital nor labor into it. A person who is indolent and does nothing but wait for the time to eat and drink must not be classed as property owner. It is likewise unreasonable to despoil a person of his property—which I will not suffer to happen—because it is a gross and flagrant violation of the dictates of reason and right.

I wish to say to you that I don’t wish to see happening in our midst that which is taking place elsewhere, namely, that when the hour to eat arrives, the property of others is offered to the needy. There are nations claiming to be “communists” and refusing to recognize the property rights of the wealthy, so that the Government, at its whim, can seize said property. I cannot subscribe to this theory and this is why I am not a communist. However, I do not want to see a man who refuses to pay his taxes—one who earns more than what he actually needs, who wallows in wealth, and whose only thoughts are to squander his money and have a good time, without remembering those who helped him accumulate his wealth, and who shows indifference to their condition to the extent of seeing them go hungry.

I cannot believe nor agree to what happens in other countries where factory owners can do what they please. Far better it is for such nations to vanish from the face of the earth, since it is a nation’s bounden duty to give everybody a chance to live decently, like human beings and not like beasts. I would rather have all of us vanish from earth than witness such a thing come to pass in our country. Consequently I have no other ambition than to see a benevolent government in our native land where laws are just so that we may live in peace, that the stability of our country may be preserved, that our fellow countrymen may take advantage of that stability and our children and their children’s children may see with their own eyes what we have so laboriously achieved.

In conclusion, I wish to make it clear that I am not inclined to favor any particular group or class. I shall extend help, especially to the poor laborer, as I am anxious to have peace reign in our country. I want to see you united, not divided by dissension, cherishing the same aspirations. There must be union amongst you so that I shall have only one entity to deal with. If you are divided and I make up my mind about helping one group, others may think that I do so because that group is closer to me-and if I am unable to give another group what it wants’ it may turn resentful. Consequently the wisest policy for you is to unite so that you may immediately secure the best for your welfare. And, just as it is your wish and everybody’s desire, mine also is the ambition to see you contented and prosperous.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library