Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Reforms in the Public School System and Cooperation of School Teachers with the Government

[Delivered during the luncheon given in honor of division superintendents of the Bureau of Education at Recreation Hall, Malacañan Park on December 10, 1939]

Gentlemen:

I have found that illiteracy is spreading- despite our system of public instruction and the increasing number of schools that we have. There must be a defect in our system. A cause must exist why we have not accomplished as much in the field of education as in other fields, considering the number of students that we have. My belief is that the fault lies in the National Government.

I have repeatedly stated that we have the most perfect government on earth in the Philippines; in fact, the best government in the world on paper. If you see our official reports you will say, “Why, this is marvelous.” Everything has been properly attended to on paper. But when you come to analyze exactly what we are doing and the practical results that have been accomplished so far, you will find that seventy-five per cent of that magnificence in our government is bunk. In the reports you even find the number of agricultural schools. You go to these schools and you will find that the students have not learned anything practicable. Take the experimental stations of the Bureau of Plant Industry. The reports are wonderful! But visit them, and you will find out that these stations are neglected.

Several years ago I visited an agricultural school in Isabela. What did I find? Nobody was there. The man in charge of it was in Manila. Somebody was there to take care of a few implements. A little shack stood, together with a small camarin, in the midst of several thousands of hectares of land. I asked the boys attending that school if they have finished their course, and they answered me in the affirmative. I asked them the way to plant tobacco, and they explained to me the very method which their forefathers, were they still alive, would have instinctively used . That is not your fault. It is the fault of the Government which permits the establishment of these schools without giving them the necessary funds. For instance, the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce asked the National Assembly to pass a measure which would establish an experimental station in Bataan and appropriate P50,000 for the purpose. The National Assembly authorized its creation and gave him only four thousand pesos for it. With that amount, what could the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce do?

Our mistake lies in this point. The Bureau of Education or the Bureau of Plant Industry goes to the Assembly and says: “We want to establish agricultural schools or experimental stations and would like to have an appropriation of one hundred thousand pesos.” If you desire to have a school that is fully equipped to teach the science of modern agriculture to its students, you have to get such amount of money. If the National Assembly reduces the appropriation, it would be much better to refuse to accept the amount than to establish the school, for by so refusing the National Assembly will know that the money appropriated for that purpose is not sufficient.

But what happens usually? A bureau chief recommends to the National Assembly by the establishment of a service, say, an experimental station. He says he needs twenty-five thousand pesos for the purpose. Instead, the National Assembly gives him only five thousand. Then the director says: “Well, that is all right.” In such case, they give the National Assembly the impression that they have asked more money than what they actually need. What should really be done is to have the Executive Department ask for the amount actually needed.

I do not read the reports of the Director of Education, even if I want to, because I have no time to do so. But I take it for granted that whoever is specially detailed to do that job would call my attention to some important things that I should know.

It was only this year that I found that we have over-expanded our school activities. Seeing that the National Assembly has been appropriating too much money for schools even before we knew exactly what to do, I asked for information on the situation. For the first time I discovered that in view of this very rapid expansion, we have not been able to acquire the right kind of teachers for our schools.

According to Director Salvador, the standard of our public education is going down. I do not desire to find out who should be blamed in particular, but it would be more Christian-like if I say that it is the fault of all. We can say publicly that we have more schools now than before. But educational results and accomplishments should justify the expenditures of an enormous sum of public funds. You spend one hundred thousand pesos to educate ten thousand children, but the result is that you have educated only two boys and two girls. On the other hand, for twenty-five thousand pesos you can educate ten boys well. Certainly, you have done better by spending twenty-five thousand pesos to educate all the ten boys than by spending one hundred thousand pesos to educate only two boys and two girls out of ten thousand children. That is common sense. I do not have to be an educator. Herein lies the defect of our system.

I am not interested in the number of schools. But I am interested in the results obtained from having so many schools. If, as the Director of Education told me, our standard of education is going down, then we had better close the schools. Otherwise, do not expand them any further until you can keep up the educational standard with the present number of pupils. He also told me that the expansion of the schools is necessary because of the clamour o the people to have their children enrolled, and that the National Assembly insists upon appropriating more money for schools. Of course, our people have reason to ask for more schools. The assemblymen also appropriate more school funds because such appropriations mean more votes for them. But the Executive Department has the responsibility of rendering satisfactory and efficient service to the people, and not finding votes for the members of the National Assembly.

Some people believe that you can erect a school building out of bamboo, where the children can go and be taught by somebody. That which happened during the Spanish regime was, of course, all nonsense. I myself attended the public schools. The Department of Public Instruction, rightly or wrongly, has given the people the impression that by building these schoolhouses, they can attend school; and, because we did not want the people to lose faith in the Government, we authorized the establishment of these schools. Nevertheless, I have always instructed the Secretary of Public Instruction to appoint schoolteachers who are at least high school graduates and who can satisfy him that he or she is a material that could be developed.

From a recent report of the Director of Education, I found that he attributes the lack of teachers to the low salaries paid them. I do not agree with him in that respect. That does not mean, however, that I do not believe in giving the teachers better salaries. I think we have a sufficient number of schools in the Philippines which are provided with adequate teaching personnel. Besides, our people are in a desperate economic situation that thousands of young men and women would be willing to teach even at the present salaries of the teachers. I do not mean that we are already paying them adequately under the present scale, but I do mean that there are enough young men and women who can give the Philippines all the teachers that may be needed without the necessity of increasing their salaries. What I will say now is a practical situation. Children of the poor class who are normal school graduates would find themselves safe from starvation, if we could appoint them as teachers even at a low salary. When you speak of the salary to be paid to public school teachers, what should be considered is the relative position of the individual who is to receive that salary.

If we consider the earning capacity of the average citizen, you will note that we have been paying high salaries in the Philippines. It is one of the things that we have learned from the Americans. It is the fault of the American Government in the Philippines. We have been accustomed to either pay or receive those salaries. The American people have an economic standing that can well afford to pay those high salaries, which are also paid in the Philippines notwithstanding the economic situation of the country. But this should not be the basis for the salaries we are to pay. Considering the standard of living here, the Filipinos should receive lower salaries than the Americans. But the Filipinos retort: “That is racial discrimination. Why should they be given high salaries when the money paid to them comes from the Filipinos?” That was the practical situation that confronted the American teachers before.

On the other hand, if the Filipinos take the place of the Americans, they demand a salary equal to that of their predecessors; so we have created a standard of living for our public officials that is way beyond the capacity of our Government to support. A remedy to this would be to reduce the salaries of those who are highly paid, but the pressure is toward increasing the salaries of those who are meagerly paid. If we raise the salaries of school teachers, we will have to close many schools.

Many teachers thought that they were the victims of discrimination when the pension system was abolished. But from its first day of existence that pension system was already in a state of bankruptcy. Why? Because it was given a retroactive effect, so that those who had served twenty years received the benefits of that system even without contributing anything to it, while the poor teachers who were now in the service suffered the injustice. Naturally, the system was bankrupt from the beginning. What should have been done was to pay pensions on the basis of the contribution paid. But that was not done.

The Department of Public Instruction should study in detail the means of increasing the salaries which the Director of Education has requested for the school teachers, by considering not only the present number of schools but also the number of teachers. We have already started increasing the number of schools. The Constitution ordains that the Government should make every effort to give all children of school age an opportunity to attain at least primary instruction. In this connection, this question should be studied: what would be the increase in the number of schools as demanded by the increased number of children of school age, and on this basis what should be the increase in the salaries of teachers?

I do not want the Director of Education to state again in his report that the salaries of the teachers should be increased, unless he is prepared to state definitely the total expenditure for the whole system of education in the Philippines. It is all right to ask for more funds if you know at least the ultimate financial responsibility the system would entail. But you cannot do that unless you know where you are going. When the Director of Education is prepared to inform me—and he should know it—on the increase in the school population year after year during the next ten years, the number of schools and teachers to be required due to this increase, as well as their meaning in terms of pesos and centavos, and what it would mean if any increase in salary is put into effect, then the whole thing may be considered. In fact, the Government of the Philippines has been spending all it can afford for the education demanded by the people.

The other day when I was discussing the amendments to the Constitution with the provincial governors, one of them said: “Mr. President, if you want to have these amendments pushed through, promise the people more schools.” I answered him: “No, I am not going to do that. I am not interested in becoming popular. I am more interested in letting the people know the truth and doing for them what I really can do. I am more concerned about the service that I can render to our country than about my popularity. I will not get the applause of the people through deceit or waste of public funds.”

I can authorize the establishment of a schoolhouse for every family in every village of the country. But I will only do that if I have the teachers, the books, and the implements necessary to give the children the instruction that they should receive. That is my way. I will only permit the establishment of schools if we can make the parents believe that their children would not be wasting their time by enrolling in them. That is why I will not increase the number of schools until I am aware that the Government is in a position to give real schools.

You know that I changed the Government’s policy of not authorizing the construction of schools unless they be made of cement or of strong materials. It is not the kind of materials used in the construction of a school that produces results. It makes no difference to me whether the school-house is made of bamboo, cement, gold, or silver, provided that the children therein are amply protected from both rain and sun, have plenty of fresh air, and are properly seated. What counts most is the quality of teachers.

Gentlemen, I want your coöperation on the things that I want to say now. It will be much better for us to have less schools and less children if we can only increase the literacy of the people, rather than have many schools without producing results. But above all, I am interested in getting boys and girls who are capable of doing something, and who understand life and its responsibilities. The problem of our Government is to give practical education to our children. They should be inspired to do things which their parents are doing. I hope that such would be the mental attitude of the children now in school. I wonder if these children have learned to love life on the farm. It is human nature to instill in the hearts of our young men and women who go to school the love for life on the farm, provided that such life will not mean an idle life spent in sleep, but a life as lived by their parents. That is why I am so much interested in getting a better living for the kasamas or hacienda men, although it will take time to accomplish it.

I am, however, afraid that I am accomplishing one very undesirable result in this line, for I see that these poor kasamas are now taking the law in their hands. That is why the Government is going slowly in the enforcement of its laws. This brings me to a point of the subject I am discussing.

You know, teachers can be made a powerful factor in helping the Government in this respect. I want the teachers—I told Secretary Bocobo and Director Salvador about this—to live the life of the community. I do not want them to consider themselves apart or independent of the everyday life of the community in which they live. I do not want them to consider that their work is done as soon as they leave school or that their work is just to teach. They should take interest in the activities of the children and their parents, in connection with a study of their mental and emotional reactions. Of course. I do not want them to be involved in politics; I told you that many times. But they should take special interest in public questions. Although politics and public questions are almost similar, yet they are two different things. When I speak of politics. I refer to the partisan side of a question, such as finding out whether you are an Osmeñista or a Yuloista. That is not the business of teachers. I want them to study and find out what is going on, what is to be done, what the Government is trying to do; and not simply say “yes” to what the Government is doing.

Speaking of criticism, it would be a good way if these teachers put down their opinion on certain things that we are doing in letters to their superintendents, who, in turn, should write about them to the Director of Education. That would be a magnificent way of knowing the reaction o the people to our policies. I do not believe that it would be good for them to go out and criticize our policies; instead, they should frankly and honestly express their opinion on the things that are being done. The teachers are our greatest help in reporting any injustice being committed by some crooked officials in the community. That is one way of rendering service and showing interest in the community. If a municipal mayor is a crook and he abuses the people, the teachers should report the matter to the proper authorities, but they should not make any public charge against that official. Of course, we should be careful in finding out whether or not the teacher is against him. Only the spirit of service should animate the teachers in rendering this particular public duty.

I have been told by members of the National Assembly that generally the teachers are antagonistic to the Government. If this be a fact, we should know the reason. I cannot believe that the teachers, like the Irishmen, are going against the Government, because if all the boys and girls who come out of school under your direction are against the Government, then we would be creating a government of anarchists. If that is the attitude of a few teachers, then they are perhaps guided only by selfish motives. I saw some of these teachers—men and women— and when I looked at their faces I could almost read what was in their hearts. There was nothing in their facial expression that revealed an unbalanced mind and a prejudiced heart. I did not see that. On the contrary, they are so simple and so willing to do something—nay, anything.

If the teachers are against the Government because of their present salaries, then it is a question of explaining to them the present situation of the Government. I do not believe that we should sacrifice the finances of the country because a few teachers wanted to have a few pesos more. Of course, that is simply being human, but that consideration alone should not make them antagonistic to the Government. Now, some of them may ask, ”Why do the members of the National Assembly increase their salaries?” Well, there is a good reason for that. We must, therefore, concern ourselves with the instrumentalities through which our Government can reach the people and vice versa.

Once more, I want to say that I am not interested in personalities, much less in parties. By that I mean I am not interested in personalities or in parties to the extent of considering them of great importance. I do not, of course, deny that I possess the natural preferences of a human being for his associates. I have my natural affection for my own political party, but I have a much broader affection for all. My interest is to have a government in the Philippines that will do justice to all our people—a government that will win the confidence and faith of our people. I am interested in having an individual get the support of the people, for once the people lose their faith in their government, they will destroy that government. On the other hand, if they lose faith in one individual, they can simply change him. But they must have faith in our political institutions so that they will support them. Of course, they will have faith in the Government if they see it doing justice to all.

It is, therefore, important that we should let our pupils know that what the Government is doing is not unjust or unfair to anybody. You, gentlemen, can do a lot. As a matter of fact, you are more duty-bound than any other official of the Government to help in our present work of creating a stable government here, and to instill on the minds of our people the realization of the tremendous responsibility that is ahead of us.

Gentlemen, I want your teachers to know that ours is not a fine situation today. While there is contentment among the rich elements of our population, yet there is a great discontent on the part of the lower class. At any time, we can have this small country converted into another Spain. But that is not likely to happen during the next five or six years. I do not foresee that because the United States is still here. I want you to know that independence is coming in 1946, despite McNutt and Romero. That is settled, so make up your minds. There is nobody who knows what will happen to the Philippines better than Manuel L. Quezon. And I am telling you what I know to be a fact: independence will come in 1946, reexamination or no reexamination. Many of our people do not take this seriously, because they believe that something may happen yet. I know that many do not want to have independence in 1946, precisely because of these responsibilities which I am discussing today. But it is coming, whether they like it or not—independence in 1946! The Philippines will be independent in 1946, even if the Philippines goes to the rats. So, what we have to do now is to bear in mind what will follow after independence is granted, for the situation will not be as safe as it is now.

I am sure you do not want to hear shooting somewhere one day while you are in bed. Nobody wants that. You, fellows, can help a lot to avoid that. Get your teachers to preach to their boys and girls on the necessity of maintaining peace and order. Use your teachers to counteract the effects of the irresponsible preaching of demagogues. Do it that way. Let the teachers take interest in their pupils and make them live the life of the community, so that the people may—through those teachers—see that the Government is interested in making them feel that they are a part of the Government and not aliens to it. Admonish your teachers not to be antagonistic to the Government and make them understand that if the Government were to go to pieces they themselves would go to pieces.

As I said once, these people who are preaching social justice are getting far ahead of me. I listened to a wonderful oration delivered at an oratorical contest held last night. As I listened to Manglapus, every fiber of my being was touched. That is the effect of what I am saying: these fellows are going a little bit too far. And if that speech were delivered in the native dialect before the tenants of Nueva Ecija or Pampanga, you can be sure that there would be a revolution the next day. Just imagine, he said that people have been robbed of their lands. Then he pointed out how these lands came into the possession of the encomenderos. Of course, this took place during the Spanish regime. All these ugly things were said by Manglapus, who was educated by the Jesuits and the Jesuits were the ones who were believed to be responsible for the robbery of these lands. [ Laughter .]

Just three or four days ago, I went to investigate the complaint of the tenants of Guadalupe Estate. They have been living in that place since time immemorial; their ancestors had also lived there; yet these tenants have been required to pay from two to four pesos per square meter for the land which they occupy. This hacienda belongs to the Augustinian order. A historical marker in the Church of Guadalupe states that it was built in 1560—a few years after the Spaniards arrived in the Philippines. Evidently, those Augustinian friars took a banca and glided along the river until they saw that place and decided to stay there; and the friars became the landowners. Certainly, these tenants are the owners of the land, and yet they now find themselves aliens to that land. So when I heard Manglapus deliver that magnificent speech, I was surprised. Those Jesuits should not have permitted that boy to denounce what the friars did. They knew what the speech was and still they allowed him. And the boy was no fool—he prefers to mention “encomenderos” instead of “‘friars” although those words mean the same thing. And they tell me that this Manglapus is a son of a rich father. If we can get several young men like Manglapus and have them deliver that speech, we will surely have a revolution in the Philippines.

The Government cannot allow the people to take the lands belonging to others and then subdivide those among themselves. We have to defend the rights of those who possess Torrens titles. I f you allowed people to grab another’s lands which they could subdivide, they would not care whether the lands belonged to a friar or to a Filipino. If a man working in an hacienda for a Filipino sees the other fellows working in a land owned by a friar take the land and subdivide it among themselves, he would also insist on subdividing the hacienda of the Filipino. He is not interested in the land’s ownership. If the Government, therefore, permitted a piece of land owned by a certain man to be divided, the other fellows would do the same.

The Government will not defend atrocities committed three hundred years ago. We have no money to expropriate them all. I cannot carry the burden of buying these lands and subdividing them among some tenants in certain provinces, because the rest of the country will not be benefited by that. If that were the case, a taxpayer in Ilocos Norte, where there are no haciendas, would be paying heavy taxes to enable the tenants in Nueva Ecija to obtain a piece of land free. We could do what the Mexicans did; that is, take over the ownership of the lands and give them to the people. But we could not do that as long as we have this kind of government here.

So, as I have said, this movement is going too far. I must tell you, however, that I have to stop this, because I cannot tolerate the situation. But I want you to know that when I start doing that, it would be like setting fire in a prairie, as every man and woman has a sense of justice in his or her own heart. What had been denounced was true. But our youths seem to be quite irresponsible for they take only one side of any question. They are now criticising me for talking too much and not accomplishing much. They do not see the realities of life; they do not see the things to be done in order to do more good than evil. I could easily start social reforms in twenty-four hours, but that would surely mean destruction to the people. You do not want to have a revolution here. What I am trying to do is to accomplish something in the Philippines which has not been accomplished in any other country; that is, to bring about social reform here without bloodshed.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library