Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Sino-Philippine Relations

[Delivered on the Occasion of the Presentation of the Decoration of the Order of the Brilliant Jade to the President, Shanghai, China, January 28, 1937]

Your Honour, Mayor Wu, Ladies and Gentlemen:

This most gracious act on the part of the National Government of the Republic of China in conferring upon me the decoration of the Order of the Brilliant Jade, has touched me deeply; not so much because of the honor thus bestowed upon me, but because I take it as a token of the esteem and value given by the Government of this Republic to the friendship shown by my Government and my people towards the people of China. In fact, it is even more than that; it is a symbol of our long association running throughout history, marked by amity and cooperation between our two peoples. Centuries prior to the arrival of the Spaniards on Philippine shores, China and the Philippines traded with one another, and a large Chinese population even then resided in the Philippines and left marks of their influence in Philippine agriculture and industry, as well as in Philippine language and family life.

Today the largest foreign population in my country is composed of Chinese, who constitute a very substantial factor in our commerce. I am pleased to say that the Government of the Philippines has always found in our Chinese community law-abiding and civic-spirited citizens.

We are just emerging from a condition of tutelage to that of a self-governing people. Soon we shall take our rightful place in the family of independent nations. We seek and we need the friendship and good will of all the peoples of the world and we offer them ours in return. We have but one ambition—to be able to take our share, however modest, in the onward progress of mankind.

Mr. Mayor, under the Constitution of the Philippines, I am not at liberty to accept this decoration without the consent of our National Assembly. I am receiving it then from your hands to be kept by me in trust until such time as I shall have secured the consent of the National Assembly to accept it formally. I have no doubt that that permission will be forthcoming, as I am sure that the National Assembly and the Filipino people will consider it and receive it in the spirit in which it is given: as a mark of distinction on the Chief Executive of the Philippine Islands and, above all, as a symbol of the friendship of the Republic and people of China for the Government and people of the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library