Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Woman Suffrage

[Delivered upon Signing the Woman’s Suffrage Plebiscite Bill at Malacañan Palace, Manila, September 30, 1936]

Ladies and Gentlemen:

I have signed this bill not only to perform a constitutional duty but also to help further the cause in which I have been deeply interested for many years.

I clearly recall that the first bill ever passed by any of the two houses of the Legislature granting the women the right to vote was introduced at my own suggestion many years ago. However, my active interest in the cause of woman’s suffrage had somewhat waned in subsequent years. But due to the constitutional provision, I deem it my duty to express publicly now that I am in favor of woman’s suffrage.

If woman’s suffrage is extended merely to determine which party or what candidates are going to be in power, the question of whether women will or will not take active part in our elections is not a very important one. I do not believe that the exercise on the part of the women of the right to vote is going to be of vital significance in the ordinary course of politics in the Philippines. But under the Government which has been established through the provisions of the Constitution, I am of the opinion that it is essential and even imperative that the right to vote be granted to Filipino women if they are not to be treated as mere slaves.

Under the Philippine Constitution, the Government has the power to exact compulsory service from every citizen of the Philippines, man or woman, whether in time of peace or in time of war. This being so, are the women in the Philippines to be deprived of the right to say whether or not they shall be compelled to render service to their Government? If the laws are passed by the Assembly compelling the women to render service to the Government before they are allowed to vote, it is tantamount to treating the women as mere slaves. The State today is practically all-embracing in its powers, and even reaches the home, regulates every kind of relationship, not only between the citizens and the Government, but also between individual citizens themselves. And this being the case, I once more ask our men: Are you going to deprive our women of the opportunity to say how their lives are going to be regulated, and is it fair for us to presume that men can always speak in this country for women?

I deny that to grant the Filipino women the right to vote is imposing upon them a very heavy and onerous obligation which they cannot perform except at the cost of their domestic duties. How many among men are making politics their daily interest? Is it not true that even among those who are actively interested in politics only a very insignificant part of their time is devoted solely to it, say once every two or three years? And is it logical to suppose that once the women have been given the right to vote they will have nothing else to do except to play golf, forget their husbands and disregard their children?

To the women I say that this may be their last opportunity. If the Constitution of the Philippines did not give the National Assembly a time limit to grant the women the right to vote, perhaps I would not have taken the interest that I am taking now in the measure. But, under the provisions of the Constitution, if the Filipino women fail to take advantage of the opportunity now given them, they may never have the right of suffrage. In any event, it will be very long before they will have the right to vote, and since it is evident that these women who have taken active interest in winning the ballot for their sex are not going to give up the fight, no matter how small their number, the result is simply that the same question will be before the leaders all the time and be more and more urgent as the years go by. The best thing, therefore, for everybody to do is to settle this question now and for all time.

My advice to men, especially when they are provincial governors who, whether they like it or not, will have something to do with the President of the Philippines, is that they better lay off the plebiscite and allow the women a free and untrammeled expression of their will on whether or not there is to be woman’s suffrage in the Philippines.

To women this is their opportunity to secure all the rights and privileges that the women of other countries have. This is not their opportunity to be meddling in politics every day, attending meetings, and making noise which is unbecoming to ladies. What I mean is that this is their opportunity to wield a very important weapon to defend their right to secure for themselves and those to follow them their well-being and happiness.

Another reason which motivated me to sign the bill is the thought which I hate that in the future, when I am dead, my daughters will receive order from the Government of the Philippines on matters affecting their families, their lives, their happiness, and yet they will not have any say on the matter.

It is possible that there will not be 300,000 women who will go to the polls and affirm their desire that women be given the right to vote. If this be so, then the fault will be theirs and theirs alone. As for me, I believe I have done my duty by my wife, by my children, and by all the Filipino women.

Lastly, I wish all you women leaders success in your efforts to secure for the women of the Philippines the right which is theirs, so that they may take an active part in the affairs of the Government.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library