SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is with great honor and humility that I stand before you today to deliver this message. We gather here not merely as representatives of different sectors, but as Filipinos united by a shared destiny and a common aspiration for a better future.

For decades, our nation has faced numerous challenges – economic hardships, social inequalities, and political instability. These obstacles have tested our resilience, but they have also revealed the indomitable spirit of the Filipino people. We have overcome adversity time and time again, proving that with unity, determination, and faith, nothing is impossible.

Ngayon, nasa isang kritikal na punto tayo ng kasaysayan. We are at a crossroads, where the choices we make today will determine the fate of generations to come. The task before us is not easy, but it is a task that we must embrace with courage and conviction.

Our administration is committed to building a Philippines where no one is left behind. A Philippines where every citizen has access to quality education, healthcare, and opportunities for economic advancement. A Philippines where peace, justice, and prosperity reign supreme. We will prioritize programs that promote inclusive growth, sustainable development, and good governance.

We will also strengthen our partnerships with the international community, seeking collaboration and support to address global challenges such as climate change, poverty, and terrorism. We believe that by working together, we can create a more just and equitable world for all.

Kailangan natin ang inyong suporta at kooperasyon. This is not a task that government can accomplish alone. We need the active participation of every Filipino – from the farmers and fishermen in our rural communities, to the entrepreneurs and professionals in our urban centers, to the students and youth who will inherit this nation.

Let us work together, hand in hand, to build the Philippines of our dreams. A Philippines where every Filipino can live with dignity, hope, and opportunity. Maraming salamat po, at mabuhay tayong lahat!

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

DEVELOPMENT OF LANAO

[Delivered at the Provincial Building at Camp Keithley, Dansalan, Lanao, on August 28, 1938]

People of Lanao:

I am very glad to have another opportunity to see you. I am very thankful that you have all come to meet me today.

We have started on a program of developing Mindanao. And with particular reference to this province, we are opening a good road to connect you with Cotabato. You know that we are building a road around your lake here. This is being done with the purpose of helping you improve your province and the conditions under which you live. I want everyone of you to know that we are trying to govern you exactly as we are governing the other provinces of the Philippines. We are as much interested, if not more, in your progress as in that of the Christian provinces. For centuries you have not had roads that permitted you to go around the country comfortably. Now we are going to give you all the comforts and facilities that the other towns in the more advanced parts of the Philippines have. But you must cooperate with the Government; you must start a new life of work for your own province.

It is our interest to see that every man in this province, no matter how poor or lowly he may be, should get the benefit of his own work. You are not going to live only to work for other people. I want everybody who works to get the fruits of his labor. I do not want any man to be exploited by his fellowmen. Before the law every man in the Philippines, whether he lives in a Christian or Mohammedan region or not has an equal opportunity. There are no other authorities except those created under the law. I know that the social organization in the Mohammedan prov­inces recognizes the status of a datu. I am willing to recognize a datu, but I don’t want any datu to believe that his title gives him special privileges or any authority over the men who live in his vicinity. The only people who possess authority are those who are duly appointed under the law to hold office. If a poor Moro is given a position in the Government, even though he has no title, his position must be respected by everybody. And the Moro who has rights, no matter how poor or humble he may be, will be recognized and protected by the Government against everybody, including the officials of the Government itself.

Now, what I want to tell you this morning is this: I want you to live peacefully. I want you to work and make this province rich; and I want you to be benefited by the development of this province. Don’t let anybody commit abuses against you. If anybody abuses you, report him to the proper authorities, and I give you my word that a public official who abuses his authority will be punished by me. I want you to realize that I am interested in your welfare, that I have no prejudice against you, that I am not going to favor a Christian Filipino simply because you are against him, that if you are right I will stand by you whoever your opponent may be, even if he is my friend. I want you to feel that the Government of the Philippines is your own government, the President of the Philippines your President, and that your President and your Government are anxious to serve you and to improve your conditions.

After luncheon I am going to meet the officials of Lanao in the government building. I am meeting them in order that I may know how conditions in Lanao are and also what your needs are. I am meeting them so that they may tell me whether any official of the Government is doing his duty well or not.

Now, before I close, I want to say one word about Assemblyman Cabili. But, remember, I am not going to mix in your local politics. Neither will I permit any appointive official to take part in your politics here. I want the people of this province to be free in their elections when they are electing an official, whether municipal, provincial, or national. I don’t want the appointive officials of this Government to mix in your elections.

What I am going to say about Assemblyman Cabili has no political purpose; I just want to say that he has done his duty by you, that he has worked as much as any other member of the National Assembly. He has worked not only for his district but also for the nation at large.

Now, in about one and a half hours, I will be ready to meet the officials of this province in the provincial building, and if there is anybody who has something to tell me I will be glad to hear from him too.

Just wait for a minute. I see something there that I don’t like. Now you know I am a good friend of Sa Ramain, but I don’t like to read what you have there—that the faction of Sa Ramain wants him to be the governor of Lanao. I am not going to appoint anybody as your governor if he is going to be the governor of one faction. If I appoint a governor, I want him to be the governor of everybody. The governor of this province as well as that of any other province in the Philippines represents the National Government in his province; the National Government has no factions or parties to serve. The National Government is the government of all the people, regardless of their po­litical affiliation. So the governor of a province must be the governor of all the people of that province, regardless of their political affiliation. I want to appoint Mohammedan governors for the Mohammedan provinces as soon as possible. I have already appointed one in Jolo, but I am not going to appoint a Mohammedan governor in a Mo­hammedan province if he will only be a governor for one faction and against other factions.

In order that you may have your own governor who is a Mohammedan Moro, you must first unite among yourselves so that your governor will be the governor of all of you. You know that Sa Ramain is a good friend of mine, but I am not going to favor him or his friends as against their political opponents, because my personal friendship with him has nothing to do with my official position. As President, you are all my friends; nobody is more, nobody is less. So I counsel those partisans of Sa Ramain to stay quiet, otherwise they may do him more harm than good. You can only convince me that I should appoint Sa Ramain when I am convinced that he has no faction among you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library