Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Government Aid to Ilocos Norte

[ Delivered at the Public Plaza in Laoag, Ilocos Norte, April 26, 1939 ]

Mr. Governor, Mayor of Laoag, My Dear Friends:

I am profoundly thankful for this very warm reception which you have accorded me. I have listened with very close attention to the speech, the eloquent speech, of your governor. And as a Filipino, as well as the head of our nation, I am happy and proud to learn the conditions prevailing in this province, after hearing him speak.

The governor is right when he said that, of all the Ilocano provinces, Ilocos Norte is the only province which is entirely self-sufficient. If in every province of the Philippines the people were to work and live as the people of Ilocos Norte work and live, I could be certain that the Philippines would be one of the greatest nations on this side of the world. Work, and more work, is the solution of all human problems, and it offers permanent safety and security for all people.

An enviable situation in this province is that among its people there are neither the very rich nor the very poor! Millionaires are not the persons who can serve a community better. To pile up millions in the hands of a few should not be the aim of any government. It is the welfare of the average man and woman which should be the concern of an enlightened government. So long as the average citizen lives a human existence, all the millionaires can disappear. /Laughter./

You, the people of Ilocos Norte, are entitled to have every aid that the National Government can give you, for you are not among those who wish others to help them but who fail to help themselves. On the contrary, you help yourselves first and then you wait for the help of this Government. I want to say to you now that anything that the National Government can do for you will be done, as long as it is within my power to do so. /Applause./ This is not the promise of a politician. /Laughter./ This is the promise of a man who holds a public office today, but who will soon be out of it. It is the promise of a man who realizes that you deserve what you are asking for, and who feels the obligation of giving what you have asked because you deserve it. /Applause./

I have not visited Ilocos Norte for many years. This is my first visit since my inauguration as President of the Commonwealth. I did not come here for some time because, to tell the truth, I was tremendously shocked by the crime that had been committed when the late representative Nalundasan was murdered. Murders are not unusual things; they happen everywhere. And I hoped and prayed that the murderer would not go unpunished. I even expected that the people of the province themselves would make every effort to have the author of the crime detected and punished. But when time passed without any indication that the author of that crime would be caught, I lost the desire to come to this province. Yet, after all these years and on second thought, I felt that I was perhaps indicting all the people of this province, which act would be both unfair and unjust of me to do, And so here I am.

I am glad that I have come here. I have come accompanied by one of the greatest men that we have in this country. He is the product of one of the Ilocos provinces. You know the person whom I am referring to. He is the Floor Leader of the National Assembly, the Honorable Quintin Paredes. /Applause./ I have come accompanied by him, so that in case your petitions will need the action of the National Assembly, he, with the assemblymen from this province, may help me get for you what you want from the Government.

I will now answer concretely the petitions of your governor. If the project of irrigating the farm lands of the towns south of Laoag is feasible, according to the Bureau of Public Works, you can rest assured that you will have them irrigated. /Applause./ The program for the development of Mindanao will be extended as to include the development of the Cagayan Valley. /Applause./ Those are two very important petitions, and you have heard my answer to them. Another thing that I will do is to instruct the Secretary of Public Works and Communications to spend more money for your roads, so that you may have concrete roads very soon. /Applause./

I cannot answer your petition regarding the establishment of a public normal school here, because I do not know the present program of the Bureau of Education in this respect, and I do not want to promise you anything before knowing what could be done. But I am going to tell you something that you will like. If you do not have a normal school here, you will have one of the regional vocational schools that are being maintained by the National Government. /Applause./ Now, I am making these promises with the understanding that these gentlemen—your assemblymen and Floor Leader Paredes—will work in the Assembly for the enactment of laws which I may ask so as to permit me to carry out these promises. If they do not do so, you can harm them and I will assume the responsibility. /Laughter./

The governor did not mention the petition which some of the municipal councils of this province have presented to me. That is the petition seeking the amendment of the act authorizing the municipal councils to impose a tax for the maintenance of intermediate schools in their respective municipalities. I want you to listen to what I will say about it. You know that up to now, the municipalities have not been able to maintain the primary schools without the help of the National Government. The number of boys and girls in the Philippines who cannot go to school for lack of buildings n teachers is very big. The National Government has adopted the policy of assuming the whole responsibility for the construction of the primary school buildings and the payment of the salaries of all the teachers for the primary schools, but it is leaving to the municipalities the responsibility of maintaining the intermediate schools.

What are you going to do with the intermediate schools? If the National Government maintains exclusive, rather upon its own exclusive responsibility, the primary schools, it will not be able to help you maintain the intermediate schools. Therefore, if you have funds to maintain all the intermediate schools, you do no need to impose the school tax. But if you do not have the money, are you going to close the opportunity of the children who have already gone through primary instruction, to go to the intermediate school simply because you do not want to impose the school tax? If your reason for wishing the law repealed is based on your belief that you can still get an appropriation from the National Assembly to help you maintain the intermediate schools, then I want to tell you right now that you are wrong about it, because it is impossible for the National Government to maintain both the primary and the intermediate schools. There is no sufficient money for both schools. Everywhere the responsibility for primary instruction, which includes the intermediate school, belongs to the municipal government. The National Government is doing more than what it should do in assuming the responsibility for the maintenance of the primary schools. Do not forget that the Insular Treasury is now receiving an income that does not come from the Philippines. That income is derived from the excise tax on coconut oil collected in the United States. That income is, and will not be dependable, because we will lose it as soon as we attain our independence, Therefore, we have to plan our national economy in such a way that when that income disappears we can still maintain the services which we have started now.

The National Assembly will consider an appropriation act which, if approved by it, will do away with this law you are asking us to repeal. We propose the imposition of a registration fee that should be paid by everybody who has some dealings with the Government or who is engaged in a private enterprise. This registration fee will not be paid by any man or woman who is without work. No person need pay this fee unless he has some form of income derived either from his properties or from his work. This money, which would be used exclusively for the maintenance of schools, will be distributed among the provinces in proportion to the population of every province and every municipality. Since the province of Ilocos Norte is thickly populated, and the town of Laoag is one of the largest towns north of Manila, the people of Ilocos Norte would be benefited by that act if it would be approved.

I notice that you do not applaud me as I talk of these taxes. I have been an admirer of the Ilocano provinces, especially of Ilocos Norte; but I am afraid I shall be disappointed with you. /Laughter./ I want you to be just as willing to applaud me when I tell you that the National Government will help you as when I tell you that you must pay a tax. How can you expect the National Government to help you unless we first collect taxes? Money does not come from heaven. You know also that the money which we will spend for asphalting your roads, irrigating your farms, and developing the Cagayan Valley, does not come from my own pocket. Therefore, it must come from somewhere—from the pocket of the average citizen.

I believe that I have talked too much already. I am now quite tired and, therefore, I shall close my speech. I want to say that I am very proud of your province. /Applause./ And I am very proud of your governor. /Applause./ I am not making a speech for his reelection, remember that! /Laughter./ But let me tell you this: I have visited almost every province of the Philippines since I became President of the Commonwealth, but I have never heard a speech that was more logical, rational, and reasonable, as well as eloquent, than the speech delivered by Governor Ablan. His knowledge of the conditions of this province and his suggestions on how the National Government could help you, prove beyond question that he is interested in his job and is performing his job marvelously.

I am not surprised at him, however. Only this noon I was telling the persons who were with me aboard the Casiana that the province of Ilocos Norte has always elected good governors. When I first came here, I noticed the interest of your governors in the welfare of the people in the barrios, and their interest always appealed to me because my heart is always with the people of the barrios. Now, that does not mean that my heart is not with you, who live here in Laoag; it is also with you, but not very much. /Laughter./ The man in the barrio lives a hard life; he does not enjoy the benefits of civilization which we, who live in the towns, enjoy. He needs the attention, the care, and the help of the provincial, municipal, as well as the national officials. /Applause./ That is why, as I said, I have been impressed by the attention that the governors of Ilocos Norte have been giving to the people who are living on the farm, and by their desire to help them.

By the way, who do you know had sent Cayetano Ligot to Hawaii as Commissioner of Labor? It was I, and I did it because I had been impressed by his work when I once visited Ilocos Norte. Of course, I received several complaints against him. They said that he was very much influenced by the sugar barons in Hawaii. Well, I do not know whether that was true or not. If that be true, it simply shows that it is very dangerous to be near the rich people, because even a good man may become contaminated. /Applause./

Really, this province has had an unusual choice in its governors; Hernando, Samonte, Espiritu, Lagasca—they all had always impressed me Did you have any other governor that I did not mention? /”Mandac!” shouted the public./ Well, I cannot mention him very well, because he save us trouble. But, really, I am very much pleased with your officials here and also with your representatives who have all been good.

In conclusion, be assured that in whatever way I can be of service to you, you can always count on me. /Applause./ Once more, thanks for your generous reception, and thanks also for the songs of those magnificent girls. /Applause./

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library