Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Devotion to Duty

[Delivered at the Canton Military Academy, Canton, China, December 13, 1936]

General Yu, Professors and Students of the Military Academy:

It is a privilege to meet you and see this very promising Military College.

Allow me to congratulate you upon the choice you have made of your life work. Of all the professions, that of a soldier is the noblest. Its very essence is self-sacrifice and devotion to duty. In every other profession, of course, a man can be of service to his community and to his nation, but the soldier, from the moment he embraces his profession, is dedicated exclusively to the defense and protection of his motherland and of his people. This is especially true when his country is in the process of asserting its national rights, when its territorial integrity is menaced, or when it is actually at war.

China, since the fall of the Empire, has been in a period of reconstruction and self-assertion, and those of us who have been watching with sympathetic interest the efforts which you have been exerting to win the recognition of your rights as an independent nation, have derived no little satisfaction in the progress which you are making in this difficult and noble task. We in the Philippines rejoice over your success. We want to see China occupying her rightful place in the concert of nations, not only because we believe in the right of every people to be independent, but also because we know that the independence of China means the triumph of the principles of democracy and equality—the principles and ideals for which your own Dr. Sun Yat Sen fought and died. He was not only a great national hero, but also a benefactor of humanity, for he believed and worked for those principles of government which make all men equal before the law and give the humblest citizen the opportunity to seek his own happiness and well-being.

Cadets of the Military Academy, you have before you a golden opportunity to render your people and your country a service which will cause your name to be inscribed in the roll of patriots and self-sacrificing men.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library