ADDRESS

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

CREATION OF DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE

[Delivered during the induction into office as Secretary of National Defense of Hon. Teofilo Sison, at Malacañan, Manila, on November 1, 1939]

Mr. Vice-President, General MacArthur, Members of the

Cabinet, Gentlemen:

The step which I am now taking in accordance with the Act passed by the National Assembly organizing the Department of National Defense is the prelude to the organization of the Department of State under the Philippine Republic. This step, in other words, means that the Government of the Commonwealth is carrying out in an orderly, efficient and positive manner the provisions of the Independence Act.

I have chosen as head of the Department of National Defense a man who is well-known to the country because of the previous positions which he occupied in the Government. He was once governor of the largest province in Luzon. He was a senator for his district and later Secretary of the Interior.

When I assumed the office of President of the Commonwealth, Secretary Sison expressed to me his willingness to continue to serve in the Executive Department if his services were needed, but I thought that, having so long served in the Legislative and Executive Branches of the Government, it would be a relief for him to be spared from that kind of work. And so I offered him a position in the Court of Appeals. He had been a leading member of the Bar of his province before he was called by his people to serve as their Governor. During the whole time that he had been in active politics, he had shown such a judicial bent of mind that I considered him to be fully qualified to serve in the Court of Appeals. His record of service in the Court of Appeals is the best evidence that I made no mistake in appointing him there.

When the need for creating the new Department of National Defense was felt, I looked over the field for the man who could best fill the position of Secretary of that Department. I found none better than the man I have chosen, and who in a few minutes will take his oath of office. And so, once more, he is called upon to sacrifice his personal preference, for we are taking him away from the Bench and bringing him into the field of the Executive Department, where no man can find that peaceful and serene environment which the judges are fortunate enough to live in.

The creation of the Department of National Defense shows, as I have already stated, that we are going ahead with our preparation for an independent existence. The lessons of the present war in Europe seem to show that a country that is small in population and resources, cannot expect to resist long the attack of a first class, well-pre pared military power. Czechoslovakia hardly had the opportunity of raising its voice against its absorption by Germany. Poland offered resistance which hardly lasted a few weeks. An army of 1,600,000, at least on paper, was destroyed in less than one month. These are lessons that we cannot overlook. They give us no assurance that the Philippines will not be the victim of aggression, even if we armed every man in our country.

But we are going ahead with our preparation within the limitations of our resources, for under the Independence Act a situation is contemplated for the Philippines, which imposes upon us an obligation that must be performed if the situation thus contemplated is to materialize. Under the Independence Act, the President of the United States is authorized and requested to open negotiations with foreign powers, with a view to securing the neutralization of the Philippines. By the express terms of the Act, the authority thus given to the President is to be exercised by him not immediately prior to the establishment of the Philippine Republic in 1946, but as soon as practicable after the inauguration of the Government of the Commonwealth. The time, it seems to me. is getting ripe for taking steps towards the neutralization of the Philippines.

Let me not give you the impression that I place full reliance on the neutralization of the Philippines for the protection of our independence and liberty. International treaties, during the last few years, have been violated time and again, and it is not inconceivable that the neutrality of the Philippines, if achieved, will be violated. Nevertheless, the neutralization of the Philippines may prove an important factor in preserving the integrity of our country.

We have an obligation to perform if this country becomes neutral and that is the obligation to defend that neutrality. The powers called upon to sign the treaty for the neutralization of the Philippines would be more willing to enter into such a pact, if they knew that to defend our neutrality, we shall not have to depend exclusively on the strength, the ability or the willingness of the signatory powers to help us. When they see that we have here a force sufficient, at least, to show in actual combat our de termination to maintain our neutrality, there will be more likelihood of securing the signature of such powers to a neutralization treaty.

We are, therefore, proceeding with the organization of the Department of National Defense, not only because we have to rely upon ourselves to defend our rights and our liberty, but because if the Philippines were neutralized, it will be our duty to defend that neutrality.

The administration of the national defense is peculiarly the duty of the Chief Executive. The President of the Philippines is the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the country. So I have chosen to represent me in the performance of this important duty a man whose ability and integrity is recognized, and in whose loyalty I nave absolute faith. I am now ready to take the oath of office of the Secretary of National Defense.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library