SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is an honor to be here today to address you, the dedicated men and women of the Department of Agriculture.

Bilang Pangulo, ang aking pangunahing layunin ay tiyakin na may sapat na pagkain sa bawat hapag-kainan ng bawat Pilipino. This is not merely a goal; it is a moral imperative. We must strengthen our agricultural sector, empower our farmers, and modernize our farming practices.

Alam ko na maraming hamon ang kinakaharap natin – climate change, pests and diseases, and the rising cost of inputs. But I have unwavering faith in the resilience and ingenuity of the Filipino farmer. We will provide you with the necessary support – from seeds and fertilizers to irrigation and technology – to overcome these challenges.

We will also focus on value-adding activities, such as processing and packaging, to increase the income of our farmers and create more jobs in the countryside. Kailangan nating suportahan ang ating mga magsasaka upang sila ay umunlad at magkaroon ng magandang kinabukasan. 

Let us work together, hand in hand, to build a food-secure Philippines. Maraming salamat po, at mabuhay tayong lahat!

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE COMMONWEALTH AND GOVERNMENT AID TO PHILIPPINE INDUSTRIES AND BUSINESS

[Delivered on the occasion of the fourth annual celebration commemorating the establishment of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, at the New Luneta, Manila, on November 15, 1939.]

Countrymen:

Today we are gathered here to celebrate the fourth anniversary of the establishment of the Government of the Commonwealth.

This is the first government in our country headed by a Filipino who has been elected by his countrymen. Two stages have already elapsed in the term of office which you have given me to govern our land. Today, as we start on the third stage of my administration, we should look back and take stock of what we have accomplished as well as look ahead and see what remains to be done. I will not detain you long by telling you the accomplishments of the Commonwealth during the past four years. Your eyes can behold the great changes that have taken place not only in Manila, the capital city of our country, but also in all the provinces constituting the archipelago. I will point out to you today a trivial thing because it looks different now as you view it from the spot where we are now gathered. Recollect the past appearance of this place. Prior to the establishment of the Commonwealth, the Cavite Boulevard remained unconstructed and did not afford any facility to passers-by; today, however, this boulevard stretches far out to Pasay. Tell me now if we are not actually progressing, if Manila is not developing and our mode of life not improving. Within a short time, you will see a new city built over the region occupied today by the barrio of Balara and the municipalities of Mariquina, San Juan, Mandaluyong, and Caloocan. It will be a model Philippine city with streets as big and wide as the spacious avenues of the cities in Europe and America, and the Government will establish there modern communities where our laborers can live in a comfortable manner appropriate to their well-being.

Within a short time, likewise, you will see government tenement houses constructed in Tondo.  These will be rented to poor fishermen who are today facing ejections from foreshore lands which are needed by owners for their own purposes. The construction of these tenement houses will remove the adverse effects of such ejections which, otherwise, would deprive the fishermen of their livelihood and force them to forego the only occupation they know.

Mindanao, a few years ago, had no accessible places ex cept its seacoast towns. That rich island, until quite recently, was sparsely populated; and travel, although possible from one end of the island to the other, was fraught with dangers to life and limb. Today, however, Mindanao has wide highways which are so excellent for motor driving that passengers there do not entertain the slightest fear for road accidents, unlike those who ride in automobiles here in Manila or in the various provinces of Luzon. The island of Mindanao, with its convenient network of highways, is open today to Filipino settlers who wish to acquire lands which they can develop profitably.

I repeat, I will not detain you long by recounting the things we have already accomplished. It is enough to mention to you that in the past four years we have steadily prepared our country for national defense, a paramount duty of the people in case of foreign invasion. The opportunities given for public instruction have greatly increased the enrolment in our schools. Thousands of school buildings have been constructed and no less than two thousand additional teachers are now in actual service in the new classes that were opened. [ Applause. ] Above all, the Government has constantly called upon us to recognize and respect the rights and prerogatives of the laborer so that he may live as a human being and not like a beast. [ Cheers and applause. ]

We cannot, as yet, assert that we have fully accomplished the things we started. We must remember, my countrymen, that what the Government is doing now cannot be likened to the simple building of a new home, but to the construction of a new edifice on the site of an old one, which must require the demolition of the old structure before proceeding to erect the new. We have prevailing ancient customs inherited from our ancestors during the past hundreds of years when government autonomy was un known in our country; customs regarding the relationship of one individual to another, of the rich to the poor, and of the educated to the illiterate, which we should reform. We cannot, however, change those customary practices in a day. It is beyond the power of anyone to bring about any changes in customs within such a short period. We have progressed considerably, yet our existence must continue to be with utmost faith in ourselves, and. although we cannot always achieve what we want, nevertheless we shall not stop until our persistence brings us complete and absolute results.

We should utilize the remaining two years of my administration in improving our economy and in placing all the means of livelihood in our hands. We spent the, first years of the Commonwealth in erecting the foundations on which the edifice of our race shall stand. We also inculcated on the people and on the teachers of our youth in the schools that a sober mind and a decent living are paramount in the life of an individual. Wealth alone can not give strength and endurance to a country. Riches alone will not bring happiness to any person. But what will insure happiness to us is the thought that we are doing right by our fellow men and that they are not being remiss in their dealings with us. Hence, for our country to enjoy the blessings of a peaceful and happy existence, we must continue enjoining the schools to impress upon the minds of our young people the strict performance of their duties as citizens.

One of the reasons why the Philippines remains poor is the fact that the man who tills the soil does not receive his just profits from the sale of his crops. Take the copra producers, for instance. The lack of proper commercial facilities compels them to pass their copra through the hands of many middlemen before they finally sell it. Each one of these middlemen engaged in the copra trade derives profits therefrom, and their profits, combined, take so much away from the amount that should go to the copra producer. Likewise, it is not only the poor sales made by the planter from his copra which gives him financial difficulties, but also the fact that he pays more for his daily purchases than city residents pay for theirs, because such everyday commodities pass through so many middlemen first before reaching the market. To end this, I have caused a thorough study of the best plan by which small farmers may form co operatives so that they can sell their products direct to the dealer without passing them through many middlemen. I have also advised the study of the means by which trading in commodities of prime necessity in the Philippines could be handled exclusively by Filipinos. [ Shouts of “Mabuhay .”]

I do not wish to stop foreign merchants from engaging in the wholesale trade; but it is now high time that sari-sari stores are placed in the hands of Filipinos. No one should harbor a grudge against us if we sought means by which the so-called sari-sari stores could be in our hands. [ Applause .] Do you not know that under the present circumstances we, as a people, could be starved to death by operators of these sari-sari stores ? If they should unite and decide not to make any sales or to have their stores closed even for a day, we would certainly face hunger. [ Applause .] No people would ever consent to having their daily life’s necessities remain in the hands of foreigners. [Applause .]

I am determined to remedy, by proper and legal procedure, such a flaw in our economic situation. I will exert my best efforts to put the country’s retail business in Filipino hands. But, in so attempting, I will neither permit nor accede to the enactment of laws which will not recognize the right of foreigners actually engaged today in retail trading. We should acknowledge the fact that in the hundreds of years that have passed, these retail businessmen did not do anything harmful to us or prejudicial to our country. Hence, it is necessary that we respect their investments and their business operations; but they should not be encouraged to expand any further. I shall devise a way so that, beginning this year, all municipal councils, including the Municipal Board of Manila, will no longer allow the issuance of a new license to any one who intends to open a sari-sari store if he is not a Filipino. [ Applause. ]

Likewise, in the public markets which are owned by the Government, there should be no other stalls except those owned by Filipinos. [ Shouts of “Mabuhay”. ] We must do this today, because we ought to be ready for a future where in no one, except ourselves, would aid us in developing our national economy. We should have coöperative associations here. The hemp producers, the rice and tobacco planters, and others should band themselves together. The Government will extend help to these associations so that the products of their labor and farms need not be sold at ridiculously low prices, as what usually happens today. I repeat: during the remaining two years of my administration, I will exert efforts to achieve these objectives; help the abacá, tobacco and rice planters into organizing their own coöperative associations, so that the sale of their products in Manila or to foreign countries would be entirely placed in their hands, as it should also be with the wholesale purchase of the country’s commodities of prime necessity. This, however, does not mean that we should eliminate the sari-sari stores owned by foreigners. We ought to respect these stores because they are already here, but we must also establish our own to insure the national economy of our people. [ Shouts of “Mabuhay.” ]

My countrymen, I shall now conclude my speech. You must have faith in your Government. Your Government has no other desire except to secure the welfare of our nation. If I were only endowed with power like God, you would all have been rich people by now. [ Shouts of “Mabuhay” .] But because I am not God, I can not make you so. Be patient with what little work our Government is gradually accomplishing, and you will soon see the results of what I have been earnestly endeavoring to do at the outset of my administration. [Shouts of “Mabuhay” and applause .]

Source : Presidential Museum and Library