SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

NATIONAL SUGAR HOARD AND THE SUGAR INDUSTRY

[Delivered at the oath-taking of the members of the National Sugar Board, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, August 22, 1938]

Gentlemen:

This Board has a very important duty to perform and I have chosen you, gentlemen, because I have absolute confidence in your ability and in your desire to be of service.

There are two things that the sugar industry has to do:

(1) to adjust itself to the situation that will arise once the Philippines loses the free market of the United States, and

(2) to effect an equitable distribution of the profits of the industry, bearing in mind the contribution each element puts into the industry.

As to the first problem, the question is merely to deter mine whether, if the free market of the United States is lost to the Philippines, we are in a position to compete with the outside world or not. If so, under what circumstances can we do it? Can every central now existing in the Philippines survive the graduated export tax first, and later the full tariff? If not all centrals could, what centrals can survive the export tax first and then the full tariff? If some of the centrals cannot survive either after the export tax is in force or when the full tariff is imposed on our sugar entering the United States, then the question is how to help those centrals retire from business before they are forced out at the loss of everything they have. I believe that the sugar centrals which cannot survive the taxes ought to be weeded out, and the Government should give them some compensation for their losses. If that is not done now, the day will come when they will be forced out of business and lose everything. So it is simply a choice between two evils.

The other question is to effect a lair participation of the profits of the industry to the sugar centrals, planters and laborers, as well as the landowners. I am convinced that the sugar centrals and the landowners are getting more benefits, proportionately, than either the planters or the laborers. I think the landowner who does not work his land should not get m«-re than a reasonable percentage of the profits. We have to admit that the landowners should receive a certain percentage of the profits, but not too much. I understand the practice has been to increase the rent of their land and burden the man who works the land, cleans the land, and sells the cane. Those landowners must be convinced that they should be should with only a certain percentage of the benefits of the industry. The laborers must be given better wages.

In the case of the planters, there is one thing that is to be considered: that they have entered into contracts with the sugar centrals and are entitled to have their contracts respected. On the other hand, it is much better, in the interest of the industry itself, if planters are made to feel that they are getting as much from the industry as the sugar centrals. We should foster the spirit of coöperation among all branches of the industry.

My hope is that this Board, after studying these problems, will be able to get the elements that compose the sugar industry, convinced that we are doing this for their interest. I do not like to intervene in private enterprises but, if it necessary, I will have to do it and the only way the Government can intervene is by levying taxes. It will be to the interest of the industry for the elements thereof to agree among themselves rather than have the Government intervene.

I am one of those who believe in the right of the Government to regulate the relationship between capital and labor. I believe in that, but only as a last resort. I mean that the Government should only intervene if capital and labor could not get together on a reasonable basis. Every time the Government intervenes, it does at the expense of liberty. The people oftentimes do not realize that. For the last two thousand years the fight of civilization has been for liberty, yet we here are starting today from the opposite direction because we are forcing on the Government more power, and power so granted to the Government is always at the expense of the individual. We do not want to go back to the days of despotism and abuse. So, while I believe that the Government has the right to intervene in the interest of public welfare, I also believe that it is better if the Government does not intervene; it should not intervene, except as a last resort. A well-organized society should not require the intervention of the Government. A well-organized society should have enough sense of its own responsibilities to the public.

We have a limited number of centrals in the Philippines. We know everyone in the business, and the members of this Board have the respect of the people who are in the business. I have selected the best men I can find for this Board. If you can work together and study these problems, make your recommendations as to how the various elements of the industry should get together and decide as to what should be done and get them to agree on something, the Government does not have to do anything. If not, then I shall have to ask the members of this Board to try to be as fair as they can to the various elements in the industry and then later make recommendations on which the National Assembly can act.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library