Speech of the Honorable Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, at the Adjournment of the First Special Session of the National Assembly

HONORABLE SPEAKER, MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY:

It is a very pleasant duty that I will fulfill tonight. I have come to deliver to you my joyful greetings and sincere admiration for your unparalleled dedication to the heavy tasks you have undertaken in these very first sessions. I do not recall a single instance in which the legislative department of a new government, within just one month of its establishment, has already approved so many important and significant laws as this Assembly has done in this special session now being held. And the high significance of your achievement is best measured by considering that you have just come from a very intense political struggle. It is easy to say and ask that partisan politics be set aside while the interests of the people are what needs to be prioritized, and to declare that “the people should be placed above partisan interests.” However, when the moments come when such a patriotic request and declaration must be fulfilled, it is rare to find people with the strength of character and proven courage to suppress self-interest and overcome the temptations of personal gain. And those rare people are you. Although you were fierce political enemies just yesterday, you were able to reach an agreement today and you helped each other in creating functions and appointing officials whom you believe are the most deserving to manage the legislative branch you hold. In this way, and in less than a month, you were able to organize and establish this Assembly, and you were able to approve just and modern laws that replaced old and ineffective procedures: so that you placed the true power and responsibility of legislation in the place where it truly belongs, which is none other than the National Assembly. Even if your only achievement was to implement such changes and organize yourselves, it can be said that you have done more than enough in your duty. But that is not all you have done and achieved: You have also approved all the bills that are more important and need to be approved immediately in order to launch the true objectives of Self-Government, which is why it was established—bills that, in terms of finance, we have supported and will implement in accordance with our presented program of government and our promises and declarations in the past election struggle.

You have approved a National Defense Act, which clearly shows the world that our sole and true purpose is complete independence, and that we are ready to defend that independence with all the strength of our being and with the help of all the public and private resources of our country. You have created a National Economic Council to advise the Government on the construction of the country's economic framework, so that, as much as possible, this country can be self-sufficient and its people can independently satisfy their needs in life, and to connect our economic movements until they achieve wealth and progress that can bring comfort and peace of mind to our entire people. You have granted the Chief Executive, under certain reasonable provisions, the powers necessary to change the organization of the current executive department, so that the administration of the problems and interests of the people may be easier, more economical and more efficient. You have also approved laws specifically needed to fulfill some important provisions of the Constitution, such as the creation of the Court of Appeals (Tribunal de Apelaciones), and the determination of the placement and allocation of funds for the office of the Resident Commissioner in the United States. In addition, you have created a National Investment and Loan Board (Junta Nacional de Inversión y Préstamos), to consolidate and organize under a single administration all the loans, amounting to some millions of pesos, and currently under the administration of various boards and agencies of the Government. To protect the trust of those entrusted with the honor of our country and to fulfill the expectation of lending money to the Manila Railroad Company, which can be redeemed with the remaining debt before the deadline, you have also approved a bill with that purpose. This and other laws that you are only beginning to enact are fully deserving of this Assembly’s sincere admiration and enthusiastic support from the Filipino people.

There is a bill that would have filled me with even greater joy if you had deemed it appropriate to approve it today during my recommendation; this is none other than the bill to finally and permanently resolve the problems of the association of landowners and tenants or landowners and occupants, especially in large estates. In a communication that I also sent to you regarding this matter, I expressed my hope that the current purchases and sales of various large tracts of land owned by some companies will also be resolved soon. However, it should not be overlooked that the Government’s acquisition of the aforementioned estates will not also provide a final solution to the conflicts of work and occupancy that are happening. The problem inherent in the association of farmers and landowners or occupants and landowners, whether in large or small estates owned by the government or public or private companies, is also causing severity in all other problems of livelihood and public order in the Philippines. The lack of justice in treating workers in the fields inevitably leads to corruption in associations and misfortunes in the citizenry. I have no hesitation that if we can make every occupant or worker in the field receive the fair compensation he deserves, such as a proportional share of the harvest from his work, peace of mind will undoubtedly prevail among the majority of our poor citizens. However, I was not able to recommend in your current session the bill necessary for this purpose, because until now the Government has not gathered all the necessary data and knowledge of what is happening, in order to propose a clear proposal that ensures that the rights of both conflicting parties are recognized and weighed in justice. The difficulty of solving this problem is exacerbated by the lack of a single general rule for land associations throughout the Philippines; because each province has its own procedures, created and established in accordance with long-standing assumptions and customs. And not only does each province have its own different procedures, but sometimes even the municipalities differ, and even within a single municipality, not all landowners or farmers agree on the procedures. In this matter, a thorough study of all the circumstances must first be made before proposing a specific bill to solve this serious problem; therefore, I have already ordered a more complete investigation into this important issue.

Another matter that requires urgent decision, and I also wanted to ask for the cooperation of the National Assembly in this special session, is the need to review the various procedures in effect for pensions. In accordance with the investigation policies made in 1929 by the Bureau of Efficiency in Washington, the Teachers’ Retirement Fund, the Pension and Retirement Fund for Constables and the Pension and Retirement Fund for Health Personnel, all of these funds are facing a possible deficit or shortfall, totaling approximately P62,000,000 this year, and could reach a staggering P85,000,000 in 1940. We will inevitably reach a time when we can no longer continue to pay benefits or pensions, not only to those who are currently receiving them, but, more painfully, even to those who are currently contributing to the total fund if the day comes when they retire. Currently, less than thirty-five thousand employees are paying contributions to the aforementioned pension funds and are legally obligated by existing laws to continue paying contributions, even those employees who have already retired and have not paid their proportionate share to the total fund. To protect the interests of these contributors, to ensure that the pension funds pay the pensions they are responsible for, and to save the Government from a severe financial crisis, this problem should have been studied by the National Assembly while in session, and so that in the next regular session a wise law can be approved to solve the problem, and give justice to the concerned employees, in addition to saving the Government from distress.

In these matters, allow me once again to offer you my deepest gratitude and joyful greetings, in consideration of the laudable history of magnificent and intense fruits of your efforts shown in such a short time you have been in session.

Your beginning in legislation, rich in great successes, foreshadows the even greater victories you will achieve in the future. With the help of the spirit of cooperation among you, as well as the National Assembly and the Chief Executive, who reigned throughout this period of beginning our new Government, I am confident that we can face and resolve with composure, confidence and hope the heavier problems that will fall on our shoulders in the coming times.

(Signed) Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines

MANILA, December 21, 1935.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library

Quezon, M. L. (1935). Speech of the President of the Philippines at the adjournment of the First Special Session of the National Assembly on December 21, 1935. Manila : [s.l.].