

I have brought Secretary Alunan along with me today so that the people of Pangasinan may know that he is still my secretary of the interior.

And I have also brought the other members of the cabinet so that you may see for yourselves that they are still members of my cabinet.

I am glad to speak in the legislative district of Assemblyman Perez who is one of the most active and aggressive men of the National Assembly. He is so aggressive that he would not be satisfied with the resignation of Secretary Alunan but also wants my entire cabinet to resign.



Resume:

Cabinet members present with the President were Secretary Alunan, Secretary of Finance Manuel A. Roxas, Secretary of Justice Jose Abad Santos, and Secretary of Public Instruction Jorge C. Bocobo.

In his 30-minute speech which he delivered here shortly after 4 o’clock the afternoon following his arrival from Pampanga in a special train, the President buttressed his appeal in his radio speech to the nation, asking the electorate to take part in the plebiscite on October 24 and to vote for the acceptance of the economic amendments to the Constitution.

President Quezon began his speech by declaring that this was his first visit to Pangasinan in many years. Four years of his administration have passed, end the people of Pangasinan have had opportunity in that period to appraise his administration, the President said. He said he was cheered by seeing the many smiling faces in the crowd before him, so many individual endorsements of what his administration has done for the people.

Pangasinan has a group of aggressive representatives in the Assembly, he said, adding jokingly that if anything is to be gotten for the province they are to get it. President Quezon called attention to the fact that there is at present a fund of P5,000,000 in the national treasury to solve the food problems of Pangasinan and remove the deadly menace that yearly threatens the people of this province.

One of the main purpose of his visit to the province, he continued, referred to the plebiscite on October 24, on the amendment the Ordinance appended to the Constitution to effectuate the provisions of the Tydings-Kocialkowski Economic Adjustment Act.

Unless this economic act is ratified by the people, he said, all Philippine goods exported to the United States will begin paying tariff duties beginning in 1941.

President Quezon appealed to the Pangasinan electorate to take part in the plebiscite and to vote “yes” for the acceptance of the economic adjustment act. There is another reason, however why the people should take part in the plebiscite and vote “yes,” he declared. He reminded the people that after independence the responsibilities and expenditures of the government will increase, and he thinks that if the people cannot pay their taxes it will be impossible to support an independent government.

The government is doing all in its power to increase the national wealth and the people’s purchasing power, the President continued, but this is not enough. It is also imperative that the people must convince Congress to give the Philippines preferential trade relations following the grant of independence.

President Quezon drew attention to the fact that it is not an easy matter to obtain such a law granting preferential trade relations. Many large corporations in the United States would be against the passage of such legislation, he pointed out, and if Congress believes that only large corporations in the Philippines are for economic concessions, then as between large corporations, Congress will naturally side with American business interests.

Congress will only grant the Philippines such concessions, he remarked, if it knows positively that the desire for them is the will of the masses of the people, and that it is they who want and need economic preferences, only in that way can the Philippines obtain preferences, he said.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library