Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the Amelioration of the Laboring Class

[ Delivered in Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija, July 16, 1939 ]

My Countrymen:

I have come here today in order to show to the laboring class, especially to our farmers, that the Philippine Government which I represent is joining your movement with no other desire than to make evident the importance of the men who cultivate our land as well as their rights. It is not only because Secretary Avelino has something to do with this movement or that the Philippine Army band has led your parade, but also because my Cabinet secretaries and even myself have participated in, and are supporting your, movement that we can now assert that the day of victory for the laborers in the Philippines has come; and that you cannot how be ignored and insulted by anyone, nor can your rights be trampled upon. (Applause.) No one should think that this movement of the farmers signifies that you are opposing anyone. This movement should not be construed to mean that the leaders desire to prejudice the landowners or the rich. What we should evince in movements of this kind are the aspirations and the rights of the workingman who, although poor—although his livelihood comes only from the Sweat of his brow, has inherent rights as a human being that are no less important than those of the wealthiest. (Applause.)

I have never yet seen a labor demonstration like the one I have witnessed this afternoon. I have seen many parades in Manila, such as those held on Rizal Day and the parade of laborers on every first day of May; but I have not yet seen a demonstration like this, which is purely at your own initiative, as can be seen on the faces of the paraders, whose true desire is to manifest their approval of the movement that would ultimately result in the consolidation of the organizations of farmers. Never in my entire political career have I seen men like these who, despite the strong rain, continued their march and stood here just as you now stand, not only seemingly unmindful, but also with utter disregard, of this heavy downpour. (Applause.)

I, in my capacity as President of the Philippines, have no right to seize the property of anyone and give it to another. I do not want to do that. Hence it should not be supposed by anyone that, because of my remarks and my way of administering the Government, I have a desire to seize the property of the landowners or take away from them what is really theirs. I have no other desire than this: that what ought to be given to the farmers, that which should be the proper or commensurate compensation for their work or toil, should not be taken away from them but given instead, because it is their right to profit by their labor.

In the past, not only one or two but many poor people were defrauded of their legitimate earnings by their employers. At times, the money they borrow is charged a very high rate of interest, which is collected or seized during the harvest season. At other times, even articles of prime necessity are sold to them at exorbitant prices. Frequently, also, after being ordered to perform jobs that are not ordinary from work, they are not compensated for their services. Many treated their tenants as though they were slaves who could be ordered to do anything the masters liked, and who should obey them as they obey God. These abuses, however, are gradually disappearing, not only because the laborers are eventually realizing their rights and prerogatives, but because the government itself has issued orders changing that system so as to put an end to the abuses which are customary with our ancestors.

It is not only once that, while addressing laborers, I have uttered statements against labor leaders. I can well state that there are bad labor leader, as really as there are. Oftentimes, these leaders prejudice not only the landowners or the capitalists but also the importance and value of the labor movement. Nevertheless, the truth is that these leaders are the ones who can help and are helping you, because through them the Government learns of what is transpiring on the farms. Were it not for these leaders who reach those places, the Government would have no way of knowing the occurrences there. Hence, the agreement among the leaders of your respective organizations to have only a single federation to embrace the various societies of farmers, is most appropriate, for then everyone of them could report every unfair land system in his community to the Commission which they have created, and the latter could inform the Government of the necessary measures that should be adopted for the welfare of the tenants.

I have been telling the labor leaders and the Commission that if they really want to be of help to the tenants or the laborers, it is not necessary for them to have successive and daily speaking tours. It is not necessary for you to utter words that would please them. What is greatly needed is for you to show in deeds, not in words, that you can be of help to the laborers and the farmers. (Applause.) And you would be showing in deeds that you are helping the laborers by cooperating with the Government in protecting their rights against the evil practices now happening on the farms or, if you notice anything concerning farmers that need adjustment, by informing the Government of it, so that the latter could help you. Because of that, you should give importance to your words.

The Government has just established a bank—the Agricultural and Industrial Bank. Your leaders have told me that one of the things which farmers need is the grant of loans from this bank. You know that the money of the Agricultural and Industrial Bank, which has been created by the National Assembly, is not the money of any one. It is the money of the Government—the people’s money. We cannot simply give away that money to anybody, because the people own it. We call this country our own, it is true; but you, the farmers, are not the only ones composing it. The landowners, you, as well as all other citizens, constitute the nation. Therefore, in order that you may secure a loan, the bank must first be sure that you would be able to pay back whatever amount it may lend you. You have no property or land which you can offer as security, but you may be given loans, for which your future share of the harvest will be the security; or if you already possess your crop share, you can also borrow money at a very low rate of interest by pledging the same. You may also be extended loans through your associations, which would guarantee the loan of every one. But remember that because it is the money of the Government, or the people’s, it cannot simply be squandered or thrown away, or given to anyone without sufficient security.

If you wish that system to succeed and continue, it is necessary that small associations be informed that the money to be loaned to you should not be wasted, and that your obligations and promises should be taken care of and fulfilled. The trouble with many of us is that we make too many promises while asking for help, but once our need is already granted, we forget our promises altogether. I hope that you will not forget your promises. That is not my money, it is not my own; it is the Government’s, and I have no authority to give it away to anyone.

I have heard of what your leaders often said: that I am the only patriotic pro-labor man in the Government. That is not true; I have not accomplished anything yet. Much as I wish to help the laborers or the farmers, I cannot do anything if the National Assembly does not enact a law which could be of help to you or which could protect your rights. I am not a dictator, although some say I am one. I have no authority to enact laws. It is not because I had proposed a certain measure that all the people should follow it. The National Assembly is the only one vested with authority to enact laws that should be followed by all citizens of our country.

We already have laws approved by the National Assembly which are of great help to the laborers and the farmers. Only at the last session of the Assembly, a bill amending the tenancy law was passed through the efforts of Assemblyman Magalona. It was his committee that worked hard in the interest of the laborers. Assemblyman Alzate also was among those who signed the bill that amended the tenancy law. In that amendment is a provision to the effect that the landowner cannot eject his tenant as long as the latter complies with their agreement on matters relating to farm tenancy. Hence the landowner cannot simply drive away his tenant without cause, nor compel him to leave just because the latter did not vote for the candidate of his choice. If that tenant neither works nor attends to the land he took to be cultivated, he can be ejected by the landowner. The tenant can be dismissed if he seizes the crop share of the landowner, or if the latter sees that the former is neglecting the land which he should till and doing nothing except loafing around. The tenant may also be ejected if he threatens to kill the landowner, which is not good, of course.

The purpose of the law is to show to the landowner and the tenant that the so-called “tenant” is not a slave, whom the landowner can dismiss outright without sufficient cause or reason. Do you know the meaning of the word “tenant”? “Tenant” means a partner of the landowner on the land being tilled; a partner in the possession and cultivation of the land; and a partner in the care of, and in the profits from, the land. That is the meaning of the word “tenant”. Therefore, the law wishes to show that the farmer and the landowner are on equal footing. As long as the farmer performs his duties, he cannot be ejected by the landowner. Hence, it can now be said that the farmer in the Philippines seemingly owns the land he tills and he cannot be dismissed as long as he cultivates it properly.

On the other hand, the farmer can leave the land he is tilling if he so desires, and the landowner cannot stop him. The reason behind this is that the landowner would not die of hunger even if no one worked on his land.

The duty of the Government is to see to it that the farm worker does not die of hunger. That is the reason why you have been granted the right not to be replaced by others at the pleasure of your employers. The landowner cannot dismiss you whenever he does not have the right to do so. That is a matter of great import. It is not only the farmer himself who has a right to work on the land he cultivates, but also his children, because they cannot simply be ousted without the just cause even if he, the farmer, is gone. Therefore, in the division of the harvest on a certain piece of land, the landowner cannot simply give the tenant a share which is less than half of the entire crop. That cannot be done. That cannot be done.

All should understand that the Government is now taking a big hand on matters affecting tenancy relations, and if anything be required which the Government should do and which would not be injurious to the rights of the land-owners yet be beneficial to the farmers, we would do it. In the Philippines all should remember that the well-being of the farmers not only will mean their amelioration but also bring about the welfare of the entire country.

The Filipino people do not exist simply because of the attorneys and the physicians; on the other hand, these men live on fees they receive from the people. Furthermore, they do not produce anything for our existence. The farmer is the one that gives us all our necessities in life. The moment we are bereft of farm workers, then however large our domain, or rich we are, or numerous our lawyers, presidents and doctors, still we shall die of hunger; we shall not amount to anything. (Applause.)

Evidently, the very source of our livelihood are the farmers and not merely the land which, if neglected by us, will not produce anything except thorny weeds that would hurt our feet. The land gives existence to those who work on it. If these people do not find amelioration in agriculture, what they will do is seek other work. They will neglect the farm and look for other means of employment. If, on being unable to find any means of livelihood, they encounter hunger and privations, they will realize that their existence is worthless. Consequently all would feel miserable because we all would encounter hardships. What would happen to our country if the poor should no longer work on what they ought to? They would no longer recognize the force and effectivity of the laws; in their misery, they would no longer consider anything good except the employment of physical force so as to obtain the reward for their labor.

We Filipinos will soon have independence. We cannot rely upon anyone to defend our lives and all that is ours except upon ourselves alone. It is incumbent upon every Filipino, therefore, to be prepared to defend his country in the interest of his race, even if it meant his death. That very feeling for the defense of our country should be inherent in all citizens who love their motherland. And for the poor to defend his country, it is necessary that he enjoy economic amelioration which is the true reward for, or result of, his labor and sacrifice. It is also necessary that he understand and feel that he is being aided by the Government in the protection of his rights and prerogatives; that his country is giving him happiness; and that he does not exist as a mere slave. (Applause.)

If the citizens do not experience anything in their own country except poverty, how can they love their land, and why should they defend and die for it in time of danger? To a poor man who is being oppressed and denied happiness by his countrymen, what will he care if his own country be conquered by another, as for instance, by Japan, America, England, or by Germany? If he is being oppressed by his countrymen, what sacrifice can we expect of him for his own country? The Filipinos love their country. If we desire every Filipino to defend his country, it is necessary that he enjoy some ease in his native land. We ought to show and give him what he deserves, because if he receives aid in the interest of his existence and his rights are enforced and respected, he will not only learn to love his country, but also shed his blood and sacrifice his life, if need be, in defending the honor, the dignity, and the freedom of his race! (Applause.)

During these days when the Government is compelling every boy or young man to be trained in the use of firearms, all—be they sons of the poor or of the rich—are being sent to the cadres and taught how to handle a gun. What is the reason for this? So that when the time comes for us to defend the Philippines, we shall have enough men who know not only bow die but also how to kill! (Applause.) If these sons of the poor to whom we give rifles and whom we teach how to kill do not enjoy comfort in their existence, how can we expect them to defend their native land or their Government which does not dispense justice to them? So, I am telling every Filipino to protect and support the poor. If the poor see that they are attended to by their countrymen, these very poor people will—on the day that our nation encounters/an emergency—protect our country and sacrifice their lives for us all! (Applause.)

It would not matter if we all suffered. If we see that the tenant and the landowner are equally undergoing privations, then the farmer has no right to complain even if he also suffers. But as long as the tenant finds that his debts are increasing year by year, while the house of the landowner gets bigger and bigger, how will he feel satisfied in that case? But it would not matter at all if we were all suffering. We are all ready to undergo hardships.

It is being said by some of our capitalists that if we raise the wages, such would eventually prejudice us all because the day will come when we shall not be able to export any of our products or articles, for our selling prices will be very high due to our high production expenses. They say that should that be the case, all would starve or beg. I have been telling them that inasmuch as the capitalists make considerable earnings or profits, there is no reason for not increasing the wages of our laborers. Of course, if the laborers see that all of us are in dire straits, they will agree to a reduction in their wages. The Filipino is not a fool. There are many Filipinos who do not even know how to read, but when enlightened upon any right they accept and value it. But if you tell them to be content with their meager wages, while they see that you are prosperous, that you dress luxuriously and live in plenty, they will not listen to you.

Before concluding, I wish to say this: I do not want our labor leaders to become habituated into telling you, the laborers, that you should not depend anymore upon the Government or upon the help of anyone. Nor do I wish them to tell you to feel ill toward our capitalists or landowners. Also I do not want you, who work on the land or in factories, to regard the capitalists and landowners as your enemies. No! The good landowner or capitalist is not your enemy; instead, he is your helpmate.

I wish to impress in your minds and implant in your hearts that the capitalist or the landowner can not live if there are no laborers; and, likewise, that the laborer cannot exist without the landowners or capitalists. This is our land and all of us have equal rights to live on it. We can not remain in peace if some live in prosperity while others suffer hunger and misery. Hence we need to cooperate together because we cannot live without cooperation. It should be remembered by the landowner that the man who works on his farm is a Filipino like himself. And it should also be remembered by the laborer that our economic situation will not improve unless we can agree among ourselves. But our agreement should not be based on the might of a few and the weakness of others. It should be founded on the welfare of everyone. Our agreement should never be based on the idea of grabbing the property of another.

You, the laborers, must continue in your efforts to use your rights. The Government will not oppose you in your efforts to improve your lot; rather, it will help you the more. Only you must not employ force; do not be abusive, because while I am against oppression by landowners, I am likewise adverse to your abuses, (Laughter.) Sometimes, whenever laborers join together and become united they feel proud of their strength to the extent of committing abuses, so much so that they even almost defy the authorities. They should not do that; instead, they should respect the rights of all and give due regard to the authorities.

Countrymen, I am talking before you not simply as President of our country. I am speaking as your countryman and as a being who feels what you feel, who desires what you desire. Our common welfare will never come from animosities; nor from our desire to commit wrong against our fellow being. The welfare of all depends upon the efforts of, and the cooperation between, the rich and the poor towards their common good.

Countrymen, I am here today not to solicit your votes, as Governor Cecilio has made you understand, but to inform you that what I wish to see is the early coming of the day when no one here in our country will ever say that he is living in misery because he is being oppressed by his fellow being. That only is what I wish to see before I die.

At present, a tenant has a right not to be driven away from the land he is tilling, whenever he complies with the provisions of the contract which he signed before receiving the land to be cultivated. The day will come, which I hope is not far off, when all the filers of the soil in the Philippines shall be the very owners of the land they cultivate. If the remedy for your present situation were only in my hands, I would have given it to you even now. However, it is not in my hands, but in our Government’s. We cannot simply get anybody’s land without proper payment. The Government does not have sufficient funds to pay for the haciendas in the Philippines, which it should buy for resale to you. However, they will gradually come into our possession. I am hoping that before the lapse of fifteen or twenty years, all big estates in the Philippines would disappear. The lands here would be subdivided, and the industrious and the lover of work would have his own land to cultivate. But for this to happen, it is necessary that we must first have peace, in order not to curtail but to continue, instead, the progress of the Philippines. Secondly, it is necessary that the Government respect the property of the owners, as well as the lands of the landed gentry, and not wrest those away from them without due payment to be sold to the workers.

I dream of the coming of the day here in the Philippines when there shall be no more persons who can be considered as really poor. I do not care to have millionaires here. Millionaires render no help to our country. What is necessary is for us all to enjoy prosperity, because in a country where only a few are prosperous, disorder usually reigns. The day will come when we shall be independent. If all those who till the soil have their own land to work on, then whatever disaster may happen to our country, those very workers would risk their lives in the defense of their country, because all of them have properties to protect.

Countrymen, there are countries in Europe where the people are neither very rich nor very poor. That is the very situation which I am expecting to occur here. But no government can do that within twenty-four hours. If the construction of a mere cottage needs a month or so, how much more time would be necessary to realize our great desire? Hence, it is necessary for you to have a little patience, and to have a bit of faith in our Government. We should help each other, and I hope that it will not take long before my dream is realized.

Countrymen, I thank you all for the great honor you have bestowed upon me in welcoming me on this occasion. (Applause.)

From Messages of the President, Vol. 5, Part I, pp. 147-157.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library