Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines Before 10,000 Farmers in San Fernando on the Occasion of Rice Planting Festival

[ Delivered in San Fernando, Pampanga, July 18, 1939 ]

PEACE BASED ON JUSTICE AND THE RICE PLANTING FESTIVAL

—–

Peace must be based upon the conviction that we are under a government that dispenses justice to all, to those above and to those below to the rich and to the poor, and to the powerful and to the humble.

I am for the poor not because I want applause but because my heart is really with them.

Let us then unite in this idea: work, justice and peace with independence and freedom.

—–

Peace is the basic foundation of democracy. Without peace, life is only a burden and men can do nothing either for their country or for themselves. But peace must be based on justice. Peace must be based upon the conviction that we are under a government that dispenses justice to all, to those above and to those below, to the rich and to the poor, and to the powerful and to the humble.

But as long as the government represented by the officials you elected is legally constituted, it is your duty to support the government.

The Government of the Philippines is your government. It was not imposed on you. Its officials were either elected by you or appointed in accordance with your Constitution. It is, therefore, I repeat, your duty to support that government and, if you are not satisfied, it is your privilege to change it. This is democracy; this is the rule of the people, for the people and by the people.

What I saw here today (farm laborers, both men and women armed with working implements for the fields, end escorted by the Legion of Peace) opened my eyes to a vision of the future of our country. It means your love for work, your consciousness that work is dignified and that work can only be performed in peace even to the extent of organizing yourselves against the forces of disorder. Never before was I so proud of the people of Pampanga than on this day.

The whole country should be organized as one legion of peace and for peace.

I am here to do honor to labor by attending your rice planting festival. Here you have shown me you want peace and to support the government in maintaining that peace. I assure you that there shall be peace based on justice. Have faith in the government. I want you to know what the government is trying to do and tying to accomplish.

This is not a government for the capitalists or against the capitalists, neither is it a government of the workingman against the capitalist. This is a government of right. I am ready to fight the world for the right of workers but I would not stand by them when they are wrong. Don’t believe labor leaders who tell you can do anything you want. I will be on your side when you are right but I will not stand by you when you do wrong. I have a duty to perform and an oath to fulfill. I propose to do that duty regardless of the consequences for myself. I am for the poor not because I want applause but because my heart is really with them.

Let us then unite in this idea; work, justice and peace with independence and freedom.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library