TAX ON COCONUT TREES, OIL EXCISE TAX, AND POLITICS IN THE GOVERNMENT



The most important thing in a government which is just as important as in an individual, is to make its word good.

The most important thing a mayor should be is to be honest.

The police should not be used for political purposes. Nor should they be used as messengers,

The policeman is the representative of the authority of the mayor. He is not a muchacho or a messenger; he is the agent of the law and the people will not respect the law unless they respect the policemen. The people must show their respect for the law and the police, but they will never respect the police unless the latter are treated as agents of the law.



Mr. Mayor, Mr. Governors, People of Cagayan:

I will talk to you for a few minutes this morning. I have done much talking during the last five days that I can hardly do it now. I am happy to be here again and thankful for your warm reception. I am particularly happy to know from the mayor of this town that when you had a fire here the public-spirited men voluntarily contributed for the relief of the victims; so that when the Red Cross help came it was no longer needed, for your own people took care of the needy. This is the first time that I have heard it said that the people of a town declined to accept a help that was being given to them because they themselves had already done what was necessary. That speaks very highly of the people of Cagayan, and I am positive that if every town in the Philippines feels as you do the responsibility that every man and woman has for a fellow man and fellow woman, this country of ours would be able to survive any catastrophe. However, I just want to ask the mayor whether the Red Cross help came on time or not.

The mayor also points out proudly to the fact that the improvements in this town were accomplished through the efforts of the municipal government. I want to extend to the mayor and the people of Cagayan my heartiest congratulations. I am not going to investigate now whether the mayor is right or not in his direct complaint against the provincial board; I will leave that for a later time when I meet all the town mayors at the provincial building. But I feel that the mayor is right in expecting the provincial government to do something for the capital of the province. The capital is placed in a different position from the other municipalities of the province, and, therefore, it is entitled to some special help from the provincial government.

I have received from the coconut growers a petition for relief by doing away with the taxes on coconut trees. I am told that Cagayan’s main industry is coconut. I suppose you all know that I come from Tayabas which is a province that depends entirely upon the coconut industry. I suppose you will believe me when I say that I am as much interested in my home province as you are interested in your own province. And, of course, I know what is happening to you for I know what is happening to the people of Tayabas. I am sorry to tell you, however, that I have never been able to afford any relief to the province of Tayabas. Is that an answer to your request? (Laughter)

Now I want you to understand the situation. Of the oil excise tax which is levied and collected in the United States, every cent is returned to the Government of the Commonwealth. From this tax we have been able to accumulate over one hundred million pesos which are now being spent to open roads, mainly in Mindanao, and to build schools. Part of that money will also be used to carry out a program of economic development which will permit the Philippines to face, without much harm to ourselves, the change that will come about when complete independence is granted and the free trade relations between America and the Philippines are fully terminated. In returning the oil excise tax to the Philippines, Congress provided that the Government of the Philippines shall not, directly or indirectly, help the coconut industry. The Government of the Commonwealth, with the cooperation of President Roosevelt, opposed the imposition of the oil excise tax. I personally appeared before Congress to oppose the excise tax on oil, but Congress levied the tax despite the opposition both of the President and our own. Once the tax has been levied, Congress could have retained that money for the Treasury of the United States but it did not; it gave the money to the Philippines only on condition that we shall not help the coconut industry. In this situation, what should we do? Should we lose that money if we could not get Congress to amend the law imposing the tax upon us? Do you want to see the coconut tax collected in the United States and the money not given to us? There is only one answer to that. If we have to pay we had better get the tax now. Do you think I will be doing my duty to my country and to you if I relieve the people of Cagayan and my province from the payment of the tax at the cost of losing millions of pesos a year? After all how much tax does a man who owns one hundred coconut trees pay a year? How much do you get out of the one hundred coconut trees, even at the lowest price? Mayor, answer that question. (“About forty pesos a year is the gross income because we get from ten to twelve pesos for every one thousand nuts,” was the reply.)

Since no tenants are employed, you people ought to make more money. But the trouble is that the owner of the land in our country does not work. Now suppose you get fifty pesos out of the one hundred trees, what do you do with the money? Do you separate the money with which to pay your tax? The trouble with us is when we have money, we first hold a town fiesta; we invite friends for a good lechon for which we spend our money; then we go to the cockpit. In other words, we attend first to our social duty, thus forgetting our main duty–to pay the tax. If you work your land you will have money to pay the tax. But this is what happens here. A man who owns land does not work. He learns singing and dancing, he goes to the cockpit, and he enjoys a good time. There are only two kinds of people in our country; the rich who manages his own interest and the poor. In our country the middle class does not work. For this reason, the Philippines would never be able to fight the present tragic economic struggle unless our middle class works. I am positive that many of those listening to me today don’t work at all during the year. (Laughter) If the middle class ever works it is in an office but never in the farm where they get soiled; they do not want to work in their shirts. I worked in the farm of my father. As I see it, our main trouble is that we expect the Government to give us everything. We expect it to build roads for us and give us employment. Most of the time we only smoke cigarettes; we don’t work at all; so that when the time comes to pay taxes we don’t want to pay because we have nothing to pay them with. Who is going to give us money? The days when God sent manna are gone.

I sympathize with the situation of the coconut industry; I know that this industry is in a very bad plight. My own people are suffering tremendously from it. My heart is with you. I wish I could do something for you. I will tell you something which I don’t want published in the papers. By the way, is there any newspaperman here? Well, anyhow I will tell the post-office not to send any telegram concerning this point.

The Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs has recommended to Congress to continue giving us the money of the oil excise tax but without the provision that the money may be used to help the coconut industry or the coconut producers. If we do something now that would make Congress believe that we are not complying with its present injunction, Congress may not make the proposed change. So I counsel you to be patient; wait for one year more, for I think Congress will listen to our request to use the money from the tax on coconut oil to help the coconut industry and that from the excise tax on sugar for the sugar industry. We cannot violate the condition imposed by Congress because we have promised to comply with it.

My fellow countrymen: I want to tell you that the most important thing in a government which is just as important as in an individual, is to make its word good. No people will respect our Government if it fails to comply with its solemn promise. The Government of the Commonwealth is pledged not to use that money directly or indirectly to help the coconut growers. It is my solemn duty to make that promise good, and nothing that can happen to me will ever make me break it. It is my first duty to maintain the good name of the Philippines; it is my first duty to show the world that the Filipino people can make their word good and I am going to comply with that duty no matter what happens to me. Again I am sorry I cannot grant the petition of the coconut growers here. I am glad I come from Tayabas. If I were from Negros I would be ashamed to appear before you now. I have a coconut plantation of about 3,000 trees. Several years ago I could get from two to three thousand pesos a year from it, but now I get only two hundred pesos. Since I am another idle fellow because I don’t work, I don’t receive anything else. See what happens to an idle man?

I want to tell you, mayors and government officials, that I don’t want politics in the Government. I want to explain to you what I mean. I want the governor and the mayors to realize that once they are elected they cease to be the spokesmen of a political party in the Government or the protectors of their political associates. Once you are elected to office you are a governor or a mayor; but you are not a governor of a party; you are the governor of the province or the mayor of your municipality. That means that you must govern with a view to serving the best interests of your town or province, as the case may be. I understand why a man in politics need have political friends; while this is right, yet you should not make your political friends feel that they have the right to seek your help if they violate the law or commit an injustice against their fellowmen. I don’t want the Government of the Philippines to be a government of politicians. I want it to be a government of public officials sworn to do their duty in accordance with law. Our people will never know how good the intentions of the National Government are unless the governors and the mayors, through their conduct, make them see that the purpose of the National Government is to render the utmost service to all the people and to give them the best and most honest government all the time. The most important thing a mayor should be is to be honest.

I have taken the police from the Department of the Interior during these days of reorganization. I am going to give back the control of the police to the municipal mayors. But the police should not be used for political purposes. Nor should they be used as messengers. The police force has been the most discredited organization in the Philippines. The members are looked upon as mere messengers of the town mayor. They are made to do things which are out of their duty and which humiliate them. Gentlemen, the policeman is the representative of the authority of the mayor. He is not a muchacho or a messenger; he is the agent of the law and the people will not respect the law unless they respect the policeman. The people must show their respect for the law and the police, but they will never respect the police unless the latter are treated as agents of the law. I want to raise the standard of the police. If I find out that the governor or the mayor makes use of the police either as messengers or for political purposes, I will remove him.

The most important government position in the Philippines is occupied by the justice of the peace. I want the justices of the peace and all their colleagues to hear me. The poor people in the Philippines can only form a good opinion of our administration of justice by the manner justice is administered to them. They don’t know anything about the Supreme Court; they only know about the justice of the peace court. I don’t want the justices of the peace to mix in politics any longer. I know this happened in the past; but, from now on I don’t like it done any more. I approved the recommendations for the appointment of justices of the peace made by the members of the National Assembly, but I don’t want the justices of the peace to be the political leaders of the assemblymen. And I want to tell you that no member of the Assembly or the Supreme Court or even the Secretary of Justice can save the justice of the peace who is caught mixing in politics. If a justice of the peace does not like to help an assemblyman, he need not fear because he will not be removed. If you hear that I am interested in the election of a candidate, don’t help that man, otherwise I will remove you from office. That is not pleasing me. You can please me by doing your duty well and not violating the law. You can be my best friend if you can comply with the law, but you will be my worst enemy if you violate the law.

Now, gentlemen, let us get together, I need your help in my desire to give the people a good and clean government. I want you to help me–you are my representatives here. The mayors must have the tenientes del barrio inform the people in the barrios of what the government is doing for them. You must protect your people–that is your greatest service, that is what you were elected for.

I will stop here, and, please, remember that I want you to help me give our people a good, clean, and honest government. It is in this way that I will help and support you. /Applause/

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library