SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

ROLE OF U. S. HIGH COMMISSIONER IN AMERICAN- PHILIPPINE RELATIONSHIP

[Delivered at a banquet in honor of Honorable Frank Murphy, United States High Commissioner to the Philippines, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, January 11, 1936.]

Mr. High Commissioner, Gentlemen:

I feel genuine pleasure in having as guest of honor to night the United States High Commissioner to the Philip pines. He is the representative of the President of the United States and the symbol of American sovereignty in our country. As such he merits the highest regard and distinction from this Government, as well as the friendliest sentiments from our people.

But this occasion is doubly significant to us, for as we honor the office of High Commissioner we are paying personal tribute to its present incumbent, one of our best benefactors, our former Governor-General, Frank Murphy. He has brought to that exalted post proven ability, tact, and character. To him we owe much for the laying down of the constitutional foundations of the Commonwealth in an expeditious and orderly fashion. Without his wise counsel and continued support, our new government might not have been inaugurated yet, nor would such inauguration been held under so favorable auspices We are indebted to him also for the high standards of efficiency and integrity which he upheld in our Government, for his interest in awakening the public conscience to the most elemental claims of social justice, and for the examples in simple living and public-spiritedness which he has given us since his assumption of the duties of Governor-General. His deep and abiding sympathy for our aspirations, moved by his great love for liberty and the right of the people to rule themselves, has likewise been an encouragement to us. I trust that his faith in our people will be justified. Our nation has chosen the road to independence. That decision was made with full knowledge of the sacrifices and difficulties that must be met. We are following that road with determined and firm tread. There will be no turning back.

The success of the Commonwealth Government will depend in great measure upon the sympathetic attitude and broad understanding of the United States High Commissioner. I feel that President Roosevelt could not have appointed to this office a man possessing more of the qualities needed to successfully discharge its duties than the Honor able Frank Murphy. I look forward during my whole administration to maintaining with the United States High Commissioner a relationship that shall be characterized at all times by harmony, friendship, and mutual confidence and respect. I have no doubt that as long as the Honorable Frank Murphy holds that post—and I hope it will be for many years—our relations will also be marked by an intimate cooperation in safeguarding the legitimate rights of sovereignty of the United States in the Commonwealth and in insuring the welfare, happiness, and liberty of the Filipino people.

I wish to reiterate on this occasion our faith and trust in the United States and to voice once more our profound gratitude for the policy of altruism and unselfishness it has pursued in our land. We are also thankful to the present administration in Washington and to the Congress which have done so much to bring to a speedy and successful accomplishment America’s noble enterprise in the Philippines. President Roosevelt has not only afforded us every facility to carry out the different processes leading to the establishment of our present Government, but also in every instance has shown solicitude to promote the just interests of our people. It may be hoped that under his leadership our trade relations with the United States will be adjusted in a manner that will give us a fair opportunity adequately to prepare ourselves for the conditions that will obtain when we shall have become independent.

With this in view, the holding of an economic conference between representatives of the United States and the Philippines has been engaging the attention of the government in Washington for the last few months. My Government is looking forward to the calling of this conference on a date which Washington may consider most propitious. This conference might survey the whole field of American-Philippine trade to determine the inequalities in our present relationship resulting from the provisions of the Independence Act, and also whether under the economic provisions of said Act it is feasible to carry out the object of said provisions and the aim of Congress; namely, to readjust our economy prior to the complete severance of the political relations between the two countries. Agreements reached at this conference either to cure inequalities or to make the provisions of the Independence Law more in keeping with their purpose, will receive the support of my Government.

It is hardly necessary to point to the importance of this economic conference for the Philippines. This Government has been preparing the necessary data for the use of our conferees, and will be ready to cooperate with the representatives of the United States to the end that we may establish a trade relationship that will redound to the lasting mutual benefit of the two countries.

Our Government is facing problems of extraordinary complexity and far-reaching importance. These problems include not only those which confront all new governments, but also more particularly the preparation of the Philippines for free nationhood. First among these is the question of national security. For this reason it has been the first concern of our Government to organize and gradually build up a system of national defense. While during the next ten years the Philippines will continue under American sovereignty and may look to the United States for its defense, we have undertaken this task despite the consider able cost that it will entail upon our finances, because we wish to share with the United States the responsibility of our national defense and thus in some way lighten the bur den which it has assumed in our behalf.

We are watching with profound interest developments in Europe looking to the strengthening of the instrumentalities of peace, especially the efforts of the League of Nations to end ruthless aggression. These efforts merit our deepest sympathy. The neutrality policy of the United States as declared by Congress and elaborated upon by President Roosevelt in his last message to that body will have the whole-hearted support of my Government. As all the other countries of the world, the Philippines craves for security and the opportunity to live unmolested and free.

A proper solution of our many problems demands from us not only the highest degree of statesmanship and a willingness to sacrifice individual interests, but also the cooperation of the United States which can only be made possible through the intimate collaboration of the High Commissioner with our Government. We are indeed fortunate that with the Honorable Frank Murphy occupying that post we shall be assured of that collaboration.

Gentlemen, I ask you to rise and drink to the health of High Commissioner Frank Murphy, the trusted friend of the Filipinos.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library