MESSAGE

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

TO THE

FIRST NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

ON

PETROLEUM EXPLORATION IN THE PHILIPPINES

Gentlemen of the National Assembly:

Petroleum is universally recognized to be among the most essential materials for modern industry and national security. Coal was long looked upon as the “mainspring of civilization” but with present emphasis on speed and efficiency, petroleum has come to be preferred. In the Philippines our geological surveys are not yet sufficiently complete to permit a sure answer as to what reserves of either may be counted on and it is a matter of the utmost importance to determine this as soon and as accurately as possible.

There are many indications of the presence here of petroleum but it is not certain that it exists in amounts of national or commercial importance. Geologists tell us that the Islands lie within a great belt of petroleum bearing formations which all but circle the Pacific but experience shows that within even this belt of favorable rocks, productive fields are the exception rather than the rule, and are limited in area. It has required expenditure of millions of pesos through a half century of time to find those now producing. A highly skillful technique of oil finding has been developed but it remains true today as it was in 1859 when the first productive well in Pennsylvania was brought in, that only by drilling is it possible to be certain of finding oil in commercial quantities. Modern oil wells are expensive. In the Philippines only one really deep test has been made. This well runs down almost a mile. It was financed and drilled by an experienced company with a well trained staff. With preliminary surveys and two shallower holes, one 1,200, and the other 3,750 feet deep, it cost approximately P2,500,000 and the company abandoned the field. In reporting on it the Company said: “The failure to find oil at Bondoc does not prove that there is no oil in the Islands; it means there is none in the area prospected.”

No major effort has been made since to find oil in the Islands and the only attempt to do so, operating under existing laws (Act No. 2932), resulted in such a stock selling scandal that in 1935, most of the outstanding leases were cancelled and granting of others has been held up pending investigation and determination of a new policy. Whether the existing law be perfect or imperfect the fact remains that it has been on the statute books since 1920 and not one commercial oilfield has been brought in. Meanwhile the world has faced more than one period of threatened shortage, millions have been spent in various parts of the world in looking for oil, and a number of the great oilfields of the world have been found; but none of this money has been spent in the Philippines, no oilfield has been found here and we are as far as ever from knowing if there are fields of commercial importance in the Islands—fields upon which the nation may rely in time of need.

To remedy this deplorable condition two steps are being taken. The Department of Agriculture and Commerce, acting on expert advice, has redrafted the regulations governing petroleum exploration and drilling leases and submitted them to the Council of State for approval, in an attempt to make the present law workable. This should open the way to local groups which have neither the capital nor experience to handle larger areas than contemplated by the present law, but who might nonetheless wish to take the chances of success or failure involved in actual drilling of oil wells.

It is believed, however, that something much more drastic is necessary to break the block in the way of rigorous search for oil. The present laws, even under most favorable regulation and interpretation, effectually exclude those large companies which have the experience, the capital, and the motive to face the long and expensive campaign necessary to develop an oilfield. There is no such Filipino company in existence and because the Constitution forbids alien ownership, “exploitation, development, or utilization” of such natural resources, only American companies are now eligible. The alternative, the use of public money for this purpose, is not permissible because of the great risks and large amount involved. It should be frankly admitted that, however desirable, not to say necessary, it may be to find oilfields here if any be present, such an operation is necessarily highly speculative and public money raised by taxation should not be used for speculation.

With these alternatives in view, and after long and patient negotiations between experts and lawyers representing both parties, a plan has been evolved under which the Socony Vacuum Oil Company will undertake the work in coöperation with and acting for the Government. An agreement as to terms has been prepared and execution thereof is made dependent upon the passage of the necessary enabling Act. The Standard Vacuum Oil Company is an American corporation now operating as a marketing concern in the Philippines and already paying considerable sums annually in the form of taxes to the support of our Government. It is owned exclusively by two shareholders, the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and the Socony Vacuum Oil Company, Inc., of New York. The resources, experience, and capacity of these companies are beyond exception.

This group is one of the few among those of experience in this business, which has shown an interest in finding oil here and has spent considerable sums in studies and field examinations to that purpose. When it had been determined that under existing laws no company could hold or operate a sufficient number of leases widely scattered over the Islands to insure enough trials to make a petroleum development project attractive, the Company approached the Government to inquire whether it was prepared to recommend to the National Assembly a repeal or change in these laws.

As a result of consideration of many plans, the one herewith transmitted to that august body has been worked out. It is, therefore, recommended that the necessary enabling legislation be passed in order that the agreement may be accepted and put into effect without further delay. Since there is no reason for dealing with this Company in a way different from that with others who are equally able and willing to undertake the same obligations, it may be preferable to make the enabling Act broad enough to permit the Executive, if he finds it in the nation’s interest to do so, to conclude similar agreements with any other Philippine or American company or a combination of the two, which may be able and willing to make similar guarantees of performance.

Respectfully,

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

The National Assembly Manila

Source : Presidential Museum and Library