SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is an honor to be here today to address you on a matter of great importance to our nation – the ongoing efforts to strengthen our disaster preparedness and resilience.

Bilang isang bansang madalas daanan ng bagyo, lindol, at iba pang kalamidad, kailangan nating maging handa sa anumang oras. We have learned valuable lessons from past tragedies, and we are committed to building a safer and more secure future for all Filipinos.

Ang ating pamahalaan ay walang tigil sa pagtatrabaho upang mapabuti ang ating mga sistema ng babala, pagtugon, at pagbangon. We are investing in state-of-the-art equipment, training our personnel, and empowering our communities to take proactive measures.

We are also strengthening our partnerships with international organizations and other countries to share best practices and access resources. This is a collective effort that requires the participation of everyone – government agencies, local government units, the private sector, and each and every citizen.

Kaya naman, hinihikayat ko ang lahat na makilahok sa mga programa at aktibidad na may kaugnayan sa disaster risk reduction and management. Let us work together to create a Philippines that is resilient, prepared, and ready to face any challenge that comes our way. Maraming salamat po.

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

GOVERNMENT POLICY, PROGRESS OF OCCIDENTAL NEGROS, AND THE SUGAR INDUSTRY

[Delivered at the inauguration of the City of Bacolod. Occidental Negros, on October 19, 1938]

Mr. Governor, Mr. Mayor, People of Bacolod and the Province of Negros:

It is a great pleasure for me to see how the people of Bacolod and the Province of Negros, in general, are celebrating the establishment of the new form of government of this city. While in part, perhaps, I should consider this public demonstration as a homage to the President of the Philippines, yet I would consider it wholly as an honor which you have given me. I see in this public demonstration the satisfaction of the people of Bacolod over the change that has been introduced in their form of government. This is indeed very significant for, as you well know, the change consists mainly in the conversion of the office of the head of this government from being elective to appointive. It shows beyond doubts that the people of Bacolod understand what democracy really means and the true objective of the Government when you find in these cheers a well-grounded motive for rejoice. There are those who believe that because the mayor of this city is now appointive, when heretofore the position was elective, this is a step backward. On the contrary, it is a step forward in the administration of the affairs of this city.

Municipal governments are not intended to be political organizations; municipal governments are constituted mainly for the administration of the affairs of a town or city in the interest of the inhabitants thereof. Nothing but honesty and efficiency are important in running the affairs of the municipal government. Policies of great importance need not be considered or discussed unless they are designed to serve as best as possible the interest of the town or city. In a city government where the mayor is appointed by the National Government, the man holding the position feels free to serve the interest of the people regardless of any political consideration. So he is in a better position to administer the affairs of his office than the one who, by virtue of his election, is sometimes influenced either by political debts which, of course, it is his duty to repay or by a political ambition which he may be entertaining secretly.

I have announced my desire to give the people of the Philippines more government and less politics under my administration. By this I mean that I consider the business of the Government entirely independent and different from the business of politics. A government has only one objective, and that is to serve the best interest of the people. On the other hand, politics is more interested in the welfare of its political organization than in the good of the people. However, political parties have but one justification for their existence—that they should choose the best within the party as candidates for positions in the Government in order that they may give the people what the people expect from their Government. When the parties or the men whom they have helped to be elected to office attempt to control the Government, the parties become the enemies of the people themselves, and, in this case, the people should attempt to defeat those parties.

We have before us a national election of the members of the National Assembly. As the titular head of the Nacionalista Party, it is my desire that the people elect the candidates of my party. But I cherish one desire greater than the desire to have the candidates of my party elected; that desire is to see that the people are permitted to choose the men whom they wish to elect and that frauds are not tolerated in favor of the candidates. I don’t want a single member of the Nacionalista Party to be elected either through fraud or undue influence of the Government.  If the people have faith in my leadership, they will elect our men. If they have no faith in our party or in my leadership, it is their privilege to elect other men: and it is the duty of all election officers to permit the people to elect those whom they choose. I desire to announce, as I have done in a proclamation I issued yesterday, that my greatest concern is to make the coming election the cleanest election ever held in the Philippines; and for any man who violates the election law, even for the purpose of electing the most beloved candidate of mine, I shall see to it that he goes to jail.  I am glad that the people of Bacolod, through this public demonstration, have shown that they are more interested in having here a good government than a political government.

The credit for the creation of tins new city is doubtless due, primarily, to the efforts of the representative of this district and, secondly, to the support given by his associates. But I want to say to the people of Bacolod and to the Province of Occidental Negros that the influence of the Speaker of the Assembly had been asserted in the enactment of this law; that he, as the head of the National Assembly, is entitled to public recognition which I desire to bestow upon him on this occasion. Speaker Montilla has decided not to seek a re-election. I want to say publicly to the people of this province that Speaker Montilla has honored you and the country for he has performed his duties as Speaker of the Assembly with dignity and integrity. I have found no more loyal supporter of my administration than in Speaker Montilla; I want to say, in the presence of all of you, that I am grateful to him and I shall always remember with pleasure and gratitude our association during the time that he was the Speaker of the National Assembly.

Occidental Negros is a very fortunate province not only because Almighty God, in His mercy, has given you a rich land but also because He has given you men of character, ability, and patriotism; men who have honored their citizenship; men who have been great leaders and faithful servants of our people. You had the great fortune to be represented by distinguished men in the former House of Representatives. No province can present a most selected list of ex-members of the Senate and the National Assembly than Occidental Negros. Those who served in the past as well as those who are serving you now are the equals of the best members of our legislature, and you should consider yourselves very fortunate in having these men. They served not only the interest of their respective districts but also that of the nation. Pedro Hernaez, although only a new member of the Assembly, has made a wonderful record for himself.  Magalona is an old member. He is, and has always been, the friend of the workingmen.  To this list of distinguished representatives, I hope that the name of one whom I, as his friend and former chief, am very proud of will be added. He is Jose Yulo.

As Secretary of Justice, Yulo was my most trusted adviser not only in the affairs of his own Department but also in all matters of national import.  There is no man in this country in whom I have more confidence other than Secretary Yulo.  He is so modest that the people would never know how much he has done in and for the Government if those who have had the occasion to see his work were to remain silent. But I cannot refrain from saying that Secretary Yulo is, at least, the equal of any secretary of justice in any government in this world.  He reminds me of a story that I once heard about a great pope. He was a modest, old man; he was very short in stature. One of the cardinals said to him, “Holy Father, it is a pity that you are not tall.” The Holy Father answered, “Men are not measured from head to foot; they are measured from here to here” pointing to the edges of his forehead). Now, if measured by the size of his brain, there is no man in the Philippines who is greater than Jose Yulo.  But that is not the best that can be said of him. Brains are necessary, but brains are not the most important in a man. They are character, integrity, honesty, and loyalty. If a man has brains but he is dishonest, he is worse than a dishonest man who has no brains. It is the honesty and the integrity of Jose Yulo which have won for him not only my admiration but also the gratitude of the Government and the respect of our people.

I was impressed by one of the floats that passed before me this evening; the float that represented the days of colonization in Occidental Negros—the time when this province was a forest, and some courageous, enterprising Ilongos came here and cut down the trees, cleaned and cultivated the land. I saw with my own eyes the days when your ancestors, with confidence in God and courage in their hearts, fought every obstacle on their way to make of this land what it is today. I was particularly impressed when I saw on the float the man cutting down the trees; like anyone who saw that float I stopped for a moment to consider its meaning. What did you see there? The man who is cutting down the trees represents labor—the workingman. It is through the sweat of the workingman that Negros is now one of the richest provinces of the Philippines, one of the best places to visit. But not all those who live in Negros now can say that they are living in plenty. On the contrary, while there are some Filipinos and foreigners here who make big amounts of money every year from the sugar industry, yet the men in the field are not getting their due share.

Among the sugar centrals in Negros, there is one which is practically owned by the Government of the Philippines. In the past that central enjoyed a participation of 45 per cent while the planters received 55 per cent. But when I became the President, I directed the bank to give the planters an additional 5 per cent for their share, so that now they get 60 per cent as against the 40 per cent for the central.  In the contract that bound the planters to the central, we saw no equity at all in the arrangement; and even though legally we could have continued to give the planters only 55 percent, yet, on our own initiative, we gave them a participation of 60 per cent.  But we did not stop there. This year I directed the Philippine National Bank to keep only 35 per cent for the centrals, so that another 5 per cent was given to the other party—the planters. However, this additional 5 per cent will not be paid to the planters but to the workingman in the field.

In the business of the sugar centrals, there are three parties—the capital, represented by the central; the capital and the land, represented by the hacenderos or the planters; and the labor, represented by the workingmen. The centrals have been getting the most out of the sugar business. It is true that in the beginning those who invested in these centrals took some risk, for they put in capital without knowing how the business would come out in the end. But, during all these years, these centrals have been making money in enormous amounts; some sugar centrals have already recovered their investments; it is, therefore, time for them to give greater participation to the men who administer the land and to those in the field—the laborers. It is my hope that the board, which I have created to get the central, the hacienda owner, and the laborer to agree on an equitable distribution of the profits among themselves, will succeed in its all-important mission. But if these entities do not do it voluntarily, it is my intention to recommend to the next National Assembly the imposition of a tax for centrals which will be used by the Government to serve the interest of the workingmen.

There is no use closing our eyes to the realities of the day! It is impossible to have our political and social institutions stabilized unless we dispense justice to everybody. Justice alone can maintain the stability of any country during these days; force cannot do it. In order that the people may give their loyal support to the Government, in order that the people themselves may constitute the best guarantee for peace and order, it is necessary that we render justice to the people. And the Government alone cannot do justice to the people; the Government needs the cooperation and help of all the elements of the community. Everybody must realize that the most selfish interests demand that you should do good to others in order that others may do good to you. The teachings of Our Lord Jesus Christ, “Do unto others what you would like others do unto you,” has to be complied with by every society or community, if it desires to survive this tremendous dislocation of the present social order of the world. Guns and bullets cannot do it. Only the people of those countries who consider it their duty to do good to others will not go through the bloody trials that others have passed.

The people of Occidental Negros are the most privileged people of the Philippines today, mainly because you have the only basic industry that is still making money. My own province is in a terrible plight; for in Tayabas we have only copra to sell, and the price of copra has gone down so much that we do not even have enough money to buy a rope with which to hang ourselves. This is also the situation of the people who live in the hemp-producing regions—they are in the same plight. On the other hand, you can still make money, as you are actually making money, in the sugar industry. You are blessed, exceptionally blessed! Now you must use the wealth that you have to benefit the people. Make everybody in Negros happy and contented; let Negros be the paradise of the Philippines.

I want to congratulate the new mayor of the City of Bacolod for the appointment I have given him. When Assemblyman Hernaez brought Mayor Montelibano to my office, he had with him a recommendation from the provincial board. Then and there I told Mr. Montelibano that would appoint him mayor of this city only upon the joint recommendations of the governor, the provincial board, and the members of the National Assembly from Negros particulars the assemblyman from this district. But told this to Mayor Montelibano: I am appointing you mayor of Bacolod because I have the information that you have the ability and integrity to head that new and great city.

I am not appointing you to serve the interest of the Nacionalista party in Bacolod; I am not appointing you to serve the interest of Assemblyman Hernaez; but I am appointing you to serve the interest of the people of Bacolod above the interest of any political party. And I know that you will do it; that is why I am giving you this appointment.

It is my hope and expectation that I shall always look back with gratification to the day when Assemblyman Hernaez brought Mayor Montelibano to my office. I also hope that when, in the future and as a private citizen already, I should pay Bacolod another visit, I would still see Mayor Montelibano the head of this city—a southern metropolis counting with at least one hundred thousand happy and contented inhabitants, a city having beautiful parks, hospitals, and schools within its boundaries. [ Long applause ]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library