Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Experiences as a Tubercular

[Abstracts from the speech delivered during the dedication ceremonies at the Quezon Institute—a sanatorium for tuberculosis under the Philippine Tuberculosis Society—at Santol, Santa Mesa, Manila, August 18, 1938]

Six years ago, when I was in the United States on an important mission in behalf of the Philippines, I started to feel chest oppression and back pain, and became easily fatigued. As my work needed all my strength and I could ill afford to be sick at the time, I took the first opportunity to consult Dr. Miller, famous lung specialist in New York City. After subjecting me to a rigorous physical and fluoroscopic examination, the doctor diagnosed my case as tuberculosis of the lungs. I was then ignorant of this disease. I had always felt vigorous and healthy throughout my life and had never thought seriously of diseases. My notion of tuberculosis then was that any one who suffered from it was doomed to die.

It was a beautiful day in spring when I entered Dr. Miller’s clinic; the sun was shining bright, and my spirits were high. When I heard the doctor’s pronouncement, I felt the day suddenly darken; my spirits became depressed and my ambitions were shattered. I passed a sleepless night thinking of the course I should pursue, realizing that death was very near. I thought of my enormous responsibilities to my people, of the task that I had not yet completed. I realized that I was a husband and the father of three children whose future I had relatively neglected. I decided on that eventful night that I must dedicate the remaining days of my life to the work that still remained undone by me as the leader of my people and as the head of a family.

I wanted to be sure how long my life would last so I could adjust my plans. The following day I went, back to Dr. Miller and told him point-blank. “Dr. Miller, I know that I am going to die and I don’t care, but please let me know how long I can still expect to live so that I may adjust my program of activity accordingly.” Dr. Miller smilingly told me that nobody died of tuberculosis if he had the will power to get well, and that if I would take a complete rest under the attention of a competent physician, I would still have many useful years ahead of me.

After disposing of the important matters I had on hand. I found myself crossing the continent bound for California where I entered the Pottenger Sanatorium at Monrovia. I was advised by the physician to stay in bed, and this I did religiously for nearly six months. I was then far from being a crippled man. I still had enough energy to go about, being used to a very active life. Therefore, to stay quiet in bed, day in and day out, required all my will-power and determination to get cured. I had fought in the Philippine Revolution and undergone hardships and privation, while still a very young man, but I had never endure I torture as when I was laid up in bed for six month even raising my head. But I knew it was necessary and I patiently endured it. After this rest at Monrovia Sanatorium, I came out a cured man full of high spirits and with a feeling of being much younger. This experience has convinced me that tuberculosis is curable, and that anybody at the incipient stage of the disease, with the means and the will-power to get well, can be cured.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library