SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is an honor to be here today to address you on a matter of great importance to our nation – the ongoing efforts to strengthen our disaster resilience.

Bilang isang Pilipino, ramdam ko ang hirap at pagsubok na dinaranas ng ating mga kababayan tuwing may kalamidad. We have witnessed firsthand the devastating effects of typhoons, floods, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions. These events not only cause immense suffering and loss of life but also disrupt our economy and hinder our progress.

Kaya naman, prayoridad ng ating pamahalaan ang pagpapalakas ng ating kakayahan na harapin ang mga sakuna. We are investing heavily in early warning systems, disaster preparedness programs, and infrastructure development. We are also working closely with local government units and communities to ensure that they are equipped with the necessary resources and knowledge to respond effectively to emergencies.

We are committed to building a more resilient Philippines – a nation that can withstand the challenges of climate change and natural disasters. This requires a whole-of-government approach, as well as the active participation of all sectors of society. Kailangan ang pagtutulungan at pagkakaisa upang makamit natin ang ating layunin.

Let us all work together to create a safer and more secure future for our people. Maraming salamat po at mabuhay tayong lahat!

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

IMPROVEMENT OF THE LIVING CONDITION OF THE FARMERS AND TENANCY RELATIONS

[Delivered before a gathering of farm tenants at Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija, on April 30, 1939]

Friends:

I have come to Cabanatuan today in response to an invitation of the landowners who wish me to hear what they have to say at their gathering. And in compliance with Mr. Feleo’s request to avail myself of an opportunity to hear you, I chose this day so that I may hear both you and the landowners.

This morning I talked to the landowners with all sincerity and frankness. The president of their association, who was present, heard all I said. That is why I know that he agrees with everything I told them. However, let it be known to you that it is my desire to see the landowners follow most of the suggestions I gave them, in the meantime that no laws embracing such suggestions have been enacted. It is true that they are at perfect liberty to follow or not those suggestions according to what their good judgment dictates. I am not vested with power to force anyone to do anything not provided by law. But I have told them that it is their duty to observe faithfully those matters which I pointed to them as express provisions of the law, or else I shall be constrained to use my legal powers in compelling them to do so.

What I wish to tell you now is this: Those acts of oppression which, as Mr. Feleo alleges, were committed by landowners in the past, even if true, must be forgotten; moreover, I believe that not all landowners were guilty of the practice. Let us turn our attention to an analysis of the future, and let the past alone. From now on, should like all landowners, not only here but also in other provinces where tenancy conditions are similar to those found here, to abide by the law and. if possible, introduce additional measures that would further improve those conditions so that tile relations between landowners and tenants would become more harmonious and lasting, and greater benefits would accrue to everyone. On the other hand, you should not expect the Commonwealth Government to enact legislation directed at the curtailment of the rights of the landowners; our Government is powerless to do that. That which accrues to the landowner is, by nature, his. Our Government is bound to protect it just as much as you are morally obliged to recognize it. In the same manner, the Government cannot allow, and will never allow, landowners to deny their tenants of their rights.

But what is most important is that you should refrain from using force in an effort to protect your rights; as, at the instant that force is used commendable though its purpose may be, such rights lose their intrinsic merits in the process. For that reason, you should not take possession of the produce of the land without the owners’ consent; you should inform them of whatever you intend to do. If anyone feels himself unjustly treated, he should present his complaint to the municipal officials. You may rest assured that I shall not allow any landowner to grab a single grain of rice from your rightful share.

At present, we have a Tenancy Law, and only that which is provided in this law could be put in force by tenants and landowners in their tenancy relations. I have no authority to force anyone to do what is in excess or beyond the limits of the law so long as no amendments to that effect are made.

Regarding your petition to be allowed to borrow money at low rates of interest from the Government or from its banks, I wish to say that I shall do my best to have it approved by the officials concerned. However, there are two things I want you to bear in mind: First, I cannot, of my own accord, grant it to you. It is necessary that legislation to that effect be enacted by the National Assembly. Secondly, granting that a law on that matter has already been enacted, still its enforcement will not be felt at once. Delay is to be expected, inasmuch as the money to be loaned to you belongs to the Government.

In view of the foregoing, a study should be made of the means by which farmers could pay the money that might be loaned to them. You may, though without any land of your own, negotiate a loan by putting up your future crops as security. However, in this case, the bank which offers you the loan should be assured of the crop from which the payment is to be secured. But unless you stop your habit of unreasonably taking away the harvest, no banking institution will ever dare to extend credit to you. If you want to find banks ready to give you loans, endeavor not to touch that portion of the crop assigned to pay the loan. As it is now, you have nothing as guarantee except your word of honor. Show not in words alone, but in deeds also, that your speech carries weight, in order that your request may be granted.

Still that is not everything that you should remember. Because it is your share of the harvest that will serve as security for your debt, it is necessary that you cultivate the land with considerable interest. If, on the contrary, you neglect your farm work or burn the crop the moment you become angry with the landowner, what else would you have to rely upon to guarantee your debt in the bank?

If you are desirous of obtaining loans from banks, show them that you are good citizens, peaceful and law-abiding. For that matter, the first thing that we should do, therefore, is obey the law—improve our ways of living.

I wish to tell you one thing: A farmer in this country will not prosper, be he granted what is due him for his labor, unless he learns to save money. The thing that impoverishes us Filipinos, rich and poor alike, is extravagance. The difference lies only in the ways the rich and the poor squander their money. The rich pamper themselves with luxuries, such as automobiles, beautiful homes, grand pastimes, etc.; while the poor indulge themselves in vices, such as gambling, cockfighting, and town fiestas. What has the future to offer a person who has the propensity of squandering money when he has but little to squander? Among us Filipinos, it is a common sight to see people who live on debts alone. And the expression so current among us is, Bahala na! (Let things take care of themselves.) There can be no improvement in our living conditions unless we learn how to save.

Another thing: Granting that a tenant gets all he is entitled to, still, owing to the fact that he works only during the planting season, his share of the harvest cannot be expected to be sufficient to cover his needs for an entire year. If a tenant who works for only three or four months on the field would not make efforts to secure other work after the harvest, but simply depend upon his share of the crop, he would soon find himself without sufficient means for his subsistence; much more if he has both a wife and children. It is impossible for him to support himself and his family for one whole year with the share which the landowner gives him for his four or five months’ toil.

There are twelve months in a year; it is necessary that we work throughout the twelve months. God will not provide us with subsistence unless we work. Even if God grants us land, unless we ourselves break the soil and cultivate it, still our living conditions will not improve. San Isidro Labrador (patron saint of labor) is preoccupied with so much business in heaven that he finds no time to attend to us here on earth. A miracle is a product of activity. It remains for us, therefore, to keep ourselves working here on earth. You should not hope that your being afforded with easy facilities by the law would improve your living conditions even if you do not exert efforts. On the other hand, the landowner or the Government must come also to your aid in order that you would have work during the year. Only when this is given a tenant that hope for his economic security is assured.

I deem this time opportune to make an important observation to both landowners and tenants regarding their tenancy relations. The word “tenancy” has a connotation which you should know. It implies partnership between the landowner and his tenant. It is not proper that either should consider himself the superior of the other. Both are partners; that is, partners in a single enterprise. The landowner offers his land, as well as his share of the expenses in cultivation. The farmer contributes his labor and his own share of the expenses. That which brings gain to one, brings gain to the other. If this truism is observed by both landowner and tenant while they strive to promote each other’s welfare like real partners, we still may see the end of all tenancy troubles not only here in Nueva Ecija, but also in all other places in the Philippines.

A landowner ought to realize the fact that if no one would work on his land, nothing would be raised therefrom, as crop production is made possible through the industry of the tenant only. He ought to keep in mind, therefore, that the tenant has a right to profit by his labor and no one has a right to deprive him of a single grain due to him from the harvest.

Likewise, the tenant must know that nothing can be grown by him where he has no land to cultivate. He, therefore, must remember that the landowner is entitled to the profits of the money he has invested in the land and should desist from aiming at a share greater than what is due his labor. It is his duty to take cognizance of the fact that the landlord should have his rightful share of the produce of his land.

Things that result in their mutual benefit should be the main concern of both tenant and landowner. They should help each other and treat each other fairly; as without land or labor both are bound to suffer losses. Tenants should remember that hunger would be more devastating among them than among landowners, who are comparatively few in number, if our agricultural lands would be left uncultivated. And it is possible that the latter may obtain by purchase everything they need, even if their land would yield no harvest for two planting seasons. On the other hand, tenants would have nothing to eat if they fail to work. They cannot strike, as a strike would only aggravate their situation and not the landowners. Consequently, you should cease thinking about resorting to force in your desire to get what is yours. During my incumbency, I shall employ the forces of the Government to prevent the repetition of those acts which, as Mr. Feleo alleges, have already been committed. That which is really your share is yours to take and hold. The days of the talindura are now over; the takipan is no more. You should now get what is rightfully yours; I assume responsibility for this policy.

I requested the landowners this morning that they should forget all about the interest on the money that they advanced to you, especially when such money was used for your subsistence. Nevertheless, so long as no amendments are made on the present law, the landowners can collect 10 per cent interest a year on the money loaned to you. But, when you borrow money for a term of four months, the interest charged should cover that period only, and not a whole a year as erroneously done by some.

I had tried to dissuade the landowners from charging you in per cent interest, inasmuch as you and they are partners. Let us wait and see what they will do with my request. If you owe them palay, you should do one of two things: either pay it in kind during the harvest or pay it in money. To my way of thinking, a cavan of palay should be returned for every cavan of palay borrowed: or if money is to be the payment, it should be paid at the current cost of palay.

Another request I made the landowners was this: The landowner should not eject his tenant as long as the latter performs well his part of their tenancy contract. I hope that the National Assembly will amend the Tenancy Law so as to insert therein a provision to that effect. It is not a tenant’s duty to perform domestic chores in the residence of his landlord. A tenant’s affiliation with any party or association, be it the Communist Party, the Popular Front, or any other party, should not be considered sufficient cause for a landowner to eject him. Nor is it proper to force a tenant to vote for his landlord’s candidate. Provided that the tenant does his duty well and does not grab the harvest for himself, the landowner has no right to oust him.

I would like to make the landowners understand that at the time the tenant shall get protection from being unjustly driven from his work, the first to reap benefits out of the new order will be the landowner himself; for the moment the tenant learns that the landowner cannot oust him without reasonable cause, he shall treat the land he works on as his own property. True enough, the moment that a tenant comes to learn that inconsequential charges will not suffice to have him ousted from the land he cultivates, he shall change his attitude towards that land, as he would not be the only one to profit therefrom, but his children as well.

One scheme which I shall try my best to obtain to benefit the tenant further, is the inheritance by his children of the privilege of working on the land he works. If a law to this effect is enacted, I am sure all agrarian troubles in this country will be ended. This scheme is not original with me. It was employed in Ireland to put to an end its tenancy troubles. Because of this, the present relations between landowners and tenants in that country are very satisfactory.

I acquired a piece of land situated between the towns of Arayat and Cabiao. My purpose was to learn something about land management. This was what I told my tenants there: “This land is yours as long as you cultivate it; no one shall wrest it from you. Half of the harvest shall be yours. I shall buy you carabaos; you will pay for them by installments. I will return your money when you shall have paid for them in full. Thus, from now on, you can consider the carabaos your own. But if they get lost, you will have to pay me their full price just the same, as not until you shall have fully paid for them that they can be considered really yours.” I told them thus for the reason that if I give them full ownership before all their installments could be paid, no one can be too certain about the fate of those carabaos during barrio celebrations.

Regarding politics. I told my tenants this much: “You know, I am the President of the Philippines. Yet, I would not order you to join any party. If you wish to become communists, be communists; if your inclinations are towards the Popular Front, you may all become Popular Fronters. But please refrain from holding your meetings during working hours. Soon after your work, you may start your meeting if you so desire. You may revile even the President himself; that does not matter with me.” [Applause and shouts of “Mabuhay!”] I believe that if this course is adopted by all landowners, all troubles here will be ended.

Consequently, the most important reform which I shall ask the National Assembly to pass will be the insertion of a provision in the Tenancy Law prohibiting the landowner from expelling his tenant so long as the latter does not do anything in the way of destroying the land or of grabbing the crop-share of the landowner. The share that corresponds to the tenant must be given him. Lending money with interest to tenants is not salutary in principle. I give you my word that I shall employ the entire forces of the Government to make landowners comply with the provisions of the Tenancy Law. I shall not tolerate the continuance of the practice of charging excessive interest by landowners on money loaned to their tenants. [Applause.]. If you are aggrieved, present your grievances to your barrio lieutenant, your councilor, or your town mayor. They will hear your complaints properly and help you. I have already instructed fiscals and public defenders to hear and attend to your complaints. But please refrain from complaining when your accusations are false; and desist from creating troubles of any sort.

In addition, I am asking both landowners and tenants to forget their past. Strive to get along together in friendliness and good will. He who ignores the law, confident that the usual deviations may still escape prosecution, must understand that he is leading himself to jail.

Countrymen: One moment more, and I shall be through. Let me remind you that you who are tenants should not look upon yourselves as enemies of the landowners; nor should landowners suppose that they are the foes of the tenants. You are not enemies; you are partners—in another word, associates. Our lives will be empty of purpose unless tenants and landlords learn to get together well. You should not think that force will yield you an advantage; because the truth is that it will yield you none.

Let us admit that you are capable of overpowering the Government of the Philippines. But, as long as the sovereignty of the United States remains here, that country will take charge of the preservation of peace. If the Government of the Philippines cannot stop a trouble, the American Government will undertake to do that. And, even granting that the authority of the United States is gone from this country, still we cannot afford to make trouble, as the element of foreign intervention will surely come in. Do you not realize that disorders here would only offer excuses to other countries in taking a hand in our affairs? In the event a foreign nation takes active interest in our internal conflict, others would cease to regard us with respect; and, possibly, such a state might bring back to us the days of the Spanish regime.

I, therefore, ask you not to allow hatred keep its pace. When you feel offended, do what you are doing now—meet peacefully and voice your denunciation—that the Government may hear your grievances and give you its help. The Government is always ready to extend to you its aid. I shall not allow it to forget you. I am a son of the poor; I was not born rich. When still a boy, I also used to plow and harrow. Mine was a small village. I know life as it is lived by poor townfolks. Thus, I wish you to understand that my whole heart is with you. I shall not allow anyone to do violence against you; just as I shall not allow you to do violence against any one. You may rest assured I shall suffer no one to suck the lifeblood from you. But it is necessary that you help me in return. That help you can give me best by not resorting to force or creating trouble.

My last request is, refrain from going on a strike. A strike is not a wise course to take. If you wish me to help you in improving your lot, strive to live peacefully and comply with the mandates of the law.

My friends, have faith in me; and. in turn. I shall have faith in you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library