Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines At the luncheon given in Honor of Provincial Governors

[ Delivered at Malacañan Palace, on January 19, 1939 ]

NEW POLICY IN HANDLING PROVINCIAL AFFAIRS

Gentlemen:

I am glad to have you here to meet the new Cabinet. With such a formidable Cabinet I am confident that the administration of public affairs in the next three years will reach the highest efficiency, so that it would be impossible for my successor to surpass their work unless he were fortunate enough to have these men for his Cabinet. As I have announced, I will initiate a new policy in handling the affairs of the Government. I will now hold every Secretary directly responsible for running his Department, and I will only consider matters affecting the Departments when the law requires my final determination or when the decision of the Secretary is appealed to me. This means that provincial officials must take up their cases first with the Secretary of the Interior, or if the question involved is in the hands of another Department, then it must be taken up with the Secretary concerned. You will come to me only when you think that you have been wrongly denied the remedy you had been working for. I need not tell you that both the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Finance, who, by virtue of the existing laws, have more business to do with the provincial government than any of the other Departments, will cooperate in every way with you in expediting all matters pertaining to your administration that are brought up to them. They called my attention to the exasperating delay in handling the business of the provinces, and they submitted this question in order that ways and means could be formed to obviate the technicalities and formalities involved in handling routine business from the provinces. I told them that I had already taken steps to that effect even before the last meeting of the Cabinet. Some governors, among them the Governor of Iloilo who first presented the question to me, stated that there have been cases in which provincial governments functioned without budgets for months. So when I returned from a cruise, I recommended to the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Finance to allow the provincial governors to authorize somebody in the province to act for them, unless for some special reason they should personally act on the matter.

I think that is all I have to tell you with reference to your work. I am hopeful that the next three years would witness a great step forward in the administration of public affairs, what with a Cabinet composed of men of proven ability and a National Assembly at whose head is a man whose ability, patriotism, and knowledge of the necessities of the country had been amply demonstrated during the time he was Secretary of Justice. I refer to Speaker Yulo. I expect, therefore, that the whole government machinery—particularly the executive and the legislative branches—would cooperate intelligently and efficiently in the next three years.

Whenever you have a business to transact with the National Assembly, do it through the Department of the Interior. If it happens that neither the Department of the Interior nor I approve of what you believe the Legislature could do for you, then go to the Speaker. But you should not go to the assemblymen, otherwise you would disorganize the whole establishment of the Commonwealth. I would not interpose any objection if you should propose measures to the Secretary of the Interior or the National Assembly. But let the Secretary of the Interior do it for you. You might also appoint a committee that would present your proposals to the Speaker and have the National Assembly act upon them. But I will not recommend to the National Assembly any measure proposed by you which I do not approve of; but if it is a good measure, I may be willing to approve it although the Assembly may have turned it down. On the other hand, if I shall veto any bill approved by the National Assembly if I find any fundamental objection to it. Remember, I do not want to deprive you of every opportunity to take up your questions with the appropriate agency of the Government. Therefore, the Secretary of the Interior is the first official you should approach; next, is the Secretary of Finance. If you do not get support from them, then you may go to the Assembly. Do not approach the assemblymen; instead, present your case to the Speaker and let him handle it. When the matter comes up to me, you may appoint a committee to see me, and if you can convince me of the merit of the case, then I shall give it my approval.

Gentlemen: I want you to feel confident that you have the support of the National Government; that I want you to be good governors first and politicians later. Do not invert that arrangement. Since you are elective officials, your first responsibility is to be the head of your province. Your being local head of your party is only secondary. As long as you act thus, you will get the cooperation of the National Government. So do not put politics above every consideration, otherwise you will not get our support in your cases. I may go further than that. Remember that the Supreme Court has decided the Carmen Planas case, which was interesting because Planas claimed that she made the charges as an ordinary citizen and not as member of the Municipal Board. But I am positive that I shall not do that in your case, as the Secretary of the Interior is confident that he has a fine group of governors and mayors. I agree with him. That does not mean, however, that I think everyone of you is a good governor. /Applause./

You must examine your conscience. If you honestly think that you are not entitled to the above opinion of the President, then you had better improve yourself. There is still room for improvement. Right now do not think of starting your campaign for reelection; instead, think more of your responsibilities to your constituents. With very few exceptions—for there are always exceptions—our people usually vote for a governor who is a good man rather than a good politician. They know who would be a good governor. A man who believes that he could be elected by pleasing a few party leaders is fooling himself. You may play politics with some people, but you cannot play politics with everybody. Your best politics is justice and efficiency in the service.

That reminds me of my visit to Pampanga the other day. I have a fishery there by the river. There are no Socialists and no labor troubles between sugar centrals and planters in that particular place. The people are peaceful because fishpond owners treat them fairly and justly, and are happy because they live near the river. In a talk with the people, I asked them about their governor. Some old men there still remember certain governors because they believe them to be good executives, and it so happened that these governors had had reelections. When they spoke to me, I knew they were not partisan because they mentioned good governors. One of the things that give me the greatest pleasure in life is when I find myself in a heart-to-heart talk with the people. They remember the good governors who gave them concrete roads. I told this to Governor Baluyot in spite of the fact that they do not speak highly of him. I know they would speak of him better if he were not only so aggressively partisan. Good governors can be reelected if they do justice to the people; and a good party man could do more for the party by carrying out its policies than by playing cheap politics. Give the people a good government and they will acclaim our party as the best.

I think we now have a good Secretary of the Interior. I do not mean that Secretary Quirino had not been a good Secretary; but certainly the Department of the Interior has not lost anything by the appointment of his successor. As department head Secretary Qurino was a very active man with high principles, and he was devoted completely to service. I regretted to have let him go; but since I had decided to change the Cabinet in order to bring in new blood to the Government, I was forced to accept his resignation. So what I say of Secretary Alunan and my present Cabinet does not mean that Secretary Quirino had been otherwise. The appointment of Secretary Alunan does not in any way reflect upon the ability of Secretary Quirino. In fact, I am very fond of him personally and officially. I was very much pleased with the way he ran his Department. As the Government has more activities now than before, it might be certain that when Secretary Quirino came to the Department of the Interior, he formed new policies. I have no doubt that Secretary Alunan would not only carry them out but also give them new impetus and new life.

I wish you all success in your administration and I sincerely hope that you will receive the cooperation of the Secretary of the Interior and the other Secretaries, as well as that of the Speaker of the Assembly who, I think, will give this Government all the help that he can possibly render. I thank you.

From Messages of the President, Vol. 5, Part I, pp. 3-7

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library