Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines During the Conference with the Delegation of the Young Philippines

[ Delivered at Malacañan Palace, Manila, September, 29, 1937 ]

ENFORCEMENT OF THE CIVIL SERVICE LAW AND ELECTIONS

—–

The only justification for people to disagree in politics should be a difference of ideas and in fundamental principles of government.

It is one thing to destroy a building and another to construct one. You can destroy a building by calling people together and telling them to go ahead and destroy it. But in the work of construction you must have a plan and everybody working on that building must work in accordance with that plan.

The only tie that can produce good is the tie of love. Love can produce good things. Hatred can only destroy; it can never build up because hatred is not creative, it is destructive. It is love that is creative.

—–

In the first place, I want to say that as far as the enforcement of the Civil Service Law and regulations in the government offices is concerned, I have been trying to do it ever since I became the President, and I intend to do it as long as I am President. We have been somewhat liberal, in the enforcement of the Civil Service Rules, in the case of men who have already been in the service for many years and who have made good records as honest men. Like the cage of these poor policemen who are in the service, we are giving them to prepare themselves for the Civil Service examination. As far as new appointments are concerned, we require strictly that they take a Civil Service examination and be properly qualified under the Civil Service rules, except in cases where the Constitution provides that they may be exempted from the Civil Service rules. So you need not worry about it.

And, as to the question of public improvements, it will be solved in accordance with a plan which the Chief Executive is devising for submission to the Assembly, a plan having in view, not the policy of favoring any province or group of provinces, but having in mind the impartial objective of the Government—the development of the resources of the country in a scientific and systematic way and with the best results for the largest number of people. Under this plan, if the Assembly will approve it, appropriations will not be used to reward or punish a province, according as it has vetoed for or against the candidates of the majority party. That should be known to everybody. We shall prepare a national program of economic development, but of course the final decision rests with the Assembly, and you, gentlemen, know that the final authority on appropriations is vested by the Constitution in the National Assembly. All that I can do is to recommend. It is my hope, however, that the National Assembly will accept my recommendations in this respect.

You say something here about amending the law so as to permit young men to be candidates for public office—that is, the provision in the Election Law that a candidate for governor be at least 30 years of age. I saw no necessity for that provision, but I could not veto the bill because we have to have elections, and if I had vetoed that provision, I would have vetoed the whole bill. In drafting that age provision, the Assembly took into consideration the fact that before a man can be a candidate for the National Assembly, he should at least be 30 years old, and the fact that the position of provincial governor entails a greater responsibility, as far as the individuals are concerned, than membership in the National Assembly. Responsibility and power are vested in the National Assembly as a body, and, therefore, one man alone cannot destroy the whole work of the Assembly. In the case of a governorship, the responsibility is individual, and the National Assembly argued that if members of the National Assembly must be 30 years of age at least, then a governor should also be of that age. But I would, not have considered that a good step, and I would, have so expressed myself, if I could have told them I was informed that the provision was inserted in order to prevent Vinzons from being a candidate. However, I want him to be a candidate, because if he is defeated, the defeat would show that the province is not with him. If he wins, I would have the opportunity to see if he can make a good governor, and we will give him a chance, but if he turns out to be a bad governor, I will go after him and suspend him.

I am not afraid of any governor. That is why I am sorry that that provision prevented Vinzons from becoming a candidate. The fact remains that I could not veto the provision increasing the age of provincial officials to 30 years; any change will depend on the Assembly. As to your complaint that the Chief Executive will interfere with the work of a governor of the opposition party, I can say that I shall not be prejudiced against him. As a matter of fact, I do not care to what party he belongs; provided he performs his duties well, I shall not intervene. I don’t care who the governor of a province is. I suspended the governor of Albay, who is an Anti, another in Samar, and another in Zamboanga, a Pro. I don’t care to which party the governor belongs provided he does his duties well. If he does not do what he should do, I will punish him irrespective of his political color. I am going to exercise the executive power of the Government under the law, in accordance with the power I have, and nobody can be in my way in the exercise of my function or in the performance of my duty. I know the limit of my authority and the extent of my duties. So, I think that is all about your positive recommendations.

I cannot leave unanswered your assertion in your memorial about the Anti-Pro controversy. You are practically telling me that the Antis won the last elections through government manipulation. That is an outrage. I was sick during those elections. I knew I could beat the Pros, regardless of what you young men could do. You make another statment that I cannot let go unchallenged. There is a provision in the Tydings-McDuffie Law which establishes a substantial difference between the two laws. In the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law that provision was there, but I am interested only in the substance of the thing. That was not an independence bill, I hate to talk about this now, now that I have forgiven and forgotten all those who fought against me. As a matter of fact, I have given high positions in the government to those persons. But I cannot, for historical reasons, let the statement in your memorial lie unchallenged—that the Tydings-McDuffie Law and the Hare-Hawes-Gutting Law were the same—because that is not true. That provision alone constitutes such a difference as to make one an independence bill and the other not, I was willing to accept the law when the provision for military and naval reservations was removed, I am not afraid of independence. It was nonsense what the Pro leaders said—that I did not want independence,

You also assert that through frauds the Antis won the elections against the Pros, I have never tolerated frauds in elections. I have never been elected through fraud. It is true that an immense majority of the students of the University of the Philippines were against me in the fight, simply because they were influenced by their President and professors. You yourself, Mr. Vinzons, were influenced by the speeches of President Palma. Influenced by their President, the students naturally were against me, but I had the confidence of the people and that was the reason why I won the elections.

It is not true that there are major differences between the two parties. The only cause for disagreement was the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. But we agreed on a platform. The only justification for people to disagree in politics should be a difference of ideas and in fundamental principles of government. It is perfectly ridiculous to be in the opposition simply because you much prefer to be in the opposition and not in the majority. My choice of party should depend on whether I agree or disagree with you. If you happen to be in the opposition and the majority agrees with you, then there is no reason for the difference and you must belong to the same party. For the Pros and Antis to continue fighting each other is to play a dishonest comedy; and when we agreed to join, it was for the better.

I hope there will be a strong minority party, but this idea of merging all opposition parties because they are all against me is terrible. The result would be such that, if those opposition groups succeeded in defeating the majority, they would be unable to carry out any policy. It is one thing to destroy a building and another to construct one. You can destroy a building by calling people together and telling them to go ahead and destroy it. But in the work of obstruction you must have a plan and everybody working on that building must work in accordance with that plan. The opposition must not be maintained merely to defeat the majority. They must formulate a platform that will give basis for their opposition; and in case they turn down the majority, they must have one objective, one common purpose.

I have seen in the papers that leaders are calling together all the opposition groups so that they may merge for the purpose of defeating the majority. They should have a platform for their objective. If they have that, then they are all right. But it’s already a defective organization from the very beginning. Do you think that it is possible for that opposition to grow? You don’t expect me to use the power of my office to create an opposition here. I cannot create an opposition, but I shall give any opposition a chance at a, fair fight.

I am going to enforce the Election Law. I would send even my own brother to jail if he violated the Election Law. If the opposition starts by being divided amongst themselves, since they are only joining together because of their hatred against the Government or against me, nothing good for the Government can come out of it. The only tie that can produce good is the tie of love. Bear that in mind as long as you live. Love can produce good things. Hatred can only destroy; it can never build up because hatred is not creative, it is destructive. It is love that is creative.

It is not true that the Nationalist Party maintained itself in power by using the Government. Patronage alone cannot succeed. When I fought Osmeña, the Colectivista Party was organized all over the Philippines. I did not have much time to organize it well because the fight started one month before the elections, but I had more senators and representatives after the elections. I had something definite to offer. The people believed in my objective, and their belief resulted in the triumph of my party. We joined our parties, but we did it then under the principle of collective leadership.

I am not accustomed to receive and not to return attacks, but I permit people to discuss opinions that are contrary to mine.

(Referring to Vinzons.) This fellow never had a right to be against me. I have gone out of my way to give him a chance, but he has always been against me. Those who prevented him from being a candidate were his own party associates before. No, I don’t work like that. I don’t resent the fact that people are against me. The best proof is the case of President Palma. He created the belief that I was a traitor to the country, that I was a dangerous public man. I know that Palma believed in good faith what he said. He was attacking me because he thought he was right. I went after him. I defeated him, but I did not punish him. When I had the chance to do something for him, I did it because I knew he could render service to the Government. And I am willing to give a chance to every man.

If you can organize an opposition party that has principles and you want to criticize the Government, then that is all right. I had the Department of Justice go over these laws to which you are referring. I am convinced that nobody can be jailed for sedition under tar laws simply because he criticizes the Government. I don t believe that can be done under these laws which forbid the curtailing of the freedom of speech, and of the press, etc. I don’t believe that you can do that. What the Sakdalistas said about me is awful, but nobody went to jail for that. I am not perfect; I know that. It is true that there are laws providing that the Government can jail anybody who is actually committing a seditious act, but there is nothing that would permit the conviction of any man who is only exercising his prerogatives as a citizen.

I think that is all.

If there is anybody among you whose ability, character, and integrity justify his appointment to an office, I have no objection to appointing him. But I am not going to appoint a man simply because he is of the opposition party. There are people who believe that the way to attract attention is to attack the Government. I don’t get scared—I am not scared. I have no objection to bringing a man into the Government who has attacked me after defeating him. I first fight him and if he wants to make a noise let him make a noise.

(Answering a question asked by a member of the delegation whether His Excellency would favor the candidacy of Vinzons, the President said that he prefers not to favor the candidacy of anybody. He is neither for nor against it. He told them that at the age of 25 he was already a governor. “And I claim,” he said, “that I was good governor.”)

(He told the conferees that if they wanted to, they could send him a petition for the amendment of that portion of the Election Law dealing with the age of candidates for governor and said that he would recommend it favorably to the National Assembly. He told them, however, that he could not include it in his message to the National Assembly at its regular session which will convene on October 16th, but that he would send a message to the Speaker recommending it favorably.)

(He made mention of the fact that the leaders of the Assembly during his time were all young—Gabaldon, Osmeña, Adriatico, Orense, himself, and others. Among the members of the National Assembly were also some of the old members of the Malolos Constitution. He said that  they treated the old members well, but that the young members ran the show.)

(The delegation also asked the President what he thought of the idea of having the Young Philippines stand as a separate opposition party. He said that he did not have any objection, provided that they fought the majority on principles and not on hatred; and provided further that they elect their leaders.)

(Commenting on the Barredo case, he pointed out the fact that many Presidents of the United States did the same thing—Jefferson, Lincoln, Roosevelt—when the courts committed blunders in their decisions. He said that these men simply exercised the principles of democracy, for no man should just sit by and keep his mouth shut about any wrong done—that is not encroaching upon the independence of the judiciary. He said that he was not content to simply say, “The Assembly did it,” or “The courts did it.” “I am the only man elected by the people of the whole country,” he went on, “and they have the right to demand that I see justice done. I am the first servant of the people. I am going to fight. If it is within the rights of the Executive Department, I will fight. What will the people say if they see me doing nothing in this regard? I cannot be placed in that position. If that is the price of the presidency, I don’t want to be president.”)

(The President advised the members of the delegation that if they want to be politicians, they should stand by something that is fundamental, saying that the people follow only leaders who are bold.)

From Messages of the Philippines, Vol. 3, Part I, pp. 130-138.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library