Speech of the Honorable Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, delivered at City Hall on the occasion of the celebration of the birth anniversary of the late President Manuel L. Quezon, August 19, 1945.

Ladies and Gentlemen:

During the life of President Quezon, it was always a privilege and a pleasure for me to participate in programs dedicated to celebrating his birth anniversary. Now that he is no longer among us, my desire to claim the same privilege is even greater, dedicating to the departed friend the offering of a few thoughts.

This occasion naturally brings to mind a multitude of memories and impressions, and I only regret that there is no time or space to encompass a past that has been a whole life and an association of little more than half a century.

I first met Quezon in 1893 when we began studying law extension at the University of Santo Tomas. We then lived under the same roof in a compartment of the same University. Our classmates—Law and Philosophy and Letters—included some who later figured prominently in public life, in teaching, in commerce and in other activities. To spare you a long list, I will mention only a few well-known names: Felipe G. Calderón and Enrique Mendiola; Juan Sumulong and Fernando Salas; Vicente Singson Encarnación and Vicente Madrigal; Rafael Palma and Jaime C. de Veyra; Simeón Mobo and Mariano Yengco; Vicente Albert and Gregorio Agoncillo. Also among our classmates were the laureate poet Cecilio Apóstol and the intellectual inspiration of Andrés Bonifacio, Emilio Jacinto, rightly called the brain of the Katipunan. Quezon already showed then that liveliness of wit, that sharpness of dialectic and that ability to improvise that we later admired so much in his days as a parliamentarian and as a fighter in the tumultuous arena of politics.

Our student companionship at the University of Santo Tomas was not a fleeting thing, transient, but was the prelude to an association that lasted a lifetime. Our camaraderie was interrupted by the vicissitudes of the revolution against Spain and the war against America afterwards, we met again when, shortly after the end of said war, we prepared to qualify in the bar examinations in the Supreme Court. Already lawyers, it seemed that the parallelism of our lives was going to continue: he was appointed Fiscal of Mindoro and I in turn received the appointment of Fiscal of Cebu.

A few years later he was elected Governor of his province, Tayabas, and I was also elected Governor of mine, Cebu. Then we found ourselves again working together in that memorable Assembly of Governors of 1906, the first to be convened in Manila, in which, it must be said, the scheme of the ideology and political action of Filipino nationalism was already outlined, which later inspired and informed the work and history of the Philippine Assembly. In that Assembly of Governors there were only a few of us nationalists, all young, among them the combative Quezon, from Tayabas, the measured Jayme C. de Veyra, from Leyte, and the effusive Isauro Gabaldon, from Nueva Ecija. The majority party then was the Federal Party which dominated the assembly. Nevertheless, it was already possible for us to reaffirm in that Assembly of Governors the nationalist ideology that, having suffered a temporary eclipse with the defeat of our arms in the conflict with America, retreated into the bosom of the popular masses and there began to resurge and gain strength under the breath of the new redemptive crusade, undertaken in the field of peace and legality.

After that came the Philippine Assembly in 1907. In it, my personal and political association with Quezon was reaffirmed and strengthened. He was elected floor leader of the Assembly and I Speaker of the same. And when it was necessary to extend the area of our struggles for independence, taking them to the heart of America itself, Quezon was sent to Washington as our emissary and there he planted the Filipino flag very high. Not for that reason was the consortium between us broken. Distance was not an obstacle to us collaborating more closely in the immense task of promoting the cause of our freedom. And when finally success crowned our common efforts, bringing in 1916 Commissioner Quezon the Jones Law on Filipino autonomy, we continued to work together to fully implement the new experiment and save the final stage that separated us from the longed-for goal: independence.

Then the Philippine Senate was first established. Quezon believed that the leader of Philippine participation in the government should be at the forefront of this high legislative body, so he offered me its presidency. After careful deliberation, however, I came to a contrary opinion; so I refused the offer and preferred to continue being Speaker of the House of Representatives, thinking then (although I believe wrongly, as later events proved) that it was there that popular leadership in the government should reside, being the most representative body and, therefore, the most sensitive to the influence and whims of public opinion. Quezon was then elected President of the Senate.

The smoothness of this long and fruitful association was not seriously disturbed until 1922 when certain differences arose that ended up dividing the Nationalist Party. However, since these differences were not fundamental but rather concerned the methods of directing and leading Philippine participation in the government, they could soon be resolved by effecting the reconciliation of the elements that had unwisely become disunited. But when examined well from this distant perspective, what I believe made possible, plainly and expeditiously, the composition of the rupture, the fusion of the dispersed elements, was the absence of the human and personal factor, the absence of what I would call the 'fulanista' ingredient. Even in the midst of the acrimony of the conflict, when the tension of the animosities was strongest, Quezon and I never ceased to be friends, never ceased to grant each other mutual esteem and mutual respect. The personal note never embittered the pure clash of ideas.

This atmosphere, even better, this state of mind prone to conciliation and harmony, was what allowed me to give Quezon my full support at the moment he needed it most. It will be recalled that due to the rupture of 1922, the nationalists divided in the elections of that year over the issue of unipersonalism and collectivism. The result of the elections was such that Quezon could not organize the House of Representatives with only the votes of the collectivists. Many of my followers, still feeling the sting of resentment due to the division, vigorously opposed a reconciliation with the President of the Senate. Their inclination was rather towards a coalition with the democrats who had gained considerable strength in those elections. It was evident that if what we proposed then was to take revenge on President Quezon and destroy him, the most logical step was to accept the insistent offer of the democrats to form a coalition with them, or, going further, to effect a merger founding a new party. However, I believed that the most decent, the most consistent and the most patriotic thing was to help recompose the broken wings of the Nationalist Party; so, stifling the temptation for retaliation, listening only to the voice of what I believed was my duty in the face of the general interest of the country, I decisively sided with the moderate elements of my group who opted for a reconciliation with former colleagues. This immediately led to the organization of the Chamber with the election of a collectivist Speaker and the consequent recomposition of the Nationalist Party.

It will be recalled that since then Quezon and I returned to work together as if nothing had happened, he being my boss now and I giving him, without reservation, the same support that I had deserved from him when for about 15 years he had been my boss and boss of the Nationalist Party. I believe that it can perfectly be said, without immodesty or arrogance, that thanks again to our union the country was able to continue advancing in its continued and progressive march towards the goal of its destiny, without avoiding and overcoming serious difficulties, the most serious of which was undoubtedly the crisis of 1923-1927 under the administration of General Wood.

The normality of my political relations with Quezon did not suffer any other major shock until 1933 when, after laborious work in the United States, the Osrox Mission (Osmeña-Roxas) returned to the Philippines with the Independence Law known as the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. The law was rejected by the Philippine Legislature as urged by President Quezon, he led a mission to work for new legislation in the United States, finding, however, in Washington that the only possible law was one equal to or similar to the one that, at his instance, the Legislature had rejected. Once again, the proposition of whether Filipinos were capable of making a new sacrifice was put to the test, overcoming differences and quarrels that could be fatal to the cause of our freedom. It seems superfluous to repeat, because this is contemporary history, that fortunately our patriotism passed the test well. I decided at that time to stay in the Philippines instead of going with President Quezon as he had insistently asked me, precisely to be prepared from here to provide him with the necessary support at the opportune and decisive moment. That moment came when Senator Tydings asked the opinion of the Osrox Mission regarding the Tydings-McDuffie bill which was then being processed in Congress and which was practically the same Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law for which we had worked. The radical elements of my group in Manila insisted on rejecting the new bill. This was not unnatural or extraordinary considering that such elements still felt the sting of what they believed was a grievance received from President Quezon and his supporters. However, by decisively placing myself on the side of the moderate elements, the Osrox Mission and the group that helped us in the Philippines resolved to support President Quezon by accepting the Tydings-McDuffie Law. This conciliatory attitude made possible the acceptance of the Tydings-McDuffie Law, not only by the Legislature, but by the entire country.

Once again the Nationalist Party was recomposed after a crisis that seemed definitive. Once again Quezon and I were able to put aside passing differences to seek only the good of the country. Once again we were able to save unity at a time when it was so necessary for the health and interest of the nation, leaving aside the personal complex, the human element. Once again we were able to recompose an association and a collaboration so modestly initiated in our student days in the classrooms of Santo Tomás and happily continued over the years. Thus, at the height of his popularity and political prestige, Quezon, being a candidate of the coalition for President of the Commonwealth on a ticket in which both of us figured, he for President and I for Vice President, was able to rightly say the following in his acceptance speech referring to our joint work:

“The vicissitudes we have gone through during these years will not be recounted again; but when I look back and contemplate the efforts we have made to achieve the goal we set out to achieve together, I am happy to see that at the end of the long journey we can face our people, standing on the same platform, with our commitments fulfilled, with our mutual friendship and esteem enhanced, and still, I believe, enjoying the continued confidence and support of our people.”

Another occasion that could have been a disagreement between Quezon and me was when he was to step down from the presidency on November 15, 1943 and I assume the leadership of the Government of the Philippines. The situation was clear. By operation of law, I would automatically ascend to the presidency on that date. Given the circumstances, this could have caused the division of the Philippine government in exile. To keep the front united in our fight with the enemy, I went to the White House and Congress requesting a legal means that would allow President Quezon to continue in the performance of the office of President during the emergency. Congress responded to my suggestions and I was pleased to see President Quezon's mandate extended so that, when the time came, he, as the head of our government, could accompany the liberating forces to the Philippines and achieve with them the liberation of the country. God has disposed otherwise. Having passed to a better life, I had to take his place when I landed in Tacloban on October 20, 1944. With profound sincerity and humility, I said the following then:

I deplore that our late and beloved President Quezon is not with us today to witness the realization of the great cause to which he dedicated his life, the independence of the Philippines. I know, however, that you feel, as I feel, that he is with us in spirit to unite our people and encourage us to carry out the vital task that lies before us.

In bringing to mind all these recollections and impressions, I feel a singular satisfaction in considering that President Quezon and I were able to maintain a personal and political association that, having begun under such happy auspices in the days of our adolescence, withstood the most severe tests and ended only with his death. As you have already seen, that association, like all human things, had its bright spots and its shadows—more of the former than the latter—its dawns and its clouds, but, in essence, it always rose above setbacks and the vicissitudes of adversity. I feel, above all, happy to recapitulate it because I am convinced that all the sacrifices we made to save the unity of the nation in the decisive moments of our people's history in those years when we were entrusted with managing their affairs were not in vain and have contributed, even modestly, on my part, to the country reaching where it has reached today. The dominant note in that association has been the subordination of everything personal to the supreme interest of the homeland, to limits sometimes inconceivable of selflessness. With all humility, but with firm conviction and with the peace of mind of a man who believes he has fulfilled his duty, I submit to the judgment of history the following fact: My joint action with President Quezon allows the Philippines to offer the world one of those examples of personal renunciation, of high collective responsibility, of unwavering solidarity so rare in the history of democracies.

In celebrating for the first time in the Philippines the birth anniversary of the late President, after our liberation, I wish to reiterate my purpose of guiding my administration along the same patriotic paths traced by my predecessor. It is an essential part of this work for the country to obtain the rehabilitation of the Philippines, to achieve recognition of its independence and to ensure its integrity against all external aggression.

I firmly believe that, united and under the protection of Divine Providence, we will achieve the full realization of these objectives.

August 19, 1945.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of the Hon. Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, delivered at the City Hall on the occasion of the celebration of the birth anniversary of the late President Manuel L. Quezon, on August 19, 1945. Manila: Bureau of Printing.