SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

GOVERNMENT POLICY REGARDING INDUSTRIAL AND AGRARIAN CONFLICTS

[Broadcast over Stations KZRM and KZIB, Manila, Saturday, 8:00 p. m., March 11, 1939]

My Countrymen:

Industrial conflicts and agrarian troubles which have arisen during the last few months have reached a point where I deem it necessary that I address the people of the Philippines, particularly the inhabitants of the provinces of Central Luzon, stating, in as plain and clear a language as I can command, the policy of the Government in reference to these industrial and agrarian conflicts in order that no one may have any doubt as to how the Government shall act in every case that may confront it.

That there is need of improving the working and living conditions of the wage-earner in the Philippines, be he a factory or a farm laborer, can hardly be disputed; that in many instances injustices and abuses are being committed against the workingman and the peasant, is an undeniable fact; that the income of the laborer is too low to permit a substantial improvement of his living conditions is generally admitted. To correct these injustices and abuses and to ameliorate the lot of the masses are the prime concern of my administration. But as I have repeatedly stated on every opportune occasion, it is impossible to accomplish these objectives in a short period of time, because we are dealing with a complex and complicated problem which is the result of traditional practices in the treatment of labor by capitalists and landowners on the one hand, and the lack of the habit of continued and sustained work among the workingmen on the other. Moreover, production methods are generally unscientific and inefficient, particularly in agriculture.

A legislation fixing a minimum wage is easy enough for the National Assembly to enact, but unless such a law takes into consideration the effects that it will have upon existing industries and their continued progress, as well as upon the creation and development of new ones, it might result in greater hardships for the laborers themselves, for it might cause the closing of factories already in operation and thus increase the number of the unemployed. Besides, a minimum wage for the workingman, to be economically sound and also fair to capital, can only be justified if the service rendered is actually worth the minimum wage fixed.

The strict enforcement of the present Tenancy Law alone will not automatically solve our agrarian problems. Certainly not in so far as the situation of the tenant or farm laborer himself is concerned. With the enforcement of the Tenancy Law, it will also be necessary to provide credit facilities, not only to landowners, but to the tenants as well. In addition, new methods of farming must be adopted to increase production and insure the maximum benefits that the land can yield. Moreover, the tenant must learn, and have an opportunity, to work throughout the year; for generally no one can earn an income that will be sufficient to properly support himself and his family all the year around if he works only for a few months.

I am mentioning but a few illustrations of the complexity of the problem that we have at hand so that those who expect to be benefited by the policy of social justice which we have proclaimed may understand fully why they should have patience and not expect immediate results. Even if the Government were to take every foot of arable land in the Philippines and distribute it without compensation among the tenants, these tenants would find in the end that their situation had not been materially and permanently improved, and in some cases they would perhaps find that they were in a worse condition, unless they were at the same time granted better credit facilities and they themselves worked harder, more consistently and intelligently than they are doing at present. Of course, the Government cannot take the lands from their present owners and give them away to the tenants; for, under the Constitution, no person can be deprived of his property except for a public purpose and with just compensation. The confiscation of land by the Government is, therefore, out of the question in the Philippines. Indeed, it is my inescapable duty to protect property rights and I shall use all the powers of the Government in the discharge of this duty. This should be made clear to the tenants so that they may not give credence to those who tell them that the Government has the power to confiscate privately-owned land and to distribute it among those who are working it. Nor should these tenants believe that should they become landowners, the mere fact that they are no longer tenants but landowners, will greatly alleviate their present condition. They will have, I repeat, to learn to work more efficiently during the whole year and use methods that will make the land yield much more than at present.

Again I want to reassure the masses of my determination to do justice to them and to improve their lot. The National Assembly, I am certain, will enact the required legislation to carry out the policy of social justice. Such laws as experience has demonstrated are necessary to improve or supplement existing labor and tenancy legislation will be enacted. Greater credit facilities will be given to industry and agriculture; the establishment of new industries and the use of modern methods in agriculture will be fostered, and labor and tenancy laws will be strictly enforced.

But in order to carry out the social justice program, there must be, first of all, peace and order. And so I am determined to prevent and suppress all kinds of violence and lawlessness and all attempts to sabotage the program of social improvement approved by the Government. In this determination, the whole Government is united. This is evidenced by the promptness with which the National Assembly has granted my request to appropriate five hundred thousand pesos to be spent at my discretion for purposes of law enforcement. I am calling, therefore, upon every law-abiding citizen to cooperate with the Government in its efforts to maintain peace and order and to carry out the social justice program. I advise everybody to refrain from carrying on any movement through propaganda or otherwise that might result in arousing the people to commit acts of violence and lawlessness, or even to make threats to do acts of violence or lawlessness. I warn those labor leaders who are engaged in this kind of activities that their continuance in this pernicious agitation is done at their own risk. I know that there are so-called labor leaders who have engaged in the provocation of labor troubles as a means of livelihood, and I know who they are; and I want to tell them that if the Government has heretofore tolerated their activities it is because they have been adroit enough to walk on the borderline of legality without transcending it. The consequences of their activities now, however, are such as to warrant the Government in the exercise of its police power henceforth to deal with them drastically and with the severity which the circumstances demand and the law authorizes. As for the misguided people who follow these false leaders with the full knowledge of the consequences of their acts, I want to tell them that I am laying a deadline beyond which any man or group of men may go with the certainty that they will be met by the forces of the Government.

I bespeak the coöperation of the labor leaders who are honestly interested in the welfare of the laboring class and are not seeking their own selfish ends. They should counsel patience to their followers and to use only legal means to secure redress for their grievances. The strike is, of course, lawful, but there would seem to be no occasion for employing it now in the Philippines. The Department of Labor and the Court of Industrial Relations have been created precisely to afford labor the right, and the sure and effective means of securing justice from capital. The labor leaders who would resort to strikes rather than to these instrumentalities created by the Government will not have my sympathy. On the contrary, and so that they may be advised of what they will have to face. I want to tell them that if a strike is declared by any labor organization before the laborers have presented their grievances to the Department of Labor, or before the Department of Labor has had time to act thereon or to submit the matter to the Court of Industrial Relations, the Government will protect by force, if necessary, any individual or organization that may offer to do the work of the strikers. And if the strike concerns those public services that immediately affect the well-being of the people, should the situation demand it, the Government itself will assume the responsibility of providing the men needed to take the place of the strikers. I will particularly take precautionary measures against general or sympathy strikes which may menace peace and order and the public welfare.

With regard to the controversy between tenants and landowners, the practice of forcibly taking crops, either by a tenant or a landowner, without the consent of the other party, must be stopped. It necessary, I shall use force to prevent it in the future. The gathering of armed men will be considered as a threat to commit violence, and any such groups will be dispersed by force in case of resistance or refusal to obey the order of authorized government agents.

If any tenant should have grievances because of the violation of the Tenancy Law, or because he has otherwise been deprived by the landlord of his just participation in the crop, such he a teniente del barrio, councilor, mayor or governor, fiscal or public defender of the province, to submit his complaint. These officials are directed to hear these complaints and to render to the tenant the help that may be necessary forthwith to bring the case before the courts. From my conversations with tenants during the trips that I have been making through the provinces, I am convinced that some of the agrarian conflicts which have arisen are due to the fact that these poor tenants, lacking the means to present their case before the courts, have felt that the only remedy to their grievances was to take the law into their hands. For this reason, I command every official of the Government and request public-spirited citizens to pay immediate attention to the complaints of these tenants and give them assistance so that they may be convinced that by appealing to the constituted authorities and through legal means, they can secure justice and redress for their grievances. Failure on the part of these officials to give prompt assistance to the tenants will be considered a grave dereliction of duty and dealt with accordingly.

Once more I urge the people to be patient and to abide by the law. Once more I urge them to have faith in the ability of their Government to right the wrongs which they suffer, to redress their grievances and to administer justice promptly and fairly.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library