SPEECH OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

NATIONAL POLICIES, NATIONALISM, AND ECONOMIC SECURITY

[Delivered at the 29th Commencement Exercises of the University of the Philippines, U. P. Campus, April 4, 1939]

Mr. High Commissioner:

The distinction which the University of the Philippines has conferred upon you is not only a recognition of your academic attainments and statesmanship, but also an expression of the high esteem and regard in which you are held by the Government and the people of the Philippines. It gives me great pleasure to extend to you my warmest congratulations.

President Bocobo, Members of the Board of Regents and of the Faculty, Distinguished Guests, Members of the Graduating Classes:

Never before could it have been said as truly as it can be said nowadays that every country is in the world and has to live with the world. The radio and the aeroplane have made all nations neighbors, and finance, commerce, and trade have made them interdependent in their economic life.

The prevailing economic system has resulted in the concentration of wealth in the hands of small minorities at the cost of the well-being, and with the consequent impoverishment, of the great masses of the people. This has created discontent everywhere and forced even the most conservative governments to revolutionize their systems of taxation and to direct and control or, at least, to regulate production and distribution in industry and agriculture, so as to effect a wider diffusion or redistribution of wealth and to provide protection to labor against exploitation by capital.

The framers of our Constitution, aware of the evils which the uncontrolled development of the capitalistic system has brought about in other countries, have clothed our new government with the necessary power to save our people from those evils. The Constitution clearly specifies the legal limitations to which private property might be subjected in the interest of the common weal. Unlike the Constitution of the United States, after which it is patterned, our Constitution sets a maximum limit to the area of public land that may be acquired or leased by individuals or corporations, and expressly confers on the National Assembly the power to determine by law, subject to existing rights, the size of private agricultural land which any person or corporation may acquire and hold, and to expropriate lands to be subdivided into small lots and conveyed at cost to individuals. The Constitution also grants the Government ample powers to regulate the relations between capital and labor and to protect the working class, especially women and children, against the greed and abuses of capital. It is clearly seen that the framers of the Constitution did not forget that private property is not an end in itself, but only a means to insure to man his material subsistence and to afford him the blessings of a higher moral and intellectual life.

These constitutional grants of power were deemed essential to enable the Government to carry out the injunction in the Constitution to promote social justice in order to insure the well-being and economic security of all the people. Pursuant to this mandate, the National Assembly has already enacted laws regulating the relations between capital and labor. It has also authorized the Government to expropriate lands to be sold in small lots at cost to their occupants.

But social justice cannot be achieved by constitutional precepts or legislative enactments alone. We must radically revise our concept of private property by emphasizing the social responsibilities of wealth. We must indoctrinate every citizen with the ethical principle that he is his brother’s keeper. We must arouse and foster the individual’s responsibility to the community of which he is a part. These are no vain words. We may forget these duties only at the cost of our peace and tranquility and, in the end, even of our national liberty.

While it cannot be rightly said that the poverty of the masses in the Philippines is due to the concentration of wealth in the hands of a privileged class—for there are really no great fortunes here, and such poverty as exists is due mainly to the fact that the resources of the country are as yet not properly developed—it should be our concern to prevent an economic development that will mean fabulous riches for a select few and poverty and misery for the bulk of our population. Moreover, the injustices and abuses which are now committed against the working-man must at once be remedied by insuring to him fair treatment, proper living and working conditions, and a just compensation for his labor.

This is, however, but one phase of our problem to provide economic security for all our people. We must increase the wealth of the nation by multiplying’ its production. And to accomplish this, we must revise our system of education and emphasize the training of our youth for vocational efficiency enjoined by the Constitution.

University or college education should not be the ambition of every young man and young woman. Only those intellectually gifted should have that ambition. This is particularly applicable to the children of poor parents. While poverty is not in itself sufficient reason for denying anyone the prosecution of higher studies, yet only those poor students with extraordinary talent and will power should be encouraged to follow an academic career. The Government itself might provide scholarship for these deserving students. But a person with only an ordinary ability will find it very difficult to succeed in his academic profession: and if he has to depend on it for a living, disillusionment and despair may be the only reward awaiting him at the end of many years of hard struggle to obtain a diploma from a college or university. The average student, especially if he is poor, ought to be satisfied with a vocational, as distinguished from a professional career, if he wants an education that will be useful to him and to the community in which he lives. And let me say that he need not feel humiliated or ashamed of his lot; for the true worth of a man is measured, not by a diploma, but by his proficiency in his chosen line of work.

This is an idea that must be popularized among our people: that an academic education is not, in itself, of value to anyone who receives it, unless he is capable of making a practical and socially beneficial use of it. Those who must depend upon their toil for their livelihood will be less exposed to becoming parasites and a charge on the community, if they pursue such courses of study as will most likely insure to them a steady work and gainful occupation.

Please do not misunderstand me. I am not minimizing the value and importance of academic education. At no time in the history of civilization has it been so necessary, as at present, for a people to have their own technological leadership in order to survive the economic struggle for existence. This is the reason why I have taken steps to place this State University in a position to produce such leadership. The proposed transfer of the University to a more appropriate place, where academic spirit may be better fostered and the student body may be more closely supervised, not only in their studies, but also in their daily lives; the contemplated employment of foreigners as professors and instructors, so as to obtain the best available assistance in the training of our youth in the arts and sciences; the plan to improve the library, laboratories, and other equipment of the university, as well as the other reforms which, with my approval, the Board of Regents is now considering—all these measures are plain evidence that I believe in the need of intellectual leadership and that I look upon this university to provide the nation with that leadership.

Incidentally, let me say that the objections to the bringing of foreign professors which, I am informed, have been raised by some persons are neither sound nor convincing and will not deter us from carrying out the plan. Such objections are inspired by a purely Chauvinistic nationalism. It is no reflection upon our people that, for the time being, we should have to enlist the collaboration of foreign educators. The University of the Philippines is still very young, and it can hardly be expected to have formed already a competent teaching staff of its own in every branch of human knowledge. Even much older universities readily employ foreigners as professors whenever needed—why should we hesitate to do the same? We cannot afford to sacrifice the vital interests of our people for a mistaken national pride. There are no prouder people on earth than the Japanese, and yet they did not hesitate to acknowledge the need of foreign assistance in matters of education, and they did secure this assistance for many years, with the result that they have been able to accelerate their cultural and material progress, and can now stand on a level with the most advanced nations of the world.

In the field of economic enterprise, it would not be conducive to our interests to adopt a policy completely eliminating the intervention of foreign capital, business men and executives. Of course, it would be unwise to open our country to an unrestrained exploitation by foreigners. Our Constitution provides effective limitations for the protection of our nationals, especially in relation to our natural resources. But there are many activities which Filipinos cannot as yet finance or undertake, either for lack of capital or because we are unacquainted with the particular industries involved. We should permit and even encourage foreigners and foreign capital to enter these fields. As soon as Filipinos have developed sufficient technological knowledge and facilities to engage in them, it will be time to take action to prevent more foreigners from coming in competition with our own nationals.

This brings me to the subject of nationalism. Nationalism, as an emotional attachment and conscious allegiance to one’s country rather than to a dynasty, a monarch or a rider, is of comparatively recent development. Its seed was planted at the time of the Renaissance, and it has reached its extreme expression in the totalitarian states.

Rightly conceived, felt and practiced, nationalism is a tremendous force for good. It strengthens and solidifies a nation. Community interest is made active. It preserves the best traditions of the past and adds zest to the ambition of enlarging the inheritance of the people. It is, therefore, a dynamic urge for continuous self-improvement. In tine, it enriches the sum total of mankind’s cultural, moral, and material possessions through the individual and characteristic contribution of each people.

So long as the nationalistic sentiment is not fostered to the point where a people forgets that it forms a pail of the human family; that the good of mankind should be the ultimate aim of all and every nation; and that conflicting national interests an only temporary and that there is always a just formula for adjusting them, nationalism is a noble, elevating, and most beneficial sentiment.

Our Constitution is inspired by a spirit of sound nationalism, and we should endeavor properly to comprehend this spirit and to adhere to it in the formulation of our national policies.

It is significant that at the very beginning our Constitution declares that the Philippines renounces war as an instrument of national policy, and adopts the generally accepted principles of international law as a part of the law of our nation. This is not a mere reiteration of the Kellogg-Briand Pact, so loudly proclaimed and so often disregarded; nor is it a passing or expedient adherence to a political tenet due to the present inability of our people to sustain an armed conflict. In addition to the principle enunciated in the Kellog-Briand Pact, the Constitution has made international law part of the law of the land. This is a positive injunction against any violation of the accepted principles of international law by our Government.

This constitutional declaration implies that our people recognize that no nation has the right to resort to war in order to carry out its national policies; that every state is a member of the family of nations; that each nation has rights that must be respected by the others; that superiority of force is no justification for adopting and carrying out a national policy that may be prejudicial to the liberties and interests of other peoples; and that right and justice alone—never force—should determine and decide the conflicts that may arise between nations. In other words, it means that we are willing to submit to arbitration or to an international court for adjudication of any and all controversies that may arise between the Philippines and other countries.

Such is the spirit of nationalism that underlies our Constitution and our conduct towards the world should be inspired by that spirit.

The progress and development of international law coincided with the period when the sentiment of nationalism first came into being. For a time, it looked as if the right of every people to their own national life, free from outside interference or aggression, were to be forever recognized and respected. The principle of self-determination was the term chosen to designate this right. Unfortunately, however, the advance of international law, as the enforceable rule of conduct among nations, has not only been halted but also received a serious setback, as shown by the ominous events which have taken place during the last few years, and by others which even now, while I am talking to you, are filling the hearts of men with the fear of another holocaust. Wars are being waged without any previous declaration of hostilities; territories belonging to one country are ruthlessly invaded by another; nations are conquered, and the maps of Europe and of Asia are being changed from day to day. Self-determination is no longer valid except for those who have the power to back it with force.

I shall not attempt to pass judgment upon the conduct of any nation, not only because I may not properly do so, but also because it is not as easy as it seems to pronounce a verdict that will, in every respect, be just and fair, if we are to consider and weigh carefully the immediate, the latent, as well as the remote causes and circumstances which have brought about the events to which I am adverting. I shall only say in passing that, without fully accepting as valid the theory that the interpretation of history must, be found in some economic fact, the root of all the current troubles that face humanity today is, in my opinion, the unjust and inhuman way in which the capitalistic system has been allowed to operate both in the fields of national and international relationships.

I have already mentioned the terrible evils which have caused maladjustments in the economy of different nations. In relation to the world economy, we find that certain essential raw materials are practically the monopoly of a few fortunate nations, and, although their use has become prime necessities of modern life, the unfortunate countries that do not possess them may not procure these raw materials with the same facility or at the same cost as those nations possessing them. Again, international trade is being artificially directed and controlled in the interest of each nation, with little regard to the immediate effect it may have upon the lives of millions of human beings, and still less to the ultimate consequences upon the particular nation concerned, the export trade of which must sooner or later suffer adversely. It is my firm belief that until a new order is established whereby the wealth of the nation is shared by all classes of society, and the common man is given a chance to live as a human being, and whereby the every nation is permitted to have an equal access to essential raw materials, and world trade allowed to take its natural course, international covenants to insure peace will not be worth the paper on which they are written.

Is it practicable to bring about the establishment of this new order? One would be a visionary who would unhesitatingly answer in the affirmative, while he who would answer in the negative would have lost all faith in mans wisdom and in the fundamental goodness of the human heart. It is certain, however, that it will not be the present generation that will see such order established. So the practical question that confronts us is: What should we do to insure our national safety against external aggression?

So long as there are nations that believe, and back their faith with force, that their national interests as conceived by them are paramount to the interests of any other nation and even to the interest of mankind, our only recourse is to build up our own force to defend ourselves against aggression. This is the reason why the Constitution asserts that the defense of the State is a prime duty of government, and that in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens may be required by law to render personal military or civil service.

We have enacted a law providing for our national defense and the plans are being carried out with military precision. Quite a large sum, considering the present condition of our finances, is being spent every year in the execution of that plan. But the Government alone cannot provide an effective defense of our fatherland. Every Filipino citizen must be willing to make the supreme sacrifice when the call to arms is sounded.

The schools, colleges, and universities, public and private, must constantly instill in the minds and hearts of their students their duty to defend the nation in time of war, and to be useful and law-abiding citizens in time of peace. We must imbue our whole citizenry with a spirit of heroic patriotism. For a country as small and with such limited wealth as the Philippines, ordinary patriotism is not enough to insure its security. Heroic patriotism is necessary—a patriotism that is devotion, loyalty, and courage that rises to the heights of self-sacrifice. Such kind of patriotism can only be felt by a people whose love of country is not based merely on a natural attachment to the land of their birth, but on the fact that their country gives them freedom, contentment, and economic security. They must be able to feel and realize that the country is theirs because they share in its spiritual as well as material possessions. The man whose life means only hardships and misery, who is abused and maltreated by his own people, who is unjustly deprived of the fruits of his labor, can hardly be expected to be willing to die in defense of those who abuse and mistreat him and who rob him of his means of subsistence as a human being. Wards can no longer be won by mercenary armies. They can be won only by well disciplined and trained armies. steeped in patriotic virtues. Rome, which dominated the world so long as its mighty legions were composed of Roman citizens, became an easy victim of the barbarians of the North when she had to depend upon hired soldiers for her defense. Thus, the program of social justice is a necessary complement to the national defense plan.

I now turn to the question of our future conduct towards the nations of the world. To America we owe a special debt of gratitude. To her altruism and generosity, we shall be indebted for our national independence. She has made as heir to her ideals of liberty and democracy and the beneficiaries of her civilization and culture. It should be our constant endeavor to preserve undiminished this invaluable inheritance as well as our friendly and cultural relations with her after we shall have become independent. Toward the rest of the world, we shall follow a course that will insure their amity and cooperation, without in any way involving ourselves in their affairs. We should adopt a most liberal policy in our foreign commerce. This is the policy demanded by our best interests. We shall thereby make friends and, being primarily an agricultural country, we shall in any case profit by it. In our foreign policy, let our motto be: Justice and friendship for all!

Members of the Graduating Classes: You are called upon to play an important role in the execution of the national policies which I have enunciated. It is a priceless opportunity which, as patriotic Filipinos, you can neither renounce nor evade. If you do not delude yourselves into the belief that with your diploma you have acquired all the knowledge that you need; if, on the contrary, you consider your university training merely as an urge to improve your learning the better to equip yourselves for your chosen professions and to discharge your social responsibilities you can be, and I hope you will be, in time, intellectual leaders, creators of new wealth, apostles of the social justice program, and true patriots, seeking for the nation the paths of progress, cultural advancement, and national security.

I desire to congratulate you on your academic achievements and to wish you Godspeed and success in all your future undertakings.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library