SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOYALTY TO THE GOVERNMENT

[Delivered at Ilagan, Isabela, February 28, 1936]

Mr. Governor, Mr. President, People of Isabela, particularly of Ilagan:

Yesterday, after my speech to the people of Echague, your Governor at least three times called my attention to the fact that I made too long a speech. For that reason, I am going to be brief here. I am just going to tell you what I consider to be absolutely essential. In the first place, I want to tell you what the change in the Government of the Philippines means, in order that you may realize the great responsibilities now resting on our people and in order that you may try as best you can to meet those responsibilities. For the first time in the history of the people of the Philippines we have the power of governing ourselves. Now, except only such matters as have been reserved to the Government of the United States, all the affairs of our people are in the hands of officials elected by ourselves. Heretofore, the legislative branch of the Government was the only one of the three departments that was entirely in the hands of the Filipino people. The executive power was lodged in an American Governor-General appointed by the President of the United States. Thus the highest government authority in our country was an American, not responsible to the Filipino electorate. By an act of Congress, passed generously in our interest, that supreme authority has been given to a man who is a native of our country, chosen by our people in a free election. As the Chief Executive of the Government of the Commonwealth, as the representative of the Filipino nation, I am the highest executive authority today in our country. [ Applause. ] And I hold this position not by virtue of an appointment made in my favor by any outside authority, nor because I have wrested that authority from someone else’s hand. I hold this position because the people of this country have elected me to it. As the Chief Executive, I am responsible ultimately for the administration of public affairs in our country. I accepted my nomination as a candidate to the presidency with one purpose, and one only, and that is to give the Filipino people the best possible government that could be given them. [ Applause. ] I made that promise to the electorate during the national campaign. I was elected, I suppose, upon that promise and upon your conviction that I would fulfill it when elected. Now, I am before the people of Ilagan not as a candidate making promises but as a President ready to fulfill those promises. [ Applause. ] Bear in mind that under the Constitution I cannot be a candidate to succeed myself. Insofar as needing your votes is concerned, I shall never need them again. If I ever did talk to the people with the idea of only pleasing them, whether I meant what I said or not, perhaps because of some political ambition, at this time you must believe everything I say, for there is no more political ambition still remaining for me to satisfy. [ Applause. ] Insofar as my political fortune is concerned, it makes no difference whether I am a good or a bad President, and insofar as my personal interests go, it might be better for me to be a bad rather than a good President. [ Applause. ] I am elected for a term of six years and unless I commit a crime which, under no circumstance, I would do, nobody can put me out of office. If I spent the next six years staying in Malacañan, sleeping twelve hours every night, dancing the rest of the day, eating good food, and signing only one or two papers a month, I would be all right still and nobody could put me down. I could, if I wanted to, let a secretary of a department do the work for me so that the next six years could be for me nothing but a continuous holiday—a fine vacation, for there is nobody who has the authority to make me work. I tell you this so that you may realize that whatever I say and whatever I do, I say and do in all earnestness, because I believe it, because I think it is the best for my people and for my country. [ Applause. ] So in addressing you, if I should say something which is not to your liking, please take it in good grace for I shall say it with the best intention of serving your best interest.

I said at the beginning of my remarks that for the first time in the history of our people we are governing ourselves. Up to this time, we have been governed by foreigners. I shall not say that we have been governed badly by them. I would rather say that we have been governed very well by them. But I want to add that no matter how well we have been governed by them, this government of the Filipinos must be better than any government we ever had in our country. [ Applause. ] Otherwise, there would be no use of having that government placed in our hands; otherwise the sacrifices our people in the past made with a view to winning freedom for us, would be sacrifices made in vain. A government better than we have ever had—that, regardless of any other consideration, I am determined to make this government which you have entrusted to my care; a government that will not only give you satisfaction but will also cause every living Filipino to feel proud of his country, proud of himself. [ Applause. ]

I cannot, however, give you even a relatively good government by myself alone. I might work twenty-four hours every day, kill myself working, but I would not be able to do it alone. In order that I may accomplish my purpose, I must have the cooperation of all the officials of the National Government as well as all the officials of the provincial and municipal governments.

I want to say to all the officials of the National, provincial, and municipal governments of the Philippines, that it is not a difficult task to give the people of this country the best government they ever had. All that is necessary is that every official of this Government, from the President of the Philippines down to the last town policeman, should know that the office is not given to him for the purpose of his own personal aggrandizement or profit, nor with the idea of permitting him to abuse the powers of that office. Public office is given to a man in the interests of the people of the country. [ Applause. ] The office is not the personal possession of the man who occupies it. The office is given to a man as a trust for him to administer for the public welfare.

Since my election as President of the Philippines, there have been incidents in my relationship with some of my former political associates, personal friends, that are illuminating. Some of them came to ask me to give them Jobs. I would ask in each case, “What job can I give you?”

The answer almost invariably would be: “Anything, Mr. President.”

“Do you mean to tell me that you could handle any job that I might give? If you can, you are the most “wonderful man I have ever known.”

“Well, Mr. President, I need a job because I have a large family and I need some money to support them. I have been voting for you all these years, [ laughter ] and now that you are the President, you have the power to give me any job,” would be his reply, which meant, “I am not interested in the kind of job that you give me. I am interested only in getting the salary because I need it. [ Laughter. ]

Now, you have been laughing, but place yourself m imposition and you will see that such an incident is not to be laughed at. You will see how tragic that situation is. Tragic for a man like me who has a heart and who is fateful, but who at the same time knows that his duty as an official of the Government rises above his personal Sections and his personal or political debts of gratitude. Imagine how sorry I must feel when a man who has helped me rise in political power, who has faithfully supported me all these years, comes to me and says, “Mr. President, now that you are where you can do something for me, perhaps not even half as much as I have done for you, can’t you give me a job? You have so many jobs at your disposal”; and I have to say to that man, “I am sorry, but you are not capable of filling a government position and I cannot give you one.” How sad that is! I know that that man, when he leaves my office, will say, “What an ingrate this man Quezon is!” Such a man cannot realize that the Government is not an institution for taking care of useless men. He does not realize that the money with which officials of the Government are paid is not my money but the people’s money. He does not realize that I cannot use that money just as I might want to; that that money is to be paid only to men who are rendering service to the Government and good service at that; that if I authorized the payment of that money as salary to men who did not deserve appointments but merely because I was grateful to them, in my conscience it would be my duty to return to the Government the money which I authorized for their salary. Now that is one case—the case of a man who wants my help to support his family.

A man would also come to me who might be a secretary of department, a member of the National Assembly, an ex-senator, an ex-representative, or a president of a provincial committee of my party, and say: “Mr. President, this man helped to keep our party in control in a certain town. Please give him a job.” Or he might say, “You have to make So-and-So a justice of the peace, or a fiscal, or a judge of a court of first instance.” In the latter case, perhaps I would ask, “What kind of a lawyer is he?”

“Well, he has been admitted to the bar.”

“What is he doing now?”

“Practising law.”

“Is he making any money?”

“No, he has no clients, and that is just the reason I want to get him a job.” [ Laughter. ]

“Well, you realize that if a lawyer has no clients he is a pretty poor lawyer. [ Laughter .] If he is too poor a lawyer to take care of cases for private individuals, how can he even aspire to occupy a position in the Government which involves greater responsibilities and therefore requires higher capacities than those required of an ordinary lawyer?”

“But I am told that you have given another man an appointment because he is a strong leader and has great influence, and if you do not give this fellow an appointment, too, he will be disgusted and we will surely lose in the next elections in that town or province.”

I then would have to tell that man, “I am sorry, I cannot appoint him. It makes no difference whether we lose that municipality or lose that province; I will not make an appointment that is not based on merit.”

This man who might be an old friend or political associate of mine, would leave my office saying to himself. “The President is not a god anymore to go to for help. He is a political ingrate.” But as a matter of fact, when I refuse to make an appointment because it should not be made, I am giving the best evidence that I am politically a fateful man. Why? For two reasons: (1) Because I have taken for granted, and I have the right to take it for Wanted, that those men who supported me in the past, have supported me because they believed that I was a worthy Public servant; (2) Because my debt of gratitude, while it includes those individuals who have voted for me and forked for me, is primarily to the great mass of the voters who themselves elected me. [ Applause .] I say it again, therefore, that I am showing political gratitude to the man who has been supporting me, by showing him that he did not make any mistake in working for me for I am doing my duty; and I am showing my gratitude to the electorate by living up to their expectations. If there has been a man or a group of men who have supported me all these years with the idea that once I was in power I would turn the Government over to them, they are mistaken.

You have heard it said, I suppose with your own ears, during the campaign that the rich people in the Philippines contributed to my election, and it is on that account that some say I am “the President of the rich.” It is true that there were rich men who contributed to my campaign expenses, but I am sure that the men who so contributed did not do so with the idea that Manuel L. Quezon, once elected, would be a tool in their hands. Those men have known me for many years and are personal friends of mine, and know that nobody can control me. [ Laughter .] Therefore, when they contributed to my campaign funds they contributed simply because they believed I would perform my duties right and well.

Now, my friends, I am not the President of the rich, and I am not the President of the poor either. I am the President of the Philippines, of the Filipino people, rich and poor alike. That means that it is my duty to give justice to all, whether rich or poor, and that I must perform my duties fearlessly, regardless of whether in so doing I incur the displeasure of the rich or the poor. [ Applause. ]

I will go back to what I was trying to say, that all this cannot be done by me alone. I need the help of every official of this Government. Any official of the Government, whether National, provincial, or municipal, who in his own conscience knows that he is not a good official should resign. [ Applause. ] We do not have to be told by our people whether we are good or bad officials—we know it right in our hearts. The man who is lazy and does not want to work, the man who is incompetent and does not know how to work, and the man who is a grafter and wants to steal, ought to get out of the Government. The sooner they do so, the sooner will they for once be rendering a great and patriotic service. Those who love to work, who know the job that is entrusted to them, and who are absolutely honest and honorable, let them remain in their offices and tackle their duties twice or three times as hard as heretofore. Let them learn better ways of doing their work, and let them always be as honest as the angels in heaven, for thus only will they be rendering a service to our people and to our government. [ Applause. ]

Every officer in the Government can now render his country a patriotic service by helping to put out those men who are not good and retaining only those who are efficient in the service. Let me say this so that the humblest Filipino official may realize that he is very important in the service of his country. Let me say that the importance of the work that a man is doing is not to be measured by the importance of the position that he is holding. The credit that a man should receive from the work that he is doing is not to be measured by the position that he is occupying.

That you may realize this for yourself, I will cite a few illustrations. Imagine a municipal policeman patrolling the streets at midnight, who sees a man trying to assault a woman. That policeman risks perhaps his own life to save the woman from outrage. Tell me, is not that modest Policeman rendering a greater service to his country than a provincial governor who spends his days playing poker? [ Applause. ] A Constabulary soldier who goes with his company into the Sierra Madres in an effort to clear a province of banditry, exposes his own life for the peace and safety of the inhabitants. Will anybody say that the service of that poor Constabulary soldier is not as important, if not more important, than that of a general who may not be doing anything except enjoying a good time? Of course when everybody is doing his duty, the man at the top, who has the greater responsibility, does not have to attend to the smaller details and is enabled to devote his title to the more important functions of the government.

The point I want to make clear is this: Every official of the government, even the most modest, has a job to perform and is as much in duty bound to perform that job well as those occupying higher positions. In our effort to give the people the best government that there is, we have to have everybody do his job, including the clerk, the policeman—everybody in the service. Every one of them should do his best because a government cannot be a government of higher officials only. The Government of the Philippines is the government of all the officials of the Government; it is the Government of all the Filipinos. Therefore, when it can be said that we have the best government on earth, the municipal police, the higher officials—everybody—should feel honored and proud because that would mean that all of them have been working hard in order to give this country such a Government. That is the cooperation I need from all the officials of the Government. If they give me that cooperation, I am sure we will not go a long way to achieve our ideal.

But that is not enough. The people in general must cooperate with the Government in order that we may have the best Government on earth. Remember that a government is established for your own good. The Government that we now have in the Philippines is no longer a government that will enslave our people as has been the case sometime in the past. No longer can any official in this Government do what in former years under the Spanish regime he was permitted to do. This is a government of laws, and no man can abuse the powers that are in his hands without being called to account either before the courts or by the higher administrative officers of the Government. Therefore, if you want to have a good government, you must cooperate with the Government. The first thing that you have to do is to abide by the laws, to be law-abiding citizens, to be peaceful and respectful of other people’s rights. Even if we had the best officials to handle the affairs of our country, what good would that be if the people themselves start disturbing public order, making trouble, or starting an uprising?

Of course I want to tell you that if there are any uprising here while I am President, there will be plenty of trouble, for I am not going to tolerate any such thing. But it makes little difference how I would handle a movement of that sort. If there were any attempt at public disorder, that alone would discredit our Government. Therefore, the people must be peaceful and law-abiding.

Above all, you must get out of your mind the idea that more of self-government and independence means lower taxes and more public improvements. Get that out of your mind right now—that idea of lower taxes and more public improvements. It seems that there are some people who think that freedom means no taxes. As a matter of fact, freedom and better government must mean more taxes. You cannot make public improvements without money and that money does not come from heaven. That comes from the people. The idea of every province asking the President, “Give us money to build this road and that building!” Where do you think I would get that money? I can only get it from the taxes paid by the people. Therefore, if you have to pay an income tax, do so. You should remember that you are lucky, fortunate, that you have to pay an income tax because that means you have an income. Your Poor compatriots who do not have to pay an income tax are not so lucky because men who do not pay taxes have hardly any property. So with those who have to pay land taxes. They must pay land taxes. The land tax is spent for public schools, for roads, and the people of every municipality are the beneficiaries of that tax. You must remember that the majority of the people do not have land to pay taxes on. They are unfortunate already in not having such property. Their children would not have the benefit of education, unless those who are more fortunate pay their taxes to support the education of those children. So please pay your taxes.

Let me tell you what I am going to do if you do not pay your taxes. If in the future the people do not pay their land taxes I am going to take their land, as is provided by law, and divide it among the poor. [ Applause. ] Now do not forget that, because I am not joking. [Applause.] At least, one very good thing would be achieved. The result would be that there would be more people owning land in our country. So those who have land taxes to pay and are delinquent, I am going to give a little time to arrange their affairs so that they can pay. There will be no more condonation. The Government will confiscate all those lands upon which the taxes are not paid and give them to the poor people of the country, to be divided among them. [Applause.] You know that up to this time it has been easy for some people not to pay their land taxes, because, under the law, the land is taken by the municipal treasurer or the provincial treasurer, and one of two things happens It is either sold at public auction or it is retained by the Government. If the land is sold to someone, only one is benefited, and the man who has lost his land becomes an enemy of the Government If the land stays with the treasurer, the land produces nothing and lies idle. The result of this situation is that the members of the Legislature have to pass a law returning the land to the former owner condoning the tax, because of the serious social problem created. But unless landowners pay their taxes more willingly, I am going to recommend to the Legislature that lands on which the taxes are not paid be taken over by the Government and distributed among the poor. Then it would make no difference whether the owners get mad because, while one or two men might get disgruntled, many more would be made happy.

We have got to do that, for it we don’t, we have to give up our hope to become a great people. Self-government means the right to govern one’s self. Independence means the right to have one’s own nation. The man who wants to get married is like the nation that wants to be independent A man who wants to get married must be able to support his wife and children. I know that there are exceptions. There are those who want to get married and expect their parents to support them. But such men ought to be whipped. [ Laughter. ] You do not want to admit that the Filipino people need to be whipped.

Speaking again very seriously, I want to tell you, my countrymen, that if we want to be a free country, if we want the Filipino people to be considered a progressive people, if we want to be respected by other nations, if we want to be able to raise our heads in the presence of anybody and consider ourselves their equals, if not superior, [ applause ] it is necessary for us to make sacrifices, sacrifices of fortune, and if necessary of life, so that those coming after us may live a life worthy of men, free men and free women. [ Applause. ]

The independence that is worth having does not only demand of everyone of you that you pay your taxes. It also demands service. It demands that every young man should undergo military training so that if the time ever comes, he will be able to defend his country with intelligence and courage. [ Applause. ] I know there are people who say this is a return to the Spanish times, to the “quintos” system. But what a big mistake to compare our program of national defense to the Spanish “quintos” system! Under that Spanish system, only one man out of every five and only the poor man was taken to serve as a soldier. The son of the rich, the son of the influential, was free. And under the Spanish “quintos” system, the Filipino solder was asked to fight for what? For his flag? For his country? For his people? No, my countrymen, for the Spanish flag, for Spain, not for the Philippines! [ Applause. ]

Under our national defense program, every young man who is of age whether he be the son of a rich father, the son of a poor man, or even the son of the President of the Philippines will be compelled to undergo military training.[ Applause ] And why is he compelled to undergo military training? In order to fight for what flag? For his flag, for his country, for his people. He will be trained to fight so that no nation will ever come to the Philippines to take our wives, our sweethearts, our possessions, and enslave us again, without first having to fight the whole country and kill every inhabitant. Is there any young man who would dare tell me that he refuses to take that military training which is necessary in order to be able to defend his country with his life, if the call should come? [ Shouts of “No!” from the crowd .]

I want to tell you, young men, I am not asking anything of you that I, myself, have not already done. As a matter fact, I am not asking from you a hundredth part of what I myself have done. I am asking you to undergo military training for a few months each year for a limited number of years. You will be taken for training in places where there are barracks, good food and good shelter. It is true that you will have to do some hard work, but look at the benefits that you will get therefrom. First, everyone of you will learn how to use a gun effectively. That means that in case of a fight you have at least an equal chance with the fellow who is fighting you, an equal chance to kill him first. Then you will learn discipline, which is a great thing. You will be “hardened up,” you will be stronger, after you have been in the Army. [ Laughter. ] You know that is your luck! You know what mine was? I was for two years in the field. I was not put up in any military barracks. We roved the mountains barefooted; sleeping many a night in the mud and without shelter. There was no one to prepare our food and many a time we had nothing to eat but guavas. I finally fell sick with malaria from the effects of which I suffered for ten years. But I did not get anything out of it. I did not even become a good soldier. Nobody taught me to handle my rifle—and the rifle was terrible, old, and with poor ammunition. I could not have hit anybody 500 yards from me. There was no equal chance for us in the fight with the American soldiers. The time came when our best defense was our legs! For two years I had to undergo all kinds of hardships, nights without sleep, days without food, with no place to rest in—all this in the service of our common country. Will you, my dear young men, do less for your country than I and many others did? Of course, I know your answer. I know that every young fellow will tell me, “Mr. President, I will be proud, not only glad, to undergo military training, so that I may write my name in the history of my country as a patriot.” [ Applause. ]

Young men of the Philippines, our work is done, we are about to render our last tribute to our country. We shall have to leave the work in your hands. You alone can bring success to our efforts. It is now in your care, the whole future of our country, for generations to come. We are not ashamed to appear before you, for we have carried on the work so nobly began by our fathers. Now we are turning it over to you and you must take it in your hands. Give our country the assurance that as we have carried on this work with a measure of success so far, you will carry it even farther. [ Long applause. ]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library