SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is with great honor that I stand before you today to deliver this message. Bilang inyong lingkod-bayan, naninindigan ako sa aking pangako na patuloy na paglingkuran ang sambayanang Pilipino. We gather here not just as officials and employees of the government, but as fellow citizens united by a common goal: to build a better Philippines for all.

Ang ating bansa ay humaharap sa maraming hamon. These challenges, however, are not insurmountable. Sa pamamagitan ng pagkakaisa, determinasyon, at malasakit sa isa’t isa, kaya nating malampasan ang anumang pagsubok. We must remain steadfast in our commitment to good governance, transparency, and accountability.

We are implementing various programs and initiatives designed to uplift the lives of our people. These include investments in education, healthcare, infrastructure, and social welfare. Layunin natin na magkaroon ng pantay na oportunidad para sa lahat, lalo na sa mga nangangailangan. We believe that every Filipino deserves a chance to succeed and live a life of dignity.

I urge each and every one of you to embrace the spirit of bayanihan. Sama-sama nating itaguyod ang ating bansa. Let us work together, hand in hand, to create a future where peace, progress, and prosperity reign supreme. Maraming salamat po, at mabuhay ang Pilipinas!

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

REELECTION OF ASSEMBLYMEN, SOCIAL JUSTICE, AND LABOR ORGANIZATIONS

[Delivered at the public plaza in Ormoc, Leyte, June 13, 1938]

Mr. Governor, Assemblyman Tan, Mr. Mayor, my Friends:

This is the first time that I have the pleasure of visiting this great town of Ormoc. I have come here not only because I had long wanted to visit you, but also because I wanted to pay a visit to your assemblyman and give him public evidence of my esteem. Before I proceed to talk of public questions that I desire to discuss this morning, I wish to say a few words about Assemblyman Tan.

I suppose you know that whereas in the last general elections for governors and municipal officials, I decided to keep my hands off the fight, nevertheless in the election for members of the National Assembly, I have publicly announced the desire and hope that members of the National Assembly who have distinguished themselves in the service of the Assembly would be reelected by their constituents.

If there is any member of the National Assembly today who deserves reëlection, that member is Tan from this district.  Ormoc had been well represented in the National Legislature in the past. But I want to say right now, without in the least disregarding the valuable services rendered by the predecessors of Assemblyman Tan, that no one has done better than he has.  Personally, to tell you the truth, I prefer that Assemblyman Tan be not reelected because I am sure that if he is not reelected I shall have more rest than I ever had the last few years. There had been times when I hated Tan and wanted to kill him because of the occasions when, despite my fatigue for having worked too hard, Tan would still insist upon seeing me to tell me something that interests his district. On some of those occasions, I was so tired and disgusted that I told my aide to tell Tan to go to hell.  But Tan is persistent and he never gives up. If he cannot see me on Monday, he comes back on Tuesday; if he cannot see me on Tuesday, he returns on Thursday and stays in the office until finally I have to see him.  So, sometimes, even when I was not quite convinced that what Tan wanted for his district was right I would accede I what he wanted just to get rid of him.  Now, this is no joke, I mean what I say; it is not a joke. Tan is a disgusting man me for that reason; and if you want to render me a personal service by giving me extra rest the next few years, then do not vote for him. But if you don’t care what happens to my rest and, instead, you are interested in the promotion of the interest of the country and of this district, and in having a lie servant who will serve the people loyally, then reelect Dominador Tan.

Now, I want to tell you this. I don’t care which members of the National Assembly are reelected. If a member of the National Assembly is elected and tries to fight me, I can fight him and, when I do fight him, he will get the worst of it. I am not looking for members of the National Assembly who will say “yes” on everything I say. When it comes to the worst, I don’t care whether the members of the National Assembly are with me or against me. The powers of the President of the Philippine under the Constitution are so great that I can govern the country without the National Assembly. I am performing a duty not as the President of the Philippines but as a citizen of the Philippines, when I tell the people that those members of the National Assembly are entitled to remain. If you have any doubt as to whether a member of the National Assembly can make it hot for me or not, choose a man for the Assembly who will fight me, and you will see what the result will be. Now, that is plain talk; but it is the way I talk. And I simply say this so that the people of this district may realize that I have no personal interest in the reëlection of Tan. It is simply because we want to establish in the Philippines a practice which is adopted by all democratic countries; that is, when a district happens to choose a man who is a good assemblyman, that assemblyman should be reëlected as often as he would want to be reëlected. Of course, they change the Assembly when there is a change of party. Now, if the district of Tan wants to elect a man to the National Assembly who belongs to the Frente Popular, Communist or Socialist party, that is different; you elect a new man then. If you prefer to be represented in the Assembly by a man of the opposition, that is your right. But, of course, although I am giving the country a non-partisan government, there is in every democracy an element of politics which I do not propose to ignore. The election, for instance, from this district of a member of the opposition, would be a direct vote against me and against my policies. I would take such a vote to mean that you do not approve of the policies that I have adopted. I would understand that to mean that you do not approve of the laws passed by the National Assembly.

In view of the fact that the most important laws passed by the Assembly are laws affecting public roads and schools, I would understand it to mean that you don’t want roads, you don’t want schools. I would understand it to mean that you do not approve of my policy to give the poor man a chance to enjoy the privilege that belongs to him as a human being. I would take that to mean that you do not approve of my punishing officials of the Government who violate the law and who do not perform their duties. But I believe I need not talk about that because I don’t expect this district to elect a man from the Frente Popular.

I will say just one more word about the candidacy of Tan. I don’t know whether there are other candidates in this district or not. If there are others, I don’t want to be understood as saying anything against his possible opponents. Rut even if you have a prophet in this district and you elect him, that prophet will not be able to accomplish during his first term what Tan can do during his second term, because in the National Assembly it is necessary to have some practice, some experience, some knowledge the ways and habits of politicians and of those who are not politicians. It is even necessary to know how to obtain an interview with the President. You know that it is very hard to see the President of the Philippines when he is in Manila. He is quite a busy man. Much as he loves to be with people, he cannot spend all his time talking to his friends. Sometimes municipal mayors come to Manila. I like very much to see them, but sometimes public duties do not permit me—I have no time, no material time to see them. The mayors of Leyte, when they go to Manila, can only see me because they have some very wise assemblymen there. Now, I have but three more years of Presidency and I should like to have in the Assembly men who, I know, will coöperate with me. And so I ask you to reelect Tan so that his term of office will end when I cease to be the President of the Philippines.

Now, don’t believe that I have come here only to advocate the candidacy of Tan. I started my speech with the advocacy of his candidacy because I want to see use him later as my interpreter in explaining the policies of the Government. And I want to use him because, knowing what those policies are, he can possibly make no mistake in translating what I am saying.

The first thing I want to say to you is the question referring to social justice. I want to explain what that means. Social justice means justice for everybody. It does not mean justice for the poor or injustice for the rich, because that would not be justice. It does not mean justice for the rich or injustice for the poor; that, also, would not be justice. It does not mean justice for Nacionalista Party alone and not justice for the Frente Popular. It means justice for everybody, for our friends and for our enemies—justice for those whom we love and justice for those we hate. There is no merit in doing justice to a friend because your heart tells you to do it; the merit is in doing justice to an enemy in spite of the fact that he is your enemy.

Ormoc, I understand, is one of the towns of the Province of Leyte where there are many prosperous merchants and people of wealth. I want to tell them that the rich can only keep his wealth forever if he treats right the man who is working for him. It is not only as a matter of justice that the man who works should be paid an appropriate wage. It is also a matter of business for the man who pays. If you pay a man who works for you a wage which is enough for the support of his family, that man will work for you with love and with devotion, and he will fight for you if the time should come that your interests required defending. But if a man who is working for you is not given what he knows he is entitled to have and he sees that you are accumulating wealth, that man in his heart will pray that you lose what you have. That is considering the question of the relationship between capital and labor in a particular way. But if you look upon the question of the relationship between capital and labor from the point of view of the nation, the consequences of injustice due to that relation are still worse, and they may even be very dangerous consequences. If we have a country where the laboring masses feel that they are treated fairly and justly, we shall have a happy and contented people and there will be no danger of public disorder or lawlessness. Who suffers first if there is lawlessness, disorder, or revolution? The first to suffer are those who have property. Therefore, from the point of view of the country at large, it is necessary that we give benefits to our laboring class. I want to say a few words, however, to our laboring class. I am for you, I am for you with my heart, I am for you with my soul, because I come from a poor family. I want you to know that in order to finish my studies I worked as a “muchacho” for the Franciscan Friars. I passed nights without food when I was a student. I have known what misery is, and that is the reason why I sympathize with the poor.

I am determined to terminate abuses against the poor. Gradually, we are trying to get the National Assembly to pass laws that will properly protect the rights of the laboring class. But you, the laboring class, must not allow yourselves to be fooled by some demagogues who call themselves labor leaders and who pretend that they are working for the laboring class when, as a matter of fact, they are working only for themselves. They live on what they get from the poor laboring class. They give them ill advice and they cause my government some trouble which makes it difficult for me to carry out my policy in favor of the laboring class.

I am in favor of labor unions. I am in favor of labor unions, because not only have the laborers a right to organize themselves, but also a union is a means whereby they can collectively press their petition and express their grievances. In fact, I have advised the different labor organizations in the Philippines to unite into one great labor organization. That shows that I am in favor of labor because if all the labor unions were organized into a great labor organization, they would make that labor organization a very powerful force. But it is impossible to have one labor organization here. Why? Because every leader wants to be the chief; and he wants to be that because it is to his interests to be a chief. And these leaders will not sacrifice their individual interests for the sake of the whole labor organization. That is the best proof that they are not interested in labor, they are interested only in themselves. Of course, in politics there are different political parties. Why? Because political parties may have different programs. And so I say to the laboring class of this province and of this town: “Beware of these self-seeking labor leaders.” Don’t listen to any ill advice from them, don’t believe that you can get your right recognized only when some labor leader speaks for you. Don t believe that any labor leader can threaten the Government or threaten me; don’t believe them when they tell you that you can adopt threatening measures in order to secure your rights, for when you do adopt such measures, you will not secure your rights. As long as I am the President of the Philippines, no group of men, no class, no organization, whether of the rich or of the poor, will be able to threaten this Government with violence for I will resist any such threat. I will deal justly and fairly only with those who are approaching the Government honestly and peacefully. I want to tell you—I am again addressing labor itself—nobody is more interested in your welfare than I am. I am not deceiving you. I don’t have to deceive you. I don’t need your votes any more because I shall never be a candidate. There is nobody who can do anything for me now in the Philippines—nobody. I shall be President until 1941 and nobody can stop me from being President. I have my powers under the Constitution, and nobody can deprive me of those powers as long as I am in office. Nobody can take away from me the presidency until 1941 and nobody can get the presidency until after 1941. Therefore, I am not deceiving you; I don’t have to deceive you; I don’t want anything. All I want is to serve you, to serve my people who have been so good to me.

My countrymen: There is no man living in the Philippines who has received so many favors from his countrymen as I have. There are few men in the whole world who have received the loyalty of their people for such a long time as I have and there is nothing that I can do to pay it back except to serve you unselfishly, devotedly with all my mind and heart, and that is what I want to do.  And I have no hatred for anybody; I have helped even my worst political enemies. I have love for all those who were with me and those who were against me.

I have no more ambition to become a political power, I have all that I want. My sole ambition is to do justice to everybody, to give you a good government that will be remembered by our children as an honest and fair government.  It is my sole hope that on the day I step out of the presidency, you, my people, will say, “He has done the best he could for our own interest.”

So, you rich individuals, you merchants, you industrialists, treat your employees well; and you laboring class, don’t hate those from whom you are getting your wages; help them in the best way you can. I promise you all the support of the Government; I threaten all with the power of the Government if you don’t comply with your duty, if you don’t comply with the law.

Now, only a few words more because I am already tired, and Assemblyman Tan can further explain what I may omit. A few words about your hemp, roads, and schools. About your hemp, I know that the situation of hemp is very bad. The National Assembly has approved at its last session a law authorizing the creation of a company that will engage in helping the hemp industry. I am going to approve that law, but I am not sure that it will be the solution for the hemp industry. We are going to do the best we can to help you. But you know hemp is sold outside of the Philippines and the purchase price of hemp outside does not depend upon us. In one way we can be of help to you. We are going to organize in this province agencies through which we can buy hemp so that your local merchants, if they pay too low, may pay a little bit better with our competition. With regards to roads and schools, this is Santa Claus time for the Philippines–you will have more money for roads and schools than you have ever dreamed of. [ Applause | This will be one way of solving the unemployment problem, and I expect the engineer, the governor, and the municipal mayors, to give work to everybody without discrimination as to party affiliations. And now, ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy to have been here. I know this has been a great day tor me and I want to close by saying, “I thank you.”

Source: Presidential Museum and Library