SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

SOCIAL JUSTICE AND NATIONAL DEFENSE

[Delivered at the Banquet Given by the President in Honor of Mem- bers of the Cabinet, the National Assembly, and Provincial Governors and Treasurers, Malacañan Palace, Manila, January 20, 1937.]

On the eve of my departure for the United States, I have invited you to this gathering to speak to you on certain matters which I consider important. In the first place, it seems necessary to give you an idea of how the Government will be run after my departure. Under the former Government, in the absence of the Governor-General, the Vice Governor-General took his place. This arrangement gave rise to the cry, when I first left the Philippines and announced that the executive powers would still be exercised by me, that it was a proof of my lack of confidence in the Vice President, and it was thought that I preferred to leave the responsibility for the Government in the hands of the Secretary to the President.

The Commonwealth Government is far different from the previous one. Then, in the absence of the Governor-General the Governor-General’s powers could be exercised by the Vice Governor-General. An Act of Congress and another by the Philippine Legislature authorized this. The reason for this was that the Governor-General and the Vice Governor-General were appointive and were responsible to the President of the United States, who had the power to define the policy that his appointees were to follow, and hence it made no difference who carried out his policies, whether the Governor-General or the Vice Governor-General.

Under the Commonwealth Government, the powers of the different branches are clearly specified, and in general none of these organs of government can delegate to other powers conferred on it by the Constitution. The Assembly, for example, cannot delegate to the Chief Executive any of its legislative powers, except in cases authorized by the Constitution. The courts cannot delegate their powers to the executive or legislative branches. Nor can the Chief Executive delegate to another the powers which the Constitution confers on no other officer of the Government.

The practice in the United States and in other independent countries, when the chief of the state, for any reason, has to leave the national territory, is for him to continue assuming the responsibility and exercise of the powers that correspond to the executive branch. In the United States exists the precedent of President Theodore Roosevelt’s visit to the Canal Zone and to the republic of Panama. During his absence the Vice President was not acting President. When President Taft went to Mexico and was the guest of the President of that country the Vice-President was not acting President, either. The instance that best parallels the present case is that one when President Wilson left for Europe to take part in the deliberations over the treaty of Versailles. The absences of President Wilson were rather prolonged but during those times neither the vice President nor any member of the Cabinet acted as President in his stead. And when the session of Congress ended and there arose the necessity of acting on measures approved by that body, President Wilson found it necessary to rush back to America, to exercise the constitutional powers which he could not delegate to the Vice President or to any member of the Cabinet. There is still a more recent case—that one when President Franklin D. Roosevelt went to Buenos Aires. It is not, therefore, a lack of confidence in the Vice President, as in the cases above cited, which prevented me from delegating then and now the constitutional functions conferred on me as President of the Philippines.

In Europe, in countries under constitutional monarchies, the heads of the states are the prime ministers. When the prime ministers of Europe leave their countries, they are not allowed, either, to delegate to any member of their cabinets the powers conferred upon them.

The Government of the Philippines can function during my absence and will function exactly as in my presence. The department heads will continue to decide matters which they now ordinarily settle. Where the sanction of the President is necessary, my approval can be easily obtained by cable. Questions which have to be submitted to the Cabinet will be decided by that body under the chairmanship of the Vice President. In the case of problems which, even in my presence, the Cabinet decides by itself, the usual procedure will be followed. Questions of national policy will be submitted to me first for consultation before decision by the Cabinet.

There need be no fear that affairs will be considerably delayed during my absence. Fortunately, besides telegraphy, we have a more rapid means of communication, the wireless telephone. While the President is out of the country he shall be represented by the Vice President in all acts and on occasions in which he should be present. In his own position, which is superior in rank to any other in the Philippines except that of the President, he shall be at the head of the Government of our country. I expect the Vice President to do more than this. I expect him, during my absence, not only to guard over the coöperation and efficiency of the Government of which he shall be the titular head, but I also expect him to be consulted by the Cabinet on questions which during my presence, are usually referred to me. If after an open discussion between them no decision is reached, the Vice President shall submit to me the result of the discussion for my consideration and decision. It is understood, of course, that the Secretary to the President, who even in my presence signs many papers for me, will continue exercising this function; and orders which are signed by the Secretary to the President, by order of the President, shall have the same value as if the President himself had signed them.

I expect the Government of the Philippines to function as smoothly in my absence as it does now. I want to show the world that we have a government here that can proceed on its own, that is efficient in all respects and under any circumstance. You are, gentlemen, the ones called upon to make the administrative machine work smoothly; I believe my faith in you is not misplaced, and during my absence I expect the country to continue enjoying the perfect peace and the well-being that it now has.

I shall proceed to other matters which I particularly wish to refer to the provincial governors. The first is the problem of national defense. Our national defense should be the first duty of the Government and this is said so even in the Constitution. I expect each provincial governor to comply with this duty with respect to his province and to co operate willingly in the execution of plans by the National Government in this matter.

Gentlemen, the question of our national defense is not a rhetorical question. It is a question which involves the very life of the nation and the honor of our people. Do you want to have a people that does not know how to defend itself? Do you want us to be considered a weakling people that deserves, instead of respect and consideration, only indifference and contempt?

We should not entertain illusions. Unfortunately, the facts show that no nation is respected unless it is capable of fighting for its rights. It is true that this is the law of might which should exist only amongst savages; but, unfortunately again, this law still predominates in international relationships. It is futile to talk here about immediate, absolute and complete independence, and, at the same time, trust to our luck, without attempting to utilize a system of national defense founded on the best methods that the modern science of war can offer.

Those who say that the organization of the national defense signifies the militarization of the country, speak without any foundation. We are organizing merely a small regular army, of 10,000 to 12,000 men, the while we are training a big number of Filipino citizens in the efficient operation of the rifle. How can 10,000 soldiers subdue 400,000 citizens who know how to use the rifle? Precisely, we are not instructing our citizens in the use of modern arms of war as professional soldiers, so that we may be free from the danger of militarism, so that in the event a military organization wants to impose on the Government or on the nation, it will have to contend with a citizenry that is prepared to fight and destroy it. This is our guaranty and this is one of the reasons for the military instruction which we are giving to our youth.

But at the same time that we are preparing our country’s national defense, we should not forget another duty that is equally as important, and which is also consecrated in our Constitution: the duty to uphold social justice. It will serve us none, gentlemen, to instruct all the Filipinos in the use of arms, if, with it, we do not inculcate in the heart of the Filipino the love of the country in which he lives, so that he will be disposed to fight and die for it The love of the citizen for his country should be not alone for the beauty of its panoramas nor for the riches of its soil. Love of country springs from the satisfaction one finds in living in it, from the intimate security in which one can live freely and quietly under a just government and where the natural resources of the country are the nation’s own and for the good of all its inhabitants. The countries that have unjust governments, where the rights of the citizens are infringed upon, where the national resources are concentrated in a few hands—do not find, in case of national danger, the whole population ready to fight for it, because to this population the conquest of its country by another nation would mean the implantation of a just and more generous government We, therefore, have to give to the Filipino nation a just government, an honest government.

With the national defense plan that we are organizing, we are sure to repel any foreign invasion only if the people,—who under the system we are adopting are the ones to fight,—are satisfied with our Government. The justice and well-being that they enjoy under the Government are what make it worth for them to fight and sacrifice. The greatest danger to the national defense that we are organizing is not a foreign invasion but a domestic rebellion. One can ride roughshod over an inert people not trained in the use of arms—but not over a people in which each citizen is trained in the use of a gun. Remember that we are training in the art of war thousands and thousands of young Filipinos, vigorous and hardy, who do not live on the Government but are professionals or employees of private companies, who are farmhands or factory workers; and these, specially the farmhands and factory workers, can become turbulent elements if they do not obtain just and fair treatment from the Government or from that part of society that benefits by their labor.

It is time that we open our eyes to realities and realize the actual state of the society in which we live. You, the provincial governors, and you, the members of the Assembly and of the Cabinet, should explain to that part of society that enjoys privileges and comforts that, if it wants to continue enjoying these privileges and comforts, it should give to the less fortunate part of our population a just share of the fruits to which it is entitled because of its honest labor. Domestic tranquillity in the Philippines can only be guaranteed by justice. All the military preparations that we are making with so much money and labor will not suffice to assure internal peace if the farmhand, the factory worker, and the small employee do not receive the wages due them and the share that is theirs by right of their labor.

I am talking about this now because now is the most opportune time—we are not being menaced by any danger of revolution. Fortunately for all, our country is peaceful and the few malcontents who are ill-advised should not cause us worry because we have effective means of dealing with them, in case they defy our Government and our laws. But we must begin now and not tomorrow—tomorrow may be too late If we give the laborers good wages, if we give the farmhands the just participation which they deserve, if we treat the poor with the same respect as we do the rich and if at the same time, we teach our youth, besides their rights and duties of citizenship, the use of modern weapons for defense, we shall have here, gentlemen, an ideal country in the world—a country which every nation will respect and which nobody would dare invade, a country where we can lead a happy life-happy, because we shall feel the protective influence of the reign of social justice and the satisfaction of seeing our compatriots all equally happy and prosperous.

All that I have said may be reduced to two things: first, that what the country needs is a National Defense that can repel foreign invasion, and second social justice to promote domestic well-being. With both our justice and our national defense promoted, we shall have a country loved by its nationals and respected by foreigners.

The two things I have talked to you about involve constitutional obligations which must be complied with. The third problem which I shall submit to you involve no constitutional obligation, but I am deeply interested in it because its solution would make me very happy. I refer to woman suffrage. Not that I think that, with suffrage, the country will be saved from all calamities which might menace us in the future, nor that we shall be better or worse governed. As you must know, woman suffrage is now regarded as a right of woman in the majority of civilized countries. Before this time, when the question of woman suffrage was presented as a debatable subject in our legislative chambers, no interest was awakened abroad. Now, the entire world knows that the question of woman suffrage in this country is to be submitted to a plebiscite, and if the results should be adverse, I am afraid that such results would cause disappointment in America and Europe. I appeal to you in favor of woman suffrage as a matter of justice to the women and as a matter of progressiveness for our country. I beg you to do all that you can for the triumph of woman suffrage this coming April.

Mr. Vice President, gentlemen: I place the Government of the Philippines in your hands: in the hands of the Vice President who shall be the visible head of the state and who shall represent me during my absence; in those of the Cabinet and provincial governors, and I am confident that all will be well. God bless us all, especially our people.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library