SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

MAINTENANCE OF PEACE AND ORDER IN TARLAC AND PAMPANGA

[Delivered at a conference with the municipal mayors of Tarlac and Pampanga, at San Fernando, Pampanga, June 1, 1938]

There have been registered a series of incidents in Pampanga which do not do honor to this province. Laws have been violated here. Persons have employed force and violence to exercise their rights. The Government does not tolerate these abuses and I expect local officials themselves to explain to the people the grave danger such abuses produce.

You may assure the people that it is the purpose of this Administration to do justice to all laborers and I expect the National Assembly to approve laws tending to carry out the principles enunciated in the platform of the party in power, which is to do justice to laborers and curtail abuses to which the poor have been subjected.

I know that we have a peaceful people, ready to comply with their duties and to coöperate with the Administration in carrying out its plans of justice to laborers and the improvement of their lot, but it is also true that there are irresponsible leaders who are inciting these people and I am afraid that these agitations may result in lamentable consequences.

I have refrained from issuing instructions to the Constabulary to use all its forces with a view to dominating the situation. However, if these nightly secret meetings continue in violation of the law and if I find that the tranquillity of the country is endangered, I shall have no other alternative but to order the Constabulary to use force. I can now issue an order concentrating the forces of the Philippine Army in Pampanga, but I want to be informed of the need of such reinforcement.

The Government has the necessary armed forces that can be utilized at any moment to meet any emergency. I am ready to use all the powers of the Government to execute the laws and to prevent the commission of abuses. I want to end the display of force which misguided laborers have been employing.

* * * * * * *

The trouble with you is that you talk of the Constitution and the constitutionality of an act without understanding what they are all about. a As the President of the Philip pines I have the power and authority to order the arrest of those people. My first mission as the Chief Executive of this country is to maintain peace and order. And I will maintain peace and order if I have to order the killing of some people to do so.

* * * * * * *

I wish to make it plain that my administration will do all it can to redress the grievances of workers on the farm, but at the same time I will not tolerate any breach of the peace, especially on the part of subversive agitators who are misleading the ignorant.

I also wish to remind the town mayors of Tarlac and Pampanga that it is their duty and responsibility not only to maintain peace and order at all cost, but also to carry out the policies of my administration.

If I am not able to govern through elective mayors I shall have to do so through appointive ones. The responsibility of governing is mine and no one else’s. We have a Constitution that gives me power to govern and I do not want anybody to misinterpret this point.

I want everybody to know my attitude. I want to govern in accordance with the will of the people. I shall respect elective officials, but if the execution of the plans of my administration is obstructed, if for lack of coöperation of those officials elected by the people, I find it impossible to comply with the duties entrusted to me by the Constitution, I shall have to select men who I know will help me. My principal duty is to execute the laws and maintain peace and order in accordance with the Constitution, and I propose to comply with that duty.

As municipal officials, you should make it a point to visit outlying barrios whenever you can, and explain the policies of the Administration to the rural folks so they may not be misled by unprincipled agitators who are always disposed to sow subversive ideas in their minds.

* * * * * * *

The time has come when the Government must adopt a clear and definite policy in this respect. A landowner who commits abuses and does not treat his laborers justly should be prosecuted. The Government will lose its moral influence over the laborers if they see that it protects those who commit abuses.

Referring to the frequent nightly meetings of which he had been informed beforehand, the President told the mayors that such meetings must be stopped, and that both those who organize and those who attend such meetings should be arrested. When Mayor Rufino Canda of Mexico, a Socialist, heard the President’s words, he stood up and asked:

“Would that be constitutional, Mr. President?”

Enraged, the President sprang to his feet and shouted:

“Yes! Why do you ask? Are you a Socialist?”

“Yes, Mr. President,” answered Mayor Canda.

Then the President continued as above.

Any landowner has the perfect right to prohibit any person whom he does not like from tilling his land.  The courts of justice, the Court of Industrial Relations, and the Department of Labor are the government agencies upon to determine the rights of individuals should a landowner decide to expel an old tenant.

However, pending the determination of the legality of his act, the landowner has the right to seek the protection of the mayor, of the provincial governor, and of the Constabulary to exercise his rights over his property.

The President addressed this to Mayor Leon Paruñgao, of La Paz, Tarlac, who is under administrative investigation for allegedly inciting laborers to rise against property owners.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library