LABOR CONFLICTS, SOCIAL JUSTICE, AMELIORATION OF THE LABORING CLASS

–––––

I am not seeking my own popularity; what I desire is the peace of the country, t.hat benefit will the Philippines get if I am the only one with whom the country is pleased, while you are at loggerheads?

I would like to see the moneyed class and the poor folks associate cordially with each other, as it is by this means alone that we could insure peace and maintain order in our country.

I know the situation of a laborer; I know that a man who is in a miserable condition thinks nothing and cannot think of anything except his way of getting some relief; and if nothing can help him out of his predicament, and he may die of hunger or of sacrifice, he cannot think anymore of his country; he cannot love anymore his countryman, because only his feelings and sufferings may dominate over his heart and mind.

I have no enemy. My responsibility to my position is a responsibility to all. I have a duty to defend the rights of the property owners, and likewise those of the poor. I favor the laboring class not because I desire to grab the property of the rich; I side with them owing to the fact that in order that the rich may enjoy peace and his legitimate share, he must give what rightfully belongs to his laborers.

Just be tolerant; have some more patience. If in the building of a shack you need to devote a few days or weeks, how much more when we are constructing a big and beautiful mansion, where we can reside peacefully and happily forever?

You can criticize anybody in the Government—that would not bother me a bit; what is important to me is your compliance with the laws.

I do not want to hear anybody say that this Government is weak; the Government will not let the people to be betrayed.

My social justice policy does not favor anybody—be he rich, poor, wise, or powerful. To every man will be given his due, but this does not mean that you will be given all that you desire. Social justice means that you should receive what is due to you; this does not mean that if you do not own any property, you will be given a piece of land, or that the land of another man will be taken away from him and be given to you.

I favor no one, be he my colleague, comrade, friend, or even my relative. I will always side with the man who is right.

The usurious practice of lending money should be stopped now! What interest can a hungry and miserable man, who has nothing to eat, give?

–––––

MY COUNTRYMEN:

I have listened attentively to all what Mr. Pedro Abad Santos said on your behalf, and I shall now speak to you on those same things.

For a long time now I have cherished the hope of being given an opportunity of addressing you, so when your leaders invited me I consented whole-heartedly to pay you a visit. The Secretary of Justice was present at my conference with your leaders who went to Manila. The Secretary is your townmate, and also the brother of the first speaker, Mr. Pedro Abad Santos. Through the Department of Justice, it is his duty to have the citizens comply with the laws of our Government, aside from his duty to see if the authorities or the townspeople are performing their functions, so that anyone who violates the law—be he rich or poor, vested with authority or not, a party leader or not—may be dealt with accordingly.

It was true, as Mr. Pedro Abad Santos said, that when your representatives called at my office and presented the complaints of the laborers and tenants here in Pampanga, I answered them that the Secretary of Justice, Mr. Jose Abad Santos, has the cause of the poor at heart. But I wish you to understand the meaning of what I have just said. That does not mean that he will side with you even if you are not in the right; it means that I will not let anyone of you to abuse if you are not in the right. ( Applause and shouts of “Long live!” )

Accompanying me now are high officials of the Government: the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Justice, the Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army, and the Chief of Constabulary. These officials are responsible for the peace of the country and the faithful performance of duties by all. The Secretary of Labor has the duty to hear the complaints of the laboring class and to investigate whether or not there is truth to their charges; if found justifiable, he may ask the capitalists and the landowners to recognize your rights, and if they do not accede, he can endorse the case to the Court of Industrial Relations.

According to Mr. Pedro Abad Santos, I am the only official interested in the welfare of the poor or the laborers here, and by that it seems as if I am really the only one on whom you place your hopes He mentioned the Cuevo–Barredo case; he made reference, too, to my withdrawal of the Constabulary from the premises of the Pasudeco Central, and he also talked about my social justice policy. What he has said is true, but I do not want you to believe that I am the only official who looks after the well-being of the laboring class in the Philippines. My colleagues in the Cabient and all my co-workers in the Government are cooperating with me in order to execute fully and properly the social justice program of my administration. Likewise, although I am not empowered to speak for the judiciary because, as you know, our Constitution has distributed the governmental powers to the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, it seems there is truth when I say that during this period our courts, in making their decisions, are adhering to the principles of social justice, not that they are in sympathy with my administration—for they are under no obligation to follow me and I have no authority to compel them to obey me—but because this program is in consonance with the mandates of our Constitution, and it is, therefore, the duty of our courts to enforce and to give effect to all statutes in accordance with the spirit of our Constitution. So you must have confidence and hope not in me alone but also in the whole Government: in the executive, legislative, and judicial powers.

While it is true that I am the head of our nation, yet I am only a single individual, and however extensive the powers granted to me by the Constitution and our laws are, still it is impossible for me to seek the economic welfare of our country without the help of the other two department of our Government—the judicial and the legislative—which are both cooperating with me in the immediate and successful realization of the social justice policy, which is a mandate of our Constitution. Perhaps there are still officials in the Executive Department as well as a few judges who do not fully understand yet the objectives of our Constitution and of a few of our laws. But you need not worry about them for, inasmuch as they are under the Executive Department, you can inform the respective department secretaries of their misdoings or policies which are not responsive to my program of administration. I promise you that any department secretary whom you may approach, should you have evidence of any violation to my policy, will mete out punishment to the wrongdoer. As to the judges, I cannot do anything. But if they violate the laws, accept bribes, or commit some injustices, even if they are not removed from office, yet their decisions can be appealed to the Supreme Court and we can be assured that the decisions of that body will be just and equitable. Although I appoint the judges, yet I cannot remove them if they have not committed any wrong. So, my countrymen, in order that your rights may be respected, in order that you may obtain what belongs rightfully to you, and in order that you may prosper, it is not necessary for me to give you guns. I hope that, through my administration, your rights will triumph in the courts. ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” ) If I give you guns, it may appear as if we have a war here. What would other nations say if they found out that the principle of social justice of the President of the Philippines was victorious only because all the inhabitants were armed? The remedy that I shall apply to bring about peace will be this: you should recognize not only my authority but also the powers of the provincial and municipal officials and all other officials of our Government. Your municipal mayors are the heads of their respective towns; your provincial governor is the head of the province. You ought to respect them. If they do you any wrong, file charges against them, and I assure you that they will be dealt with according. ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” )

But as long as they occupy their respective positions in the Government, you should recognize their authority and not have another government. In every town, only one government is formed, and that very government is the one that is recognized by all. You cannot simply organize associations and recognize only their authority, for such associations possess no powers like those of the Government. Those associations which you have organized in accordance with law are legal, and no one can prohibit you from proceeding with your undertakings, but your association or society is devoid of an authority similar to that of the Government. Should the officers of these organizations have complaints, they ought to appear before the corresponding authority in the Government—for instance, to the Secretary of the Interior. And it is not proper that you yourselves should decide matters affecting the welfare of the people and start disturbing the peace of the community by blowing the tambuli (horn) and say: “Go ahead!” I am talking to you now as a friend—your friend who understands you. I know you have faith in me as I suppose you understand that it is my heart that speaks today and not simply my lips! ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” )

Now, I shall answer the complaints of Mr. Pedro Abad Santos.

He said that some judges are using their authority in order to abuse you and cause you misery. If you can show evidence against the judges who are abusing their power, they can be removed. But if the judges have not committed any wrong, I feel there is no justification in removing them from office and I cannot do anything against them. In the Cuevo–Barredo case I did not consider the decision of the court to be just; but I was unable to do anything against the judge; it was enough that I said his decision was bad. Because of this I created many enemies, and almost all the lawyers in the Philippines were opposed to my intervention. But, because it was justice that I was seeking, I did not mind them, in order that I could defend your rights. ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” )

What Mr. Pedro Abad Santos said regarding bail seems right. The poor man goes to jail whenever he cannot put up the necessary bail; on the other hand, the rich man never enters it because of his money! ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” ) Even though I have not thought of it earlier, yet I was able to obtain information on the trouble occurring here. When I learned that the poor could not furnish bail, I told the Secretary of Justice to remedy the situation so that persons charged with light offenses could be set free during the pendency of the case. ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” )

But those who face criminal charges cannot simply be set at liberty. For the present I shall consider the suggestion of Mr. Pedro Abad Santos, and I shall order a further study of this matter in order to find out the best means of enabling an accused person or the defendant in a case set at liberty, while his case is pending. But your leaders should promise me that if this be remedied you will not disturb the peace and violate the laws. If you make disturbances, I shall not help you seek the law’s change.

My countrymen: Now I shall tell you what I think regarding our troubles. But before I proceed, I must repeat once more what I have been saying time and again. I believe that at present our laborers in the Philippines are not receiving their rightful share for their labor. ( Applause and shouts of “Long, live President Quezon! ) This is more so in the sugar industry in which the laborers have a right to better wages, because among all the industries in the Philippines, the sugar industry makes the most profit, and this profit does not only result from the investment which capitalists have made in the sugarcane field, but it is also due to the aid of the Government to the industry. Sugar is exported free to the United States, and this industry has also its envoy, who makes representations to the American Government so that sugar exportation is not curtailed. It is a recognized fact that the exportation of sugar to the United States should not be stopped at once. Hence, the Philippine Government has a right to request the centralistas or the central owners, as well as the landowners to give a decent share of their profits to the laborers, for their profits are realized through the aid of the Government. ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” ) This is not the only time when I said this. Once, when I spoke before the hacenderos and the central owners of Iloilo, I told them that it was their duty to look after the well-being of the laborers because their industry is getting benefits through the help of the Government.

The landowners here told me that I was to blame for your disorder. This is not true. I have already told the labor leaders that I will help them if they recognize and respect the law. But the moment they violate the laws, they will lose my cooperation. The share given to the landowners by the central owners here in Pampanga is smaller than that given to the landowners by central owners in Negros. Here, the Pasudeco actually gives only 50 per cent, although I have heard that it will increase the share in the near future. In Negros, 55 per cent is the share given to the landowners and tenants who plant sugar cane, while 45 per cent is retained by the central owners; and now 60 per cent is received by the sugar-cane owners, and only 40 per cent is kept by the centralistas . Here, it is on 50-50 share basis. It is, therefore, imperative that your centrals should draw up new contracts.

It is not possible, through the courts or by virtue of the power of the Government, to effect changes in their contracts, because it is the duty of the Government to respect the contracts of the centrals. But they ought to take the initiative, and the increase in the share of the planters and the landowners should come from them; and, afterwards, the landowners must increase the share they give the laborers. In provinces like Pampanga, the sugar centrals earn much profit, and so is the case with the landowners; but the tillers of the soil hardly get enough for their means of existence. ( Shouts of “Long live!” ) I cannot force the centrals to make changes in their contracts, neither can I compel the landowners to alter their terms with you; but if they will not take the initiative, I am ready to ask the National Assembly to approve a measure which will increase their land taxes, from which I expect to get what I shall give you. ( Applause and shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” )

I should not have needed that the Government intervene in the improvement of the relationship between the field workers and the landowners on the one hand and the central owners on the other. And I do not want you to look upon this move to improve your living condition as a debt of the people to me or to my administration, for I am not seeking my own popularity; what I desire is the peace of the country. What benefit will the Philippines get if I am the only one with whom the country is pleased, while you are at loggerheads? Perhaps, I would be benefited were I still living, but suppose I am already dead? That is why every day I have always requested the capitalists to improve the living condition of the field workers because I would like to see the moneyed class and the poor folks associate cordially with each other, as it is by this means alone that we could insure peace and maintain order in our country. I do not like to see again what I am witnessing here this afternoon. I know that you who are gathered in this place, harbor ill-feelings and have an ax to grind against the property owners in Pampanga. I do not like to behold such an ugly sight. ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” ) I feel very sorry, because you yourselves are harboring hatred against one another. I see that you do not love each other. How will your province appear if you fight among yourselves?

At this moment, I should like to appeal to the capitalists in order that they may extend the necessary help for your well-being. But if they would not accede to what I will request them to do, I shall be compelled to impose upon them through legislation.

My countrymen: I know the situation of a laborer; I know that a man who is in a miserable condition thinks nothing and cannot think of anything except his way of getting some relief; and if nothing can help him out of his predicament, and he may die of hunger or of sacrifice, he cannot think anymore of his country; he cannot love anymore his countrymen, became only his feelings and sufferings may dominate over his heart and mind. Hence, the paramount need in the Philippines today is a means whereby no person will be so miserable in life as not to be able to think of his duty to his native land. The Philippines is facing a very dangerous future. We shall be alone here. We will be duty-bound to defend the fate of our country in case a foreign nation comes to molest us. If our country is molested by any other nation, in order that every Filipino could feel, in the deepest core of his heart, true love for his native land, and that he may be prepared to readily offer his life in the defense of his country, it is necessary that he must have a decent living—a living, though not totals abundant, that at most must be sufficient as source of subsistence as long as he would want to work. It is not only a living enough for himself, his wife, and children,—not only sufficient to provide food for himself and his family,—that is needed, but one that must also furnish them clothes even during Sundays only—clothes that are clean, and not those ragged and dirty ones worn throughout the year.

If we believe that the heart of the laborer throbs for the love of our country, we must exert our utmost to help every man in the Philippines to have a prosperous life. In order that we may expect a laborer to love and defend his country, it is necessary first to make him understand and feel that he is enjoying a prosperous life.

It is not because I am an enemy of the capitalists and landowners that I side with you now. No, indeed; I have no enemy. My responsibility to my position is a responsibility to all. I have a duty to defend the rights of the property owners, and likewise those of the poor. I favor the laboring class not because I desire to grab the property of the rich; I side with them owing to the fact that in order that the rich may enjoy peace and his legitimate share, he must give what rightfully belongs to his laborers.

I beseech you to have more patience; I ask you to desist from resorting to the worst—by burning the sugar-cane fields and harvesting the palay at your will and then seizing all, including that which does not belong to you. You must not do that! You should give the concerned his rightful share.

I know that in an incident here, the man who seized the palay was right. His landlord, the owner of the palay, was indebted to him. He wanted him to pay him first before giving his share of the crop. Since this is a civil case, it should be brought to the courts.

You should not violate the laws; it is not also proper that the landowners be given the opportunity to seek the intervention of the Government. The Government is duty-bound to give what help they ask for, and it can order the Constabulary to guard the palay.

I wish to call your attention to the fact that it takes time to help you improve your condition. Just be tolerant; have some more patience. If in the building of a shack you need to devote a few days or weeks, how much more when we are constructing a big and beautiful mansion, where we can reside peacefully and happily forever?

Now, with regard to strikes. Strikes are not always beneficial. They are powerful weapon in claiming your rights; but, they should not be overused. If you have any complaint, present them to the Department of Labor or to the Court of Industrial Relations. It is true that it takes time for these government entities to decide the questions at issue, as my friend, Mr. Pedro Abad Santos, has indicated here, but we cannot do anything. You cannot expect other officials to do what I can, for I can even give orders to the Chief of Constabulary and make him comply with them at any time; but the other departments or offices which are devoid of the powers like mine cannot be employed immediately. But, what shall we do? Such being the case, we should be tolerant and wait for the appropriate time.

My friends: You can always hope for my help as long as you comply with the law. Your complaints and the alleged injustices done to you can be taken to the courts and to the proper authorities; once there, you can unravel everything that is in your heart. It is, therefore, not necessary that you use guns or any other weapon. No law officer or government official can abuse you because justice is dispensed to all alike.

Strikes—don’t you know?—are not the best methods to resort to because they are prejudicial to both the laborers and the employers. You should bear in mind that corporations have more money at their disposal than you. Even if you have a strong organization, still you should not immediately resort to a strike while you have not enough money to maintain yourselves during the period of the strike. It is, indeed, necessary that your organization should have sufficient money to meet any emergency in order to give support not only to its members but also to their wives and children who are dependent upon them.

When employers find themselves in an embarrassing labor situation and see feat you are using force, they employ strike-breakers in order not to hamper their business activities and to protect their property. And if strike-breakers are molested, the employers may be compelled to seek the aid of the Government so as to maintain the peace and order of the country.

My friends: I shall send representatives of the Government here—officials of the Department of the Interior, the Department of Labor, and the Department of Justice—in order to investigate and know what is actually happening in Pampanga. If you have been prejudiced in your case, let them know so that they can help you. You must know that we have laws which can be well availed of by the poor and which are a strong and effective weapon against the abuses of the rich and the landowners, but you have failed to make use of them.

In order that strikes may be avoided, I beg you to give me sufficient time, say, six months, to study the different phases of your problem and to remedy the situation. In this way, you may be able to receive your rightful share; and I promise you that the Government will exert its power to have the centrals give a better share to the landowners or hacenderos so that, in turn, they shall give a better share to you. Before the close of the present session of the National Assembly, we shall enact a measure which will increase the taxes of the centrals, and the income will be utilized by the Government to improve the sad plight of the laborers. But I warn you not to create any disorder or to violate any law or engage in any bloody conflict because only you yourselves in this province will be injured. Do not employ such means. At present, your complaint may reach the Government any moment. Also, either your representative or an authorized delegate of Mr. Pedro Abad Santos may, at any time, go to his brother who will hear your complaints.

You can criticize anybody in the Government—that would not bother me a bit; what is important to me is your compliance with the laws. If you want to meet, go on, and hold your meetings. You can even say that you will spill blood but you must not insinuate that you will cut the neck of a man; you can also shout that you will kill, but kill only in words and not in deeds. You can lambast any official in the Government or even my administration; this would not matter to me. What I particularly desire is that you here will enjoy permanent peace and that you will give the Government sufficient time to be able to intervene in your behalf and to study thoroughly your situation.

Before I came, I learned that Secretary Jose Abad Santos requested his brother, my friend, Mr, Pedro Abad Santos, not to display red banners in welcoming us. To me that is not important. You can use any color for banner—red, blue, or whatever color you wish; you can also organize here any party association, be it a socialistic or communistic organization; you can even discuss matters with tight-fisted hands; such will not bother me as long as you do not create any disorder or violate the laws. I do not want to hear anybody say that this Government is weak; the Government will not let the people to be betrayed.

I want to see you here in good company among yourselves, and without trouble. That is the purpose of my visit; my desire that we understand each other. And now that we are face to face with each other on this occasion, I wish to inform you that my social justice policy does not favor anybody—be he rich, poor, wise, or powerful. To every man will be given his due, but this does not mean that you will be given all that you desire. So, you are the ones to be benefited by social justice because you are the aggrieved party.

Social justice means that you should receive what is due to you; this does not mean that if you do not own any property, you will be given a piece of land, or that the land of another man will be taken away from him and be given to you.

Countrymen: In conclusion, I wish to thank you all for giving me the opportunity to hear your complaints through my friend, Mr. Pedro Abad Santos. I promise you that it is not only myself but also the members of my Cabinet who will always be ready to take up your charges. I promise you also that I will not permit anybody to harass you or to use his influence, wealth, and power to abuse you. ( Applause and shouts of “Long live President Quezon!” ) Under my administration, all men are equal. I favor no one, be he my colleague, comrade, friend, or even my relative. I will always side with the man who is right. So, if you are being abused by anybody, let me hear your complaints, and I promise you that if you have sufficient evidence to prove his guilt I will punish him. But I ask you, in return for this promise, to show me your eagerness to help the Government not in words but in deeds, by obeying the laws, by avoiding any trouble that may disrupt the peace of the country, and by promoting close friendship among the inhabitants here. Your organizations which have been established in accordance with law, are not bad, and nobody can prevent you from proceeding with your undertakings; but never utilize your organizations in violating the laws or my orders so that you may not bring about trouble in this country.

It is my desire that before finishing, I shall repeat to you my only wish: may all the sugar centrals in Pampanga, at their own initiative, increase the share of the hacenderos or the planters, so that, in turn, these will increase the wages of the field laborers. The usurious practice of lending money should be stopped now! What interest can a hungry and miserable man, who has nothing to eat, give? ( Shouts of “Long live President Quezon! ”) May the landowners in Pampanga and in the whole Philippines not wait for our laws to compel them to give your needs in order to maintain a decent existence; instead, may they, of their own accord, show in deeds that they, too, have hearts and that they are ready to help our laborers who are in dire need. ( Prolonged applause and shouts of “Long live P resident Quezon!” )

From Messages of the President, Vol. 5, Part I, (1941).

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library