Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Filipino attitude toward Japan

[Delivered at a Banquet Given in His Honor in Tokyo, Japan, February 5, 1937]

Mr. Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I can find no adequate words with which to express my deep appreciation of the hospitality of His Excellency, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Madame Arita.

For many years I have been the recipient of the hospitality of my friends in Japan, and I can say truthfully that I feel almost at home in this wonderful country.

By a gracious act of the Government of the United States, we now have, in all matters affecting our domestic affairs, a self-governing Commonwealth in the Philippines. Our foreign relations are still under the control of the United States, and will be until the day the Philippines become independent.

It is the duty of the Government of the Commonwealth to lay the foundations for the new nation, and it is my hope and earnest desire to so prove to the world the worthiness of our purpose in seeking membership in the international brotherhood of free states that, when the day of our complete separation from America shall have arrived, we shall be welcomed and given our rightful place in the family of nations.

Of course our first concern will be not only to keep but also to foster our friendly relations with the Government and people of the United States. No less can be expected of a grateful people that we are. We owe to America our freedom; she has contributed to our progress both culturally and materially.

As for our attitude toward the Government and people of this, our great neighbor Empire, deeds speak louder than words. Our association with Japan dates prior to the Spanish discovery of the Islands. Some Japanese historians and ethnologists say that the founders of this nation are of the Malayan stock, the race to which my people belong. But regardless of any racial kinship, it is a historical fact that there has been friendly intercourse between Japan and the Philippines running through centuries past. In our own day Japan is taking part—and no mean one in the material development of the Philippines. Thousands of Japanese subjects are now residing and doing business in the Philippines. Regardless of what news papers may now and then say, I can assert, confident of no successful contradiction, that it is impossible to improve upon the relations prevailing between your people who are residing in my country and my Government and people. As I see it, the Japanese in the Philippines expect to receive no special privileges; all they want is fair deal. And for our part I can assure you that this they are receiving and will always receive in full measure from our hands.

It is our earnest desire to always conserve the friend ship and good will of the Japanese nation, and we are doing everything in our power to convince the people of Japan that we are their friends and well-wishers.

Our debt of gratitude to America, our friendship for the American people, do not preclude our being friends with the Empire. On the contrary, we think that to foster the friendly intercourse of these three nations should be the aim of wise statesmanship. Not only peace in the Far East, but also the cause of world peace will thus be promoted.

You are right, Mr. Minister, when you say that commercial relations between your people and my people are and will be in the interest of both. Our policy will be one affording equal opportunity to all who desire to take part in the development and improvement of our country and people. Only thus can we show the world that our claim to independent statehood is well founded.

The frequent visits of Japanese to the Philippines and of Filipinos to Japan, will, I have no doubt, make for greater confidence amongst our people and foster the friendship now so happily existing.

Mr. Minister and Madame Arita: The members of my party and I are profoundly grateful to Your Excellencies for your generous hospitality, and let me hope that we shall have the privilege of bidding you welcome in our country in the near future and of reciprocating this splendid demonstration of cordiality and friendship towards our people.

Ladies and gentlemen: May I have the honor of proposing the health of His Excellency, the Foreign Minister, and Madame Arita.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library