SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

RESPECT FOR PROPERTY RIGHTS AND GOVERNMENT PLANS FOR BUENAVISTA ESTATE

[Delivered at Barrio Cruz-Na-Daan, in San Rafael, Bulacan, on January 31, 1939]

Countrymen:

I have come here to ask you if you who work in this estate wish the Government to intervene and devise a way so that in the end the estate will become yours. Before I decide on what the Government should do in this matter, I desire to know first your feelings, for I understand that you—the majority or a few of you—have filed a complaint with the court against the owner of this hacienda; and I do not want others to tell you that you lost your case because of Government intervention, and to which you would add that I had desired to save the San Juan de Dios Hospital from this litigation. If you want to be left alone and the Government not to do anything, I may just as well go home now and leave you among yourselves. But I am informing you that you should not transgress the law and the decisions of the court.

The first duty of the Government, which is also my first duty, is to have all persons comply with the mandates of the law and the decisions of the court. So if anyone among you wishes to speak, or if the town mayors of San Ildefonso and San Rafael can express your feelings, they can speak now.

Mayor Valte. —Mr. President, inasmuch as Your Excellency desire to know what our wishes are, I will state them: the lessees of San Rafael desire that the Government either buy or expropriate the estate and then subdivide and sell it to the people.

Mayor Verde.— Your Excellency, fellow citizens. I simply wish to say this: Let the Government buy this estate and give it to the people. [Shouts at the people: “We do not like that!”]

A Citizen. —We desire the Government to acquire this estate, and afterwards we would be at the disposal of the Government.

The President. — Now, I am going to speak again. I have heard rumors that you disagree among yourselves in your objective. That is precisely the reason why I have come here. Many persons have told me that you want the Government to purchase the Buenavista Estate for resale among you: news has reached me also that your desire is to have the land you now occupy or work on given to you. The Government cannot buy this land and give it to you free. In the first place, the National Assembly has no power to donate to anyone any property purchased by the Government. In the second place, even if the National Assembly has that power, yet our Government has no money with which to buy all the estates in the Philippines for distribution among the people. And if other provinces should learn that the Government bought the Buenavista Estate and gave it to you without cost, other provinces having similar estates would demand of us to do likewise on the haciendas within their territories.

Countrymen: I shall speak frankly before you. I never say anything that does not come from my heart, and I never make any promise which is beyond my ability to perform or which I cannot execute. So, what I will tell you now is my true conviction which I am ready to carry out. I said that it is impossible for the Government to donate its own property to you, and I give the reason why. Should—as you desire—the Government purchase this estate, it would be necessary for you not only to promise to pay back the amount that might be advanced by the Government, but also to keep that promise, or I would compel you to pay for it. And if there are leaders or candidates here who will tell you or promise you that through their intervention the payment would be condoned, do not believe in them because they will not be able to accomplish what they say or promise.

A Citizen.— We filed an action in court in order to obtain a clarification, but it will take a long time to obtain a decision of the case. But if Your Excellency could make the matter clear to us, we would greatly appreciate the explanation. We want to know if the Government would expropriate or confiscate the estate, because an expropriation proceeding will determine the rightful owner of this estate. If the President would expropriate this estate and it could be proven that it should be bought, we would be ready to pay the parties concerned.

The President.— I do not believe that your litigation over the ownership of this estate could be terminated by means of an expropriation proceeding. What I guess will likely happen is that the possessor of the Torrens title will be recognized by the court as the lawful owner; but remember that I am not the court, nor do I have any power to decide such cases. The court will decide that. If what worries you is the probable outcome of your case in the event that the Government buys, expropriates, or leases the estate from the actual possessor, then you need not worry about it, for whatever agreement we might enter into with the San Juan de Dios Hospital would be made with a stipulation that you could continue your litigation if that should be your wish, and the decision of the court would be followed afterwards.

A Citizen. —Should, by chance, the Government purchase the estate, and since we are not in favor of dropping the case, we then would not pay for it yet because this case is still under litigation.

The President.— You may not pay the value of the land while the case is pending; because in this litigation the question being determined is not whether you are or the Hospital is the owner of the estate, but whether the owner is the Government or the Hospital. Therefore, to whichever the court would recognize as owner—the Government or the San Juan de Dins Hospital—you must pay the rent because the land is not yours.

A Citizen.— If Your Excellency would decide the dispute over this hacienda, we would all ho in favor of your decision because you are the President of the Philippines.

Another Citizen. —What I may say. Mr. President, is that if the Government should lease the estate now, it would mean a transgression of a question at issue, because this case is still pending in court; so it is necessary first to determine its ownership. Later, when the ownership is determined, the land may then no sold to us.

The President. —It is not true, if the Government leases this estate from the San Juan de Dios Hospital and you, in turn, be required to pay the rent, that this situation would be in violation of the question at issue before the court; because until after the cast is terminated, it is really the holder of the Torrens title that should be recognized as the owner. Therefore, even if the Government leases this estate and you in turn rent it from the Government, such would not be an impediment to the decision to be rendered by the court on your case. The recognition by the Government that the owner of this estate is the San Juan de Dios Hospital rests upon the fact that the Hospital has the Torrens title and is actually in possession of the estate. More than this you, of course, have been paying your rentals of the estate to the Hospital. I also know a little of the law because I am a lawyer. If you wish to entrust this matter to me, I will tell you now what I intend to do. You, the people of San Ildefonso and San Rafael, should have faith in that my heart is with you; for if it were not so, even only upon Judge Endencia’s decision that the share of the harvest corresponding to you be not taken first and that the entire crop instead should be deposited with the depositary. I already would have ordered Constabulary soldiers to keep watch on the palay harvest. But you know quite well that I did not do that: instead, I had Judge Endencia asked that he revise his decision and award to the tenants their share of the harvest. I took into account the fact that those tenants who were to be deprived of their share would have no means of subsistence and would, therefore, starve. [Shouts of “Long live the President!”] You know also that Judge Endencia revised his decision and the tenants were allowed to get their share. I was later informed that after the court had permitted the tenants to acquire their share, there were a few who did what they should not have done; and they not only took their share but also meddled with the portion pertaining to the owners.

Please understand well what I will say. When I heard of this incident in San Rafael and San Ildefonso, I entertained ill-feelings against you. I felt bad because I considered that you did not appreciate the assistance I had given you so that the court would allow the tenants to obtain their share, thus respecting your rights.

Countrymen: A person who desires his rights to be respected has a corresponding duty to recognize the rights of others. One who would not recognize the rights of his fellow men should not expect others to respect his rights. Those persons who took the crop which did not pertain to them actually transgressed the law, discredited our Government, and looted the property of another.

I wish to remind you now that when I accepted this position which the people bestowed upon me, I swore I would have the laws and the decisions of the courts obeyed and respected, and I would defend the rights of all. I am responsible to God, to the country, and to my conscience for the performance of what I swore to do. So I wish you to know that I will order the arrest of anyone who will violate the law, disregard court decisions, ignore the rights of others, or get what does not lawfully belong to him, so that the court can mete out the appropriate punishment. I entreat you, in the name of our country and our Government, and of your love for peace in our land and stability of your economic welfare, not to commit any violation of the law and existing rights. In the first place, because you would only compel me to employ force against you; secondly, because you would weaken my stand in my desire to improve the living condition of both the poor and the laborers. On the day that the laborers decide to use means which are against the law or violate the rights of their fellow men, they would not triumph, because the Government would then he their enemy. So do not place me in such an embarrassing position. I am telling you frankly that my primordial aim in this life is to help my impoverished countrymen, especially the farmhands and factory laborers. If during my administration I could give comfort to the life of the laborers, I would more than consider it as divine luck, because I then would have had an opportunity to help my people. If you want to see what I have been wishing for night and day—that our nation be peaceful, our people progressive and happy, and the lot of the poor class ameliorated—then lend me your cooperation and do not commit any disturbance or any untoward act. Give the Government sufficient time to uphold your rights. Do not believe any person who tells you that in being obdurate and by going against the law of the Government, your rights would be respected. You will not gel anything by so doing.

Countrymen: I have no desire to be a candidate again. Three years from now. I shall be a mere Juan de la Cruz. Therefore, you should believe in what I say because only your welfare and the betterment of our country are what I am wishing for. I wish to remind you also that no person can prosper materially through the help of others alone. One’s prosperity will come, first of all, from his own perseverance. He who refuses to be persevering, who does not want to work—in short, the lazy—shall never amount to anything. A person who does nothing but scratch his head will not prosper in life, whatever help the Government may render him. All my plans to bring amelioration to the laborer—to increase his earnings and to help him acquire his own land—have no value to a person who wastes his time in fondling fighting cocks.

I will now answer those tenants who wish this estate expropriated. I do not think that it is the best means which the Government should employ. I fear that through expropriation proceedings the Government will pay a higher price. This land is valued at P4,190.601.35, according to its certificate of assessment. If we resort to expropriation, I do not know what price the court would consider as reasonable. It might be P4,250,000. None can foretell what the opinion of the court would be. If I do not expropriate this estate, I think that it can be bought at P3,000,000, more or less. My worry concerns you, because you yourselves will have to pay, in the end, for whatever will be the price of the estate.

What we plan to do is to enter into an agreement with the Board of Directors of the San Juan de Dios Hospital in order to have this land leased to us annually at P100,000, which amount would be increased by P2,000 every succeeding year. However, within 25 years, the Government could buy it for P3,000,000. Under the lease plan, we shall form a cooperative association with you as members. You will also manage it. You will choose the directors of the association and they will take charge of the collection and payment of rentals. The directorate will decide all matters pertaining to the progress of the association and the increase of your profits from the land. The Government will appoint a manager who will aid the directorate in running the association. For the construction of improvements on the estate, the Government will also lend the association the necessary capital which will bear an interest of only 4 per cent annually. If you borrow money from the association, you will pay an interest of 6 per cent; so that whoever borrows P100, for instance, will pay only P6 as interest for one year.

The Government will construct roads, build schoolhouses, dig artesian wells, and give you free dispensaries on the estate. If you agree to our plan, we will proceed with it; if not, then the Government will not interfere in this matter.

A Citizen.— I am only a tenant, and my whole crop was taken by my landlord.

The President— I have no power on that matter. File a complaint in. court.

A Citizen.— But , Your Excellency, I do not have money to pay a lawyer and the fees in court. (Right there the President instructed the provincial governor to give the old tenant a public defender.)

The President.— You will have a plebiscite hero to decide this question.

A Citizen.— What if our votes should be changed, Mr. President?

The President.— Why should they be changed? Who will change them? Do not worry about that: I will not let that happen.

My countrymen from San Ildefonso and San Rafael: I wish to reiterate what I said a while ago: that I will leave you alone to decide your own question. If you desire the Government to accomplish what I propose, it will do it; if you do not want it, it will not. In short, in your hands lies the realization of the plans regarding this estate. But whatever be your decision. I enjoin you to maintain peace. I wish you to be peaceful, because a troubled country will never be progressive and its people cannot enjoy prosperity. Besides, the Government cannot allow you to be always in chaos. Our Government is not simply a joke. The Government will not allow any citizen to unlawfully cultivate land which is not his, or grab the property of another.

You can continue with your case in court, but it is necessary that, in the meantime, you must respect the rights of others and abide by the decision of the court. If the court rules later that this estate on which you work is the property of the Government and not of the San Juan de Dios Hospital, still it cannot be given to you free; instead it will be necessary for you to pay the Government for it, though at a little cost. On the other hand, if the court decides in favor of the San Juan de Dios Hospital, it is equally necessary that you respect the decision and either pay the rent for your lot to or buy the lot from the Hospital. None can promise that he can save you if you will not recognize the decision of the court, and if he does so, you can be sure that he will not be able to do anything. So, unless you are really willing to wield bolos and use your own strength to fight the Government, you should do what I am telling you now.

There are many persons assuming to be he-men who instigate their countrymen to commit disorder, but when the time comes for them to be tried, they disappear; you cannot locate them for they keep on hiding.

A Citizen.— Your Excellency, I only wish to inform you that I was brought up here as a child and I am over 70 years old now. Even in my childhood I saw that the land comprising this estate was but small; today, however, it covers a very big area.

The President— I know that because that is the history of most of the estates. The truth is that if it were not only against the law, I would want to get this estate without payment and simply give it to you free. Ah! my friends, I know that this estate was a forest in the past, and it was only cleared and tilled because of your industry. I know what happened here, so I am willing to be of help to you. I know the history of the estates in the Philippines, so I am assiduously looking for a way so that those estates would become the property of the people. But we have a law which gives validity to the Torrens title. As long as the court does not decide that a Torrens title held by a person or corporation is of no value, it is necessary that all should respect the said title and it is the duty of the Government to defend the ownership of those who possess Torrens title.

Finally, I am requesting the provincial governor, as well as the mayors and barrio lieutenants of San Ildefonso and San Rafael, that they should keep in mind the responsibility of a public official. The first thing they must perform is their duty. If, by chance, the municipal mayors here or their barrio lieutenants are affiliated with the Handa Na and Dumating Na societies, they should bear in mind that their responsibility as mayors and barrio lieutenants enjoin them to serve the law and not their society. If by chance they have affiliates in the society who violate the law, they should not close their eyes or side with their co-members-otherwise, I will remove them from office. The will of an association should not be followed by an official of the government; it must be the mandate of the law. I expect the authorities of these two towns to comply with their duty to help and serve the country, to obey and enforce the law. It is their duty to defend the oppressed and punish the wrongdoers even if the latter are their relatives, compadres, or co-members in their society.

Friends and Countrymen: I bid you good-bye, and many thanks. [ Shouts of “Long live the President!” ]

Source : Presidential Museum and Library