Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Labor Unity in the Philippines

[ Delivered on the occasion of the Labor Unity Parade, sponsored by the National Labor Commission, on the Luneta, Manila, in the afternoon of June 5, 1939 ]

My Friends and Countrymen:

In behalf of the Government and in my own. I am extending to the workers in the Philippines happy greetings this afternoon. I wish to express to them my great joy over what my eyes behold today, which is no other than the realization of my long-felt desire for the coming of the day when the labor organizations in our country would arrive at a conciliation and subordinate themselves into only one organization in order to have strength and stability.

It is to the great honor of Secretary Avelino that this unification of the different labor elements in the Philippines has taken place under his administration of the Department of Labor. And because I would not be able to shake hands with you all, I will simply shake hands with Secretary Avelino [ applause ], and by this handshaking I promise you that you can be sure that the Government of the Philippines will defend the rights of all workers in our country. [ Long, ringing applause. ] Perhaps a few see some kind of danger in this eventuality, because they may be thinking that if the workers in the Philippines have absolute unity already, they will utilize this strength to trample upon the rights or prerogatives of others. I do not believe that such will transpire. In my long experience with the feelings and thoughts of the people in our country, especially the poor, my belief is firm that the Filipino does not only aspire to have his rights—which are beneficial to him respected, but also he is, if properly enlightened, ready to recognize the rights of others. That is why I am hopeful that this union of labor organizations in the Philippines, will not only be the cause of their complete integration in their demands, but will also be instrumental in helping us all, because through the representatives of these organizations, it will be easy to understand whatever is being contemplated by means of equity and to uphold the rights of all the workers.

In other countries laborers achieved victory only after a long period of struggle, and sometimes, by means of spilling blood. Now, in the so-called totalitarian states, the Government leads in the establishment of labor organizations; but, even if in other places or in the totalitarian states the laborers have already gained some concessions, all that they do is subject to the decision and will of the ruler of such nations. Here, however, although our Government fervently wishes to be of help to the laborers and to see them prosperous, yet it does not interfere with you but, instead, allows you full freedom to form your organization according to your wishes. What the Government only does is help you, and in so assisting it also allows your will and thought to prevail.

There is nothing on earth so valuable as freedom. Hence, even if the Government has been doing good things for you, if these are being done through imposition and you have nothing to do but follow them—this, in my belief, will not be as satisfactory to you as when you follow your own will. That is why, although Secretary Avelino had been of help in intervening to bring this end, you really were the ones who worked and triumphed, because your leaders were the ones who truly decided on this matter, while the Government did nothing but cooperate with you.

My countrymen: we have a long way to go before we come to a situation where it can be said that all are receiving what is due them, and that their lives are truly comfortable. My firm belief is that that day will come. For that day to come, however, not only the Government, not only capital, not only you but also other laborers like you, must ponder over our situation so that we would not make any mistake regarding whatever we desire to achieve. The workers in the Philippines must realize that we are starting a new life, and that the time we are facing is not the same as the past. We are going to establish our own Government which shall not be under any nation. In these days, every Filipino should think not only for his well-being or that of his companions, but also for the good of us all. If you workers are asking your employers for something which you think should be given to you. I am appealing to your leaders who represent you, to study whether or not what you ask for is within the power of the employers to give and if it can be given. You must not forget the saying: “If we want eggs, we must not kill the hen.” [ Ovation and cries of “Long live the President!” ]

To capital. I can say this: it must realize that nobody has the right to get rich at the expense of labor. [ Applause. ] Labor is more valuable than capital. [ Ovation and cries of “Long live the President!” ] Capital may be wasted, ruined, or lost, but as long as there is labor, time will come when capital will appear again. [ Applause .] But if labor is lost, capital will appear again. [ Applause ] But if labor is lost, capital cannot do anything. [ Cries of “Long live the President!” ] He is blind who does not see this truism. Not only thousands but millions of years had passed before capital appeared on earth. It was also hundreds of years that man had been already living on earth and still there was no capital. Bit by bit through acquired knowledge and by fighting his way against the forces of nature, he learned to gather food in order to exist not only for the present but also to save something to eat for the morrow. That was the beginning of the so-called capital. That is why I repeat: labor is more valuable than capital. [ Ovation and cries of “Long live the President!” ] Not only that: the right of labor is more precious than property rights, or the rights to property, because those of labor are humane rights. [ Cries of “Long live President Quezon!” ]

Capital must use its rights, but in using them it should not forget that the prerogatives of labor are more important. [ Applause. ] Capital or the investor wants to gain. Why? Because he wants to have not only riches but also the comforts of life so that he and his children also may enjoy them. But does he not think that if life is valuable to him and it is truly nice to live in comfort, those who work for him are also endowed with life and are desirous of enjoying it, too?

These are matters which if kept in mind and practised by all will, I hope, lead to the day when those with possessions would have nothing to fear, because their property will be respected by their fellow men. If everybody bears this in mind, the time will come when there will be absolute truth to the statement that nobody dies of hunger in our country.

I have no ambition in life except to see the day come when the laborers in the Philippines shall lead the lives of men, [ applause ] and have their rights respected. I expect your being united to be of help to the Government in giving realization to matters it has long desired to accomplish.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library