Speech of the Honorable Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, to the First National Assembly Regarding the “excise tax”

Mr. Governor, Provincial Representatives:

I have come to you today to hear from my own lips what happened regarding the so-called “excise tax.” During my last visit to Mindanao, the people of the Province of Cagayan de Misamis requested me to address the difficult situation of those who make a living from coconuts. The first words I uttered in response to that request were these: you know that I am from Tayabas, I said to the people of Cagayan de Misamis. You know that Tayabas is a province that lives solely on coconuts. You should think that if I could do something to remove the “excise tax,” I would not need to be asked by the people of Cagayan de Misamis, because I should feel that need myself. My answer showed the people of Cagayan de Misamis that removing the said “excise tax” was not on my mind. Because they believe that since I am from Tayabas, I do not need to look for other solutions because I will do everything I can on my own initiative.

The first thing I want to ask you, people of Tayabas, is this: Is there anyone in the depths of your heart, if it is only for the value of a coconut, who would not do everything in their power? Is there anyone among you who would dare say they would do what cannot be done? If there is anyone who thinks so, I will leave the province of Tayabas.

You should think—you should believe that you do not feel any hardship here that I do not feel.—If I desire to serve the country, I should serve Tayabas even more, because this is the province where I first saw the light, and you were the first to help me rise to the position I hold today. You should believe that, if until now I have done nothing to improve the value of the coconut or remove the “excise tax,” it is because of the following: Isn't it true that it has only been two years since the price of copra in Tayabas has increased? Wasn't there an “excise tax” before? For a year, when the Congress of the United States decided on the “excise tax,” the price of copra was higher than it was during the war. No one among you can deny this. If the price of copra is falling, the “excise tax” is not to blame, because if that were true, the price of copra would never have risen.

The value of anything sold abroad follows the trend of the market, and you know that copra is not sold to us here but in the United States. The value of goods comes from where they are sold and the competition of those who sell them; not from the Philippine Government. If copra were sold and used here, we could give it value. But it is not here. Can we tell those who serve that the price of copra should be this or that, or tell other buyers that if they don't pay this price, we won't sell? What will happen if no one pays the price we want? Can the Government buy copra at the high price you want and then sell it at a low price? Can the value of copra in Tayabas improve through government money that will be used to buy it?

If there is anything I can do for you, I would not even hesitate to sacrifice my livelihood. What else am I waiting for in the province of Tayabas? You have always shown me love. You were the first to elect me and the same ones who elevated me. Could you be the ones I would forget?

That “excise tax,” when first proposed by the United States Congress to be imposed and cover our oils, I went before Congress and opposed it. In fact, I asked the President of the United States to do everything in his power to prevent the “excise tax” from being approved, and the President sent a message to Congress asking that the “excise tax” not be approved; but even so, it was still approved by Congress.

That could have meant that after the tax was collected in America, it would remain in the US Treasury without the Congress being able to stop their decision. But I requested that if possible, the tax be returned to the Philippines. So Congress stipulated that if it were returned to us, it could not be used for the benefit of coconut farmers, because if that were the case, the return of the tax to the Philippines would be cut off. My position then was this: if I did not agree to return the tax, when would it ever be used to help coconut farmers, the tax would remain in the United States? Should I have done that? The decision was in their hands, not ours. Besides, for example, if I had agreed to the decision not to allow coconut farmers to benefit from the amount returned to the Philippines, and the tax would continue to be returned to our Government, wouldn't that be for the good of the entire Philippines? We must think that the good of the Filipino people is the good of the province of Tayabas, and I think I did not make a mistake in my decision.

Since I could not force them to give the coconut farmers the full benefit of the “excise tax,” I accept the amount returned to us for the benefit of our Government. In fact, where will the two million allocated to Tayabas come from if not from that same “excise tax”? Therefore, Tayabas will also benefit. You just haven't received the full benefit yet, because the road improvements are not yet complete. We have already decided on that so that you will also benefit from the money you paid in “excise tax.” But what the Government cannot do, or what we will lose if we do, is the money from the “excise tax.” It will be taken from us by the United States Government, because that would violate what it ordered us to do.

You should know that sugar also has an “excise tax.” It is also forbidden that the “tax” on sugar, which is returned to us, be used in the sugar industry.

If there are men here who think they are strong enough to conquer America, let them go first and do what they can. If they can, let them go first and I will follow, because I confess to you that I cannot fight America. But the truth is, our courage is only in meetings. What is needed is to show them in deeds and not in words, what we can do.

One of the things the “Joint Preparatory Committee” is asking for, if the “excise tax” cannot be removed, is to allow the Philippines to use the said “excise tax” to revitalize the coconut and sugar industry. At the end of the “Joint Preparatory Committee” work, I forced them to ask that the Philippine Government be allowed to help the coconut industry. That is all I can tell you. I asked that the “excise tax” be removed, so it cannot be said that I did not do anything, but rather I worked hard to benefit the coconut industry in the Philippines.

Deputy Lavides is not only a deputy of his province but a deputy of the whole Philippines, like the others. You should not blame and scold Deputy Lavides for thinking he has done nothing about the “excise tax,” because the truth is, Lavides has been bothering me a lot in Manila because of his insistence on having a “law” that means taking government money to help the coconut industry, because if I agreed to him, Congress would withdraw the money coming from the “excise tax.” I know that Lavides cannot be surpassed by anyone you put in the Second District, and if your anger at him is only because I am preventing him and any deputy from presenting any proposal relating to reducing money from the “excise tax” to be used for the benefit of coconut farmers. And I stand by that, because I know it would violate the provisions of Congress law.

Let's wait a little, because I expect or I am waiting that in the meeting of the United States Congress in January, Congress may agree that the money from the “excise tax” on coconut oil can be used for the benefit of coconut farmers. Congress did not agree the other day only because of the strength of the competitors of our oil in America, who wanted to destroy our industry. But now, in the report of the “Joint Preparatory Committee,” it clearly shows the United States that if they do not give us the opportunity to help our industries while the American flag is still here, our livelihood here will be destroyed when independence comes. Do not expect America to ever remove the “excise tax” on coconut and sugar. Let's not think about that. All we can expect is to allow that money to be spent on the sugar and coconut industry. Once we have Independence, the “excise tax” will continue without being returned to us. They will not remove that “excise tax” and we will have nothing to rely on.

Tell me, provinces, how the government can help you. Regarding roads, you don't need to tell me. We can do that, and we alone know how we will do it.

What we Filipinos need to do is study other uses for coconuts. Why is it that we from Tayabas don't study how to eat coconuts and just eat rice? That's no joke. The coconut is more valuable than rice. And when I was young, when we had no rice, we ate coconuts. Let's revive the making of *bukayo*, because *bukayo* is very delicious. Also, sweet *bao*. When I was studying, I always asked my parents for money so that when I was at school, I could just buy Chinese *bao*. The difficulty with us Filipinos is that we forget what is truly ours. We have many things and tools related to coconuts. The truth is, we need to revive the habits of the past. We need to find different uses for coconuts, not just to export to other countries, but to use here as well.

You should know that the “National Development Company” has technicians studying various things related to what comes from coconuts; and the most important thing we should do is for those with coconut trees to be encouraged to work. The difficulty with us Filipinos is that landowners don't want to work. When they have two hundred, four hundred, or a thousand coconuts, they still don't harvest and make copra, so they earn very little. In America, the farmer works, while here we mostly spend time in town, or at the *sabungan* (cockfighting arena).

There is no solution to our livelihood unless we work. Let's remove from our minds laziness and pickiness, as well as reliance on the government, because it is not the government but the people who should strive for themselves. We have few possessions, yet we don't want to work hard. What will happen to us? In America, a farmer can cultivate and plant on twenty-five hectares of land. That is possible because they have machines. But we can also have and use machines, whenever we want. What is bad about us is that most people don't want to work. Who among us handles a plow? Most people only think about dressing well, and I'm afraid to get my hands dirty. It's thought to be shameful to work. Work is not a punishment from God to man, it is a blessing to man.

I believe that if what is said in the Bible is true, that when Adam and Eve were created, they did nothing but eat delicious food, enjoy looking at the beauty of nature and listening to the chirping of birds, or look up at the sky and pray, the population of the world would not have increased. But God blessed man with work, so Adam and Eve also worked and because of that the population increased and this world was healed and became healthy.

Even I have handled a plow. Do you think my hands are afraid of the plow! I have pounded rice, and I am proud that I did so. If someone with a thousand coconut trees works on it themselves, they will earn much more. That is the first secret of livelihood, because even there the value of their copra is higher. It is necessary, we must work. If the landowner does the work himself, he will benefit more. What I mean is, if the land is small and he can manage the work himself, he doesn't need to rent it out to others; and if the land is large, he can then pay others. Whatever the case, our policy in life should be work, and reduce or forget about distractions and wasting time on town festivals. But what I see is that we have too many saints we celebrate: the feast of Saint Paul, Saint John, Saint Anthony, and so many other saints. During those feasts, we spend a lot of money. I also see in the feasts that everyone usually has a feast in their homes; but the truth is, I'm not generalizing, many of those celebrating are just borrowing money to spend. In our calendar, there are more saints' feasts than the number of days in a whole year.

What will happen to us with such habits? We prioritize town festivals before paying land taxes, and when asked why there is no money, we say: “The price of coconut is too low!” But in our festivities, we have *lechon* (roast pig), delicious food, we dress up nicely just to show off to friends and acquaintances; after losing money on the festivities, we blame the government because the price of coconut is too low. It is also common in weddings to have large feasts. And to say the least, when there is a feast, the one hosting spends a lot of money. The money spent on the wedding clothes is also money! Why do we need to have a feast when our child gets married when it's not necessary to announce the marriage to the whole town? What I mean is, if we have a child to marry, we don't need the whole town to witness it, which will cost a lot of money, because you will have to feed everyone.

Many of us borrow money just to have a big feast when our child gets married. I, when I got married, went to Hong Kong with no witnesses. This is something I'm telling you now so that we don't spend money on things that are useless.

Let's think about what will happen to our livelihood if, in case, we lose the benefit of our country in the market of the United States, and because of this, let's stop excessive praying to God, because He cannot attend to us, He has a lot of work in heaven. We need to help ourselves. The government has nothing to give us. Whatever the government thinks, we need to work first, reduce spending money on things that have no history. If we don't do that, we will be enslaved again, in case we gain independence.

The toughness and strength of Japan do not come from its army, but from its national livelihood, so Japan will never die. It will not be defeated by other countries because the Japanese work even during typhoons and earthquakes that have not subsided. If that kind of disaster happened here, everyone would think the world was ending. But they continue to work on their tasks; they do not stop working, no matter what happens. There lies the strength of Japan. Loving to work, and that is the first thing we should remember, listen to me, my beloved provinces, because the livelihood of our race, we cannot save it if we Filipinos do not work. Let's rely on our strength, on our efforts. Then let's ask for help from God and the government.

I cannot solve the price of copra. The “excise tax” cannot be removed. I feel the discomfort of those two things. I also cannot lie to you. But all I can say is this: on the day the Congress first thought about imposing the “excise tax,” I asked and fought against that “tax.” When I didn't succeed in my fight, I then asked that the “excise tax” be returned to the Philippines, but there were stipulations and instructions on the use of the said money. Even so, even with the prohibitions, I expect them to grant my request, and build various coconut industries that will benefit the people.

Let's be enlightened. Your representatives you will elect will not help with the “excise tax.” Don't blame Lavides. He did what he could, and no one can do more than what Lavides did. What I and the government can do is: I will expedite the sending here of money to be used to repair the roads so that the unemployed workers can benefit. You may not know that I raised the wages of workers, and as soon as the two thousand allocated to Tayabas is spent, the workers will earn a peso a day. That is the only way I can help you. All villages will have schools next year, and when school resumes, there will be no poor children who cannot study. There will also be all the teachers needed. In all your villages, I will have the roads repaired.

Commissioner Guinto told me that you want to know about rice. I must inform you that the reason we established the NARIC is to prevent the price of palay (unhusked rice) from becoming too low, and to prevent the price of rice from rising too high. The difficulty with us is that we Filipinos give the rice trade to other people, and in this way, the rice traders are the ones who benefit. Like a saw, back and forth, it eats, and we Filipinos are the ones being eaten.

It is not possible for the NARIC to solve our situation suddenly, because as long as the sale of rice is not in the hands of Filipinos, whatever the NARIC does, someone will still raise the price. I know that in the next two days, the NARIC will lower the price of rice a little; but the price cannot be lowered without reason and justification. That matter is not in their hands.

The personnel of the NARIC were appointed by the President, and to the best of their ability, they are doing everything for the good of the citizens. On the day I see that what they are doing is wrong, I will remove them. It will not happen now what happened in the past when the price of rice rose so much that the poor could hardly afford to buy it, because as soon as the rice traders exploit too much, I will order rice to be brought from Saigon.

You can rely on me that if it were only within my power and I could do it, I would not neglect my provinces of Tayabas. You love me and I love you as well. I will do what I can to the best of my ability and the rest is up to you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library

Quezon, M. L. (1938). Speech delivered by His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines : at the capitol of Tayabas on Tuesday morning, September 20, 1938, explaining the “EXCISE TAX”. Manila : Bureau of Printing.