SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

STATUS OF THE COMMONWEALTH AND NATIONAL DEFENSE

[Delivered at a Luncheon Given in His Honor by the New York City Mayor’s Committee on Welcome, at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, New York, February 20, 1937.]

Mr. Mayor, Professor Finley, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I need not say that I feel highly honored by this luncheon, nor is it necessary for me to express my gratitude to Mayor La Guardia for the kind words he has spoken.

Mayor La Guardia’s reference to the days of the Revolution when I was a soldier in the Philippine Army, brings to my mind now one of the most thrilling moments of my life. I was captured in the mountains of Mariveles in 1899, and made a prisoner of war. The mountains of Mariveles face the Island of Corregidor, where there is now a great United States army post. Soon after I was elected to the Presidency of the Commonwealth, I again visited that post accompanied by the American Commanding General of the Philippine Department. As our boat approached the landing place, the roar of nineteen guns in salute to the President of the Philippines was heard, and as I landed, soldiers of the United States Army were there presenting arms to me—to me, the man who only a few years ago was a prisoner of that army! I want to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, I was thrilled. I was thrilled to witness the greatness and generosity of America, as represented in that act. Her own soldiers, her own army, the army against which I fought only yesterday, was there to do me honor.

Where and under what sky can we find a more generous act?

And so it has been the history of America in the Philippine Islands during all these years, a history of unselfish devotion to a duty self-imposed, of helping the Filipinos to improve their economic conditions, and to train them in the art of self-government, until at last, only a year and four months ago, the Government placed in the hands of the people of the Philippines the administration and government of their own affairs, retaining only for the United States the control of foreign affairs—this until the day when complete independence shall be granted.

The Government we have now in the Philippines has a Constitution of its own, framed and adopted by the Filipinos, approved by the President of the United States, and then, in a plebiscite, approved also by the electorate of the Philippines. This Constitution is mainly patterned after the Constitution of the United States, but with some very important differences. I wouldn’t care to say that our Constitution is an improvement upon your Constitution, but I do not want to say that such changes as we have introduced in our Constitution were introduced after thirty-five years of close study and observation of the workings of the Constitution of the United States.

One of these changes, for instance, is that our President is elected for six years instead of four, but he may not accept a second election. [ Applause ] The purpose of this amendment is to place the President in the position where he may feel primarily, if not only and exclusively, that he is the head of the nation, disconnected entirely from any political party or political considerations in the administration of the affairs of the country. [ Applause ]

The President, therefore, does not feel that he has to take into consideration either the dictates of his party, the attacks of the opposition, or the passing whims of the people.

He is permitted to sit in his office and, oblivious of the noise that is going on around him, study every question that is presented for his consideration and action with the single view of doing what in his opinion is best for the country at large. [ Applause ]

Another significant change in our constitution is that the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands cannot declare unconstitutional a law passed by the National Assembly and duly signed by the President, except by two-thirds vote of the Supreme Court. [ Applause ]

Third, the executive is given great powers. Perhaps it is due to this fact that some of the jolly writers of this country have been inclined to call me a legalized dictator, forgetting, evidently, that those are contradictory terms. A man cannot be a dictator under the Constitution if he exercises powers that are given him by the Constitution.

The President of the Philippines has great executive powers granted to him by the Constitution. He can veto specific items in appropriation bills, so that the “pork barrel” system, about which we hear so much, cannot get by the pen of the President. He can veto such things, and when he does veto any specific items, the Legislature has to override his veto by two-thirds vote. If and when the legislature appropriates more money than the President has recommended in his budget three-fourths of the vote of the National Assembly is required in order that such a provision may stand.

You can see, then, that our Constitution has profited from the experience of other countries.

There is one clause in the Constitution which may shock the great lovers of individual liberty and the advocates of peace at any price. That clause provides that the Government of the Commonwealth may require compulsory service from every citizen of the Philippines, whether in time of peace or in time of war. Under this clause the Philippine National Assembly has enacted a law making military training compulsory for every male citizen of the Philippines over eighteen years of age. [ Applause ]

Very recently I have noticed that this Law has been denounced in the United States as something which was had at the instigation of the War Department in Washington, for the purpose of getting the United States ready to attack Japan. There are things that are so absurd on their face that it is almost an insult to pay any attention to them, but I shall take the liberty of imposing upon your patience and say a few words on this because, in the first place, it is ridiculous to say that after America has been in the Philippines for thirty-five years when she did not think of using the Philippine people to invade Japan, now that she has established a self-governing Commonwealth and is committed to the granting of independence ten years hence, she is going to organize this army of Filipinos there.

Now, again, this would perhaps be a reasonable idea, if America were lacking in man power, but will a country like this, which was able to send to Europe three, four or five million men during the World War, need the four hundred thousand Filipinos that we can train within ten years to use arms? And are we, with our 450,000 Filipinos, going to be able to conquer Japan? That is ridiculous on its face.

If you had the idea of conquering Japan, it would be easier to load your transports with your own soldiers American soldiers, than first to go to the Philippines and pick up these Filipinos and take them over, which is ridiculous.

We are giving the Filipino youth military training for several purposes. One is whether the Philippines can defend themselves or not against foreign invasion it is the duty of every citizen to defend his country whether his country can win the struggle or not. Under our National Defense plan we do not assume that the Philippines can resist any and all attacks from the great powers, but we assume that we can put up sufficient resistance in the Philippines so that any nation that may want to attack the Philippines will think it over twice, bearing in mind the cost in life and money if it attacks a country that is prepared to defend itself.

But there is another reason for this. I want to say that if I were assured by God himself this moment that the Philippines will never be imperilled by any other country, I would still be in favor of giving the Filipinos military training.

Well, ladies and gentlemen, this talk of militarism has become very popular, but let me tell you this: Military training makes the man who receives that training a better citizen in time of peace. He learns discipline. He learns to recognize constituted authority. He learns to consider duty above personal convenience, and that is what I am trying to do. [ Applause ] That is what I am trying to do in the Philippines. I want every Filipino to know that he can only call himself a worthy citizen of a worthy country if he learns his duties before he demands his rights. [ Applause ]

Further, this National Defense plan of the Philippines includes training in vocational professions, so that the young man, after his training will be a better farmer, or he will be a better engineer, or whatever his vocation may be. So, please don’t pay much attention when you hear that we are militarizing the Philippines and that we are militarizing it for the purpose of attacking Japan with the Philippine Army, or for the purpose of giving President Quezon, the legalized dictator, the opportunity to whip the rest of the country with his soldiers.

As a matter of fact, the regular army of the Philippines will contain only ten thousand men,—ten thousand! Who is the dictator who can use ten thousand men to whip sixteen, seventeen, or eighteen million people, which is the population of the Philippines today, the majority of whom know how to use a rifle? Why, this talk is not worth any further discussion and, therefore, I am going to pass to another subject.

I am proud to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that, in spite of the fact that one of the fears of those who doubted the preparation of the Filipinos for self-government was that we would be bankrup, as soon as the power of disposing of our finances was left in Filipino hands, I am proud to say that the Philippine Treasury never had a greater surplus than it has today. [ Applause ] I have 50,000,000 pesos unencumbered surplus in the Philippine Treasury; in other words, I have 50,000,000 pesos more over all our expenses at the end of the first year of the Government of the Commonwealth. [ Applause ] This is in spite of the fact that we have introduced public improvements that were of immediate benefit to the country. We have increased the number of our roads, the number of our hospitals, the number of our schools, and this increase in our surplus was not due to the fact that we have been going after the taxpayer in the form of increasing taxes. We have been going after the taxpayer who heretofore did not pay his taxes; in other words, we made the collection of taxes effective. By doing that, we did not have to overburden the taxpayer.

So we have in the Philippines a government where the land tax in the provinces is only 7/8 of 1 per cent and in the City of Manila, 1/2 per cent, as against 2.79 of Mayor La Guardia in the City of New York. [ Laughter and applause ]

Proceeding—I know that I am off the air now but I suppose I may further take advantage of your indulgence. [ Applause ] Our income taxes, for instance, are the lowest in any country in the world. Our highest tax, income tax on 3,000,000 pesos or over, is 30 per cent. If one has an income of $200,000,000 in the Philippine Island, he won’t pay more than 30 per cent. That is, therefore, the place for all the Wall Street folks. [ Laughter ] extend to them a very cordial invitation this noon. They can go there and pile up their money. I do not promise, however that ten years from now we may not be trying to do to them what is being done to them in this country

Just at this time we think that we should not scare people who have some money to invest, because we assume that the man who has some money to invest wants to make some profit for himself from the money that he is investing and, therefore, we are leaving him plenty; and we don’t forget the workingman, either. We are trying to expropriate all the large landed estates for the purpose of selling them back on very easy terms to the man who works the land.

You know, ladies and gentlemen, that I am one of those who believe that no man has the right to own more land than he can work. Of course, I am not going to apply that literally for, if I did, I suppose many of the Filipinos would be running away from the Philippines; but there is a happy medium. In this happy medium the purpose of the Government should be to have as many people owning their land as possible. No better weapon can be placed in the hands of a country against Communism than the ownership of land in the hands of the small man in the district. [ Applause ]

And what of the future? Eight years and four months hereafter, under the terms of the Independence Act the Philippines should be independent. There are two provisions in this Independence Act which are worthy of notice. One of them provides that not later than two years prior to the establishment of the Philippine Republic, the President of the United States shall call a Congress of the representatives of the Government of the Philippines and the Government of the United States, for the purpose of discussing the future trade relations between the two countries and, if a common ground is found, to make that the policy of this Government after the independence of the Philippines has been granted.

I take it that the reason why the Independence Act contains this clause is that the Congress of the United States is aware of the opportunities that there are in the Philippines for American trading. Today the Philippines is the seventh best customer of the United States, and as she grows in population and in wealth, this trade will proportionately grow, provided the conditions under which the trade is carried out are as favorable as they are today.

The Philippines, ladies and gentlemen, is a growing country and a rapidly growing one. In 1922, I think, or in 1920, the last census of the Philippines was taken, and we had about ten million people. We now have from sixteen to eighteen million people. Recently we have discovered that almost every island of the archipelago has rich gold mines, and the Government of the Commonwealth is doing everything in its power to promote the development of these gold mines.

There are some people who believe that we even have oil—but we have iron, we have coal, and we have almost everything that is required in war, and those are very expensive and necessary things in these days, for in spite of our hopes that there may never be war, because the World War was fought to end war, in these days everybody is fearful that there may be another war. The Philippines, therefore, is a territory that is potentially a very rich country, and a potentially very rich country is a fine market for anybody who has something to sell.

Of course, that is not going to be a one-sided proposition. On our part we will be demanding as much as you will want from us, which will mean that there could be some reciprocal trade agreements between your country and the Philippines.

Another clause of the Independence Act authorizes the President of the United States, after independence shall have been granted, to negotiate with the Government of the Philippine Republic for the establishment of naval reservations in the Philippines for the United States. I care to say nothing about that. That is something that will have to be discussed between this Government and the Government of the Philippine Republic once the Philippines is independent, and by that time, if it will take eight more years, I am afraid I shall be dead, so I prefer to say nothing more about it.

I do want, however, before I close, to call your attention to the fact that while our political affiliations are getting looser and looser, our trade relations and other kinds of relation are getting tighter.

Only recently you have inaugurated this Pan-American Airways that has put New York nearer to Manila than New York was to Honolulu two years ago. You can go from New York to Manila now in seven days, and perhaps in less. That means that we are getting closer to one another, that our association, culturally, commercially and otherwise, is getting closer than when you first went to the Philippines.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us hope that America and the Philippines, after they have been politically separated, may always be joined by ties of friendship and cultural and commercial relationships. [ The audience arose and applauded ]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library