Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On England and the Philippines

[Delivered at a Dinner in Honor of Lord Rothermere at Malacañan Palace, Manila, October 12, 1936]

My Lord, Gentlemen:

It affords me great pleasure to welcome to our shores one of the most distinguished Britishers, His Lordship, our guest of honor tonight. I take it that most of those who are gathered around this table know that at one time England took Manila, and that if she had wanted it she could have taken the Philippines from Spain.

Sometimes it is a question in my mind as to what would have been the Philippine Islands, what the history of this country would have been, if England, instead of Spain, had remained here during the last two hundred years. I suppose this is not an appropriate occasion for me to answer that question. I mentioned this fact only to show that we are not altogether strangers. Moreover, the English community in these Islands has contributed to a very large extent to the development of our commerce, and it is with satisfaction that I am able to state on this occasion that we only have praise for the conduct of every British subject who resides in the Philippines. [ Applause .]

I think that it is a Britisher, a very prominent business man in Manila, who has expressed absolute faith and confidence in the future of the Philippines under a government managed by Filipinos. To prove that he was sincere he has sold every security that he had abroad and invested it in the Philippines since the inauguration of the Commonwealth. No man can give better evidence of his faith in a government and a people. No man can give better evidence not only of his faith but also of his interest and his affection for a people than this gentleman to whom I refer for the best evidence that we can give is only that it would cost us money should our confidence be misplaced.

It is a privilege to us to entertain Lord Rothermere here tonight. I hope that although his sojourn is only for a very few hours, he has met a sufficient number of our people to enable him to form some judgment as to the character of the Filipinos and has seen the conditions prevailing in the country, and that when he goes back to England he will use those powerful means that he has at hand to acquaint not only England but entire Europe with the conditions prevailing in the Philippines.

We are among those who believe that the presence of England in the Far East is in the interest of peace and of civilization. It is our desire that the future relations between the English people and our people, between their Government and our Government, after we shall have become independent, will be one of close friendship in a spirit of mutual service. [ Applause. ]

Now, gentlemen, I am going to ask you to drink to the health of Lord Rothermere and to express the wish that he may at some future time pay us another visit, a much longer visit than the one he is paying us today.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library