PROVINCIAL CAPITOL OF CEBU, RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE



It is only human that when you can decide things in favor of your friends, you prefer to decide them on their side. But I had a duty to perform, and I had to perform that duty even against the wishes of my friends and regardless of what the people might think when I was convinced that what they were thinking was wrong.

Religion is a great force for good.

When I speak of social justice I mean precisely justice for everybody. It does not mean justice for the rich and injustice for the poor. Neither does it mean justice for the poor and injustice for the rich. It means justice to all the constituent parts of the community.

Those who have can only keep what they have if they do justice to those who work for them.

I have only one ambition left in this world. That ambition is to give the Filipino people an honest, efficient, and fair government.

Progress is impossible to attain without peace. No country can grow rich without peace. Peace is the basis of every good thing in life, and peace, in order to be permanent and enduring, must be, and should be, based not only on bayonets but also on the contentment of the people.

The people, the masses, can only have confidence in their government by the manner in which they are governed in their respective municipalities.

The poor people can only believe that they can get justice from this Government if the justices of the peace give it to them in their respective districts.

There is only one way to show me that you are 100 per cent with me; not by shouting “Mabuhay si Quezon!”; not by applauding Quezon; not by giving Quezon a warm reception as you are giving him now; not even by voting for Quezon; but by performing faithfully your duties as Filipino citizen and by doing your obligations as officials of the province.

Let us have peace, peace based on justice, peace based on cooperation, peace based on the common desire to see this country of ours the greatest nation on this part of the globe.



Mr. Governor, Mr. Vice-President Osmeña, His Grace, My Dear Friends:*

Today is a great day for the Province of Cebu. An issue which has been discussed in your political platform for many years has been closed forever. It would be foolish to ignore the fact that in the erection of this magnificent building, which will testify to the great efforts made by your ancestors, there was a strong opposition.

There are people who prefer to ignore facts, believing that by so doing those facts would cease to exist. In my life, both as an individual and a public man, I have always faced facts squarely. So I am facing the facts when I started any remarks this evening that before you succeeded in building this capitol you went through a long and hard fight.

But this is not against the people of Cebu. Quite the contrary, it speaks highly of your patriotism and courage. We have every reason to believe that those who opposed the erection of this building were inspired by high public motives. They did it in the performance of their duty as citizens of the Province of Cebu.  On the otherhand, those who insisted that this building should be built, and built here, had the right to believe that they too acted in good faith and in obedience to what they thought was in the interest of the public.

I want to say to you right now that I myself had very serious doubts as to whether this building should be built here or not.  When Governor Cabahug submitted this matter to me, after my inauguration as President of the Philippines, I made a thorough investigation of the facts of the case before I finally acted on it. I came to Cebu and visited the place, I warned Governor Cabahug not to take the matter up with Vice-President Osmeña.  I did not talk to Vice-President Osmeña about it; I did not consult him. Instead, I ordered all the papers that remained for many years in the archives brought to me.

To tell you frankly, I did not want to approve the construction of this building for two reasons. First, because I was afraid that not only the good name of the Government of the Philippines but also that of Vice-President Osmeña would be involved; second, because I knew that those who opposed its erection were the men who stood by me here during the Anti-Pro fight.  and it is only human, ladies and gentlemen, that when you can decide things in favor of your friends, you prefer to decide them on their side.  But I had a duty to perform, and I had to perform that duty even against the wishes of my friends and regardless of what the people might think when I was convinced that what they were thinking was wrong.

The President of the Philippines has a duty which he owes to the whole Filipino people: that if he must decide a question affecting one province, he must see to it that the best interests of that province are served. Now, I want to say to my friends my old political friends who stood by me here; that I finally decided on the erection of this building here; if you are really my friends, you should abide by my decision.  But even those who are not my friends should abide by my decision for it is a decision based not only on facts but also on what I consider to be for the best interest of the province. Furthermore, it is my duty to respect the decision of the government of this province. You should also abide by my decision because your own eyes at this solemn moment tell you that I am right.  Look at this building! What a magnificent building worthy of the people of Cebu!  Look from the other side of this building, and see those blue mountains before you! So I congratulate the people of Cebu!

There is, however, one man here today who should be sad and lonesome. Who that man is, even the most scrutinizing among you cannot detect. He is not in your mind. Well, ladies and gentlemen, the unlucky man of Cebu today is Governor Buenaventura Rodriguez, because it is my purpose to dismiss him from his high position and, instead, appoint myself governor of Cebu.  He is committing a great crime, for he has dared to have an office that is even larger than that of the President of the Philippines.

I congratulate Vice-President Osmeña. I am not congratulating him for the erection of this building, but for the vision that he had almost thirty years ago when he conceived the great project of improving and enlarging the City of Cebu. It was after the great fire of Cebu that Vice-President Osmeña conceived of a new City of Cebu. At the time when he envisioned what we are now seeing here, I am positive that no other Filipino in the Philippines had such ideas about a modern city as he had. At the time it would have been inconceivable to have a great project as what you have now. I do not say that everything that Vice-President Osmeña has done here, as a leader, is well done. It would be childish for me to tell the people of Cebu who Vice-President Osmeña is. You certainly know him as a public official of this province better than I do. I am not going to enter into a discussion of his political career as a public official. But I may boldly say here in the presence of this great audience, that when the Vice-President is gone the consensus of the people of Cebu would be that he was the great builder of this province.

It may be that he has been at times a leader more of the Province of Cebu than of the Philippines. But if he has been so, certainly the Cebuanos should not be the ones to criticize him for that. I want to say to you that I have been in public office as long as Vice-President Osmeña. As President of the Philippine Senate, I wielded a very great influence in the Government. But I invite you all to come and visit Tayabas and to compare it with Cebu. Well, I am not implying that Vice-President Osmeña has done better than I, nor the reverse. I am only asserting that Vice-President Osmeña will be recognized by posterity as the great builder of Cebu.

I will not speak to you of his achievements as one of the greatest leaders of our people, because I have not come to campaign for his candidacy as my successor. Besides, I still have friends in Cebu who want me to be reelected in spite of the provisions of the Constitution to the contrary. I have only referred to what Vice-President Osmeña has done for Cebu, because it is fitting to make that statement on this occasion.

I congratulate Governor Cabahug for having built this capitol. I congratulate him and the members of his Board. I also congratulate Governor Rodriguez because he is going to be the beneficiary of what Governor Cabahug has done.

But above all, I congratulate from the bottom of my heart the people of Cebu. I congratulate you, because you are worthily represented in the Executive Department by two secretaries who occupy the most important portfolios in the Government. The two most important activities of the Government—education and health on the one hand, and public works and communications on the other—are in the hands of two Cebuanos: the Vice-President, who is the Secretary of Public Instruction, and ex-Governor Cuenco who is Secretary of Public Works and Communications. You should be proud of Secretary Cuenco. He is a man of honesty and integrity, a man with a courage and conviction that do honor to him and to this province. In the National Assembly, no province is represented by more influential, more patriotic, and more devoted representatives other than Cebu.

I said before that I did not come to advocate the candidacy of Vice-President Osmeña as my successor, but I must tell you now that I have come to advocate the candidacy of your representatives. And I am recommending alike the reelection of those who were formerly Pros and Antis.  You should not have any political fight this coming election. You must go ahead and elect them. If, however, the Frente Popular presents its candidates, then fight the Frente Popular.

Now, I am going to touch on a few points of a rather ticklish public question. I will speak on religious instruction in the public schools for two reasons: first, because the members of the National Assembly from Cebu were practically unanimous in supporting the bill, and second, because His Grace, the Archbishop of Cebu, is with us here.  I want to say to you that at first, I was inclined to favor the bill. I was even hoping that the National Assembly would pass a bill that is constitutional. I wanted to approve the bill, because I firmly believe that it is not only for the best interest of the individual but also for the best interest of the State, that the children be instructed in the principles of their respective religions.

Religion is a great force for good. But after I had studied the law as it was passed, and after I had gone over the fountain of that legislation when it had been first enacted, I came to the conclusion that, much to my regret, I had to veto the bill, because I found it unconstitutional. However, I did not stop there; I went further and studied the question of whether the Constitution should be amended or not. My honest conviction—and it is a conviction that I have not only as a public official but also as a Catholic—that we better not touch the Constitution at all.

That I believe in religious instruction, I have demonstrated by sending my own children to colleges where they receive religious instruction. But it is one thing to teach religion as a part of the curriculum in a religious college and it is another thing to teach it in the public schools. If we are going to amend the Constitution with reference to religious instruction in order that the work that has been accomplished so far may not be wasted, and for that amendment to amount to something, religious instruction should be made a part of the curriculum in the public schools, otherwise we will be doing nothing more than what we are doing now.

In a country like the Philippines, where we have so many religions, and where every religion is entitled to an equal recognition by the Government, to make religious instruction a part of the curriculum will be to bring chaos to the school. In the first place, it is true that when it comes to religion the people are not very tolerant whether in the Philippines or anywhere else. This is especially true in the Philippines, for the reason that we are a new nation. We have only thirty-five or forty years behind us on this question of religious tolerance. Well, imagine five different ministers teaching five different religions at the same time under the same building. If that would be the case, everybody would devote himself only to the teaching of his religion; nobody would interfere with the other’s religion. That is all right only in theory, but not in practice.

The Catholics in the Philippines constitute an immense majority of our population. I take it that the Catholics believe that if religious instruction would be made a part of the curriculum, the greatest beneficiary would be the Catholic Church. I am afraid that that may not be always so. It is a very dangerous thing to even permit the Government to have anything to do with the church. This does not mean, however, that the Government will not have anything to do with the church. It will be perfectly right for the Government to do something with the teaching of religion if this is made a part of the curriculum. But suppose we have a President who is a zealous Catholic—one who entertains some prejudices against other religions while he has strong inclinations in favor of his own religion—he would directly or indirectly exercise his influence in favor of the teaching of the Catholic religion. The majority of you who are Catholics will say, all right, that is fine, let me do it. But suppose the next President happens to be a non-Catholic; suppose, for instance, he is Vicente Sotto —I mention his name because he comes from this province and I know that he is not fully in accord with the teachings of the Catholic church−the result would be only chaos and confusion. If the Catholic President feels that he can favor the Catholic church, Vicente Sotto will certainly believe that he can also favor any church other than that of the Catholics.

Now, if and when such a situation arises, we who are Catholics and who compose the majority of our population, what shall we say? Shall we say that that is not right? If we say that it is right for a President to favor the Catholic Church, end if we bear in mind that this Government must be fair and impartial to all religions, we should recognize that the President who helps other religions is also right.

And I say this: if the teaching of the Catholic religion is made a part of the curriculum, the final power and responsibility for conducting classes will be, in the last resort, in the hands of the Government. If there are complaints from the priest of one church or of another, the decision will be rendered by the Executive Department of the Government, and this department may decide those questions in favor of his own religion regardless of the merits of the case. Now, what would be the consequence of that? The consequence would be that the Catholics, being in the majority, would want their religion protected in the schools and always make that question an issue whether a candidate is a Catholic or not. That means that a religious strife will always be involved in every election,

And now, I want to ask every Filipino, whether he is a Catholic, a Protestant, an Aglipayan or of whatever sect he may be, these questions: Do you want religion to be discussed in politics? Do you want to mix religion with Government? I am sure you will answer, “No.” Yes, you don’t want that to happen.

My countrymen, it will be a sad and tragic day when the Filipino people begins to make religion a political issue. The entire history of the human race shows in letters of blood how terrible was the fight for religion. If we are all Catholics, and only Catholics, I will say, all right, let us keep the unity of the Filipino people in their religion. But we are not all Catholics in the Philippines. The few, even if only a few, who do not profess the Catholic religion, are as much entitled to respect as we are.

We must, therefore, maintain in all its integrity the doctrine of the separation of Church and State. In the old days, in the early years of Christianity when the sovereigns were Catholics who recognized the supreme authority of the Pope over them, the unity of the Church and State favored the Catholic religion, because, in the last resort, the Chief of the State recognized the Pope. But that time has passed. In our days, the union of the Church and State simply means the control or attempted control of the church by the Government. So it is better to keep the Church and State separate.

Now I am going to talk to you on another subject. You have heard of social justice, and I want to tell you what I mean by social justice. When I speak of social justice I mean precisely justice for everybody. It does not mean justice for the rich and injustice for the poor. Neither does it mean justice for the poor and injustice for the rich. It means justice to all the constituent parts of the community.

I am emphasizing at this juncture, justice for the poor because in our country the poor people need the protection of the Government. Let us tell the truth here. For centuries past, we have been accustomed, to treat the poor as unworthy of any consideration by the powerful. We think that the poor have only such right as we may give them. When we pay them a salary, we do not consider if the salary is sufficient to support them; we only take into account what we want to pay them. When we pay a poor workingman his wage, we don’t consider what he needs for the support of his family. We pay him what we think he will accept, because he has to accept it.

In religion—I am going to talk on religion now—the real Catholics know that the command of our Lord is to love one another. Love is emphasized by the kind treatment which give our fellowmen. Love is manifested by giving our fellowmen what they are entitled to have.

But if you don’t want me to talk of Christian love, let me talk to you of human selfishness and convenience. I want to tell those who have, that they can only keep what they have if they do justice to those who work for them. You pay a man forty, fifty, or sixty centavos for a day’s work. That man has been working all day. That man has a wife and children. He has to eat; his wife and his children have to eat also. They also need clothes at least to cover themselves Do you think that a daily wage of forty, fifty, or sixty centavos is enough for them, because with that amount they can buy a little corn or rice and some fish? If you divide that food among seven persons, there will be just a small portion for everyone. Do you expect them to eat only that? If they are hungry still, they remedy their hunger by drinking water. Do you think that if they have a pair of clothes for the year, that is enough? Do you think that a poor man’s daughter or son will have more than enough if he has a pair of clothes while the daughters and sons of the rich are having clothes by the dozens?

Now, let me ask you, my friends and countrymen: What do you think the poor man will feel when he is treated that way? We have people in our country who charge an interest of 25 per cent on money loaned. We have corporations here that pay dividends of 50 per cent on capital invested. And, surprisingly, those corporations refuse to raise the wages or salaries of their employees!

No, we cannot go indefinitely with this situation. The day of reckoning will come. We are organizing a citizen army and we are expecting this army to protect our country from any foreign invasion. But remember that the majority of the men who are given military instruction are the sons of the poor. If these men see that their parents or they themselves are not treated justly by our Government and our people, they are not going to defend their country.

I have only one ambition left in this world. That ambition is to give the Filipino people an honest, efficient, and fair government.  I want every man and woman under the Filipino flag to feel that no matter how lowly he or she maybe, he can come to this Government and receive the protection of the law. My ambition is to see that in this country of ours the workingman will be given his rights without the necessity of working for them.

Progress is impossible to attain without peace. No country can grow rich without peace. Peace is the basis of every good thing in life, and peace, in order to be permanent and enduring, must be, and should be, based not only on bayonets but also on the contentment of the people. I want to remind the officials of this Government,–national, provincial, and municipal,—that they are in office primarily to serve the interest and welfare of the people and not to promote their selfish interests. They are not in the Government to commit abuses against the people. On the contrary, they are in office to prevent the commission of abuses by the other officials of the Government. I hope every official of the Province of Cebu will bear in mind that this is his bounden duty.

In speaking of officials of the Government, I am referring particularly to the justices of the peace who must bear in mind that they are the only officials to whom the poor can appeal for the redress of their grievances. The people, the masses, can only have confidence in their government by the manner in which they are governed in their respective municipalities. The poor people can only believe that they can get justice from this Government if the justices of the peace give it to them in their respective districts. I want every justice of the peace to feel that he occupies a very important position. I want him to know that he does not have to please anybody, that he does not have to be the friend of anybody, in order to keep his position. All he has to do is to comply with his duties. The justice of the peace must be fair, honest, and courageous. If he performs his duties well and good, he need not fear anybody, for he will remain in his post. But if he mixes in politics, or allows himself to be the instrument for the persecution of somebody, or he himself commits abuses, nobody can save him, for I will remove him from office.

In his introductory remarks, the governor said that the people of Cebu are 100 per cent pro-Quezon. Well, I want to tell you that there is only one way to show me that you are 100 per cent with me; not by shouting “Mabuhay si Quezon!” (Long live Quezon!); not by applauding Quezon; not by giving Quezon a warm reception as you are giving him now; not even by voting for Quezon; but by performing faithfully your duties as Filipino citizens and by doing your obligations as officials of the province.  You can show me that you, whose duty is to administer justice, are pro-Quezon by doing justice to everybody.

I am proud and happy to be here; proud and happy, because I am convinced by what I have just seen with my own eyes that it is true that the people of Cebu are 100 per cent pro-Quezon.  I have only one request to make and that is: please continue the good work that you have done in the past. By that I mean that you continue along the road of progress and culture. But I advise you not to continue any further in your political strifes and controversies. Let us have peace, peace based on justice, peace based on cooperation, peace based on the common desire to see this country of ours the greatest nation on this part of the globe.

My countrymen, I wish you success and God bless you.

* Associate Justice Manuel C. Briones, upon designation by the President, acted as interpreter.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library