Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the new policy on education, public works, and clean and honest Government

[Delivered in front of the Provincial Building in Tacloban, Leyte, June 10, 1938]

Mr. Governor, People of Leyte:

I am happy to be with you here, but I am sorry that you have to get wet in order to hear me. I will not detain you long for we are in the rain.

I know that the people of this province are informed of the purpose of my administration; namely, to give our country a good, clean, and honest government. And I feel sure that of the provinces of the Archipelago that are well governed, the Province of Leyte is certainly one of them. [ Applause ] I have no doubts that here you have a governor who does not intend to use his office to promote his own interest. Governor Martinez did not seek this position; he was requested by your leaders to serve the province.

I have a man of my absolute confidence who hails from Leyte; that man is your former representative and senator; he is now one of my advisers, but he will very soon leave his post for a better one. I am speaking of Judge Enage. [ Applause ] There is no man in the Government of the Philippines other than Judge Enage in whose integrity, honesty, and sense of justice I place greater confidence. I know that in the past you did not always vote for Judge Enage. But I have known Judge Enage in the Senate, and I know that he is one of the best public servants we have in the Philippines. Judge Enage has never abused my confidence in him to prosecute any man from the Province of Leyte. He has never abused that confidence to promote his friends if they did not deserve the promotion. I, therefore, feel certain that you must be having a good government here now because Judge Enage tells me so.

I want to take this opportunity to tell your public officials, from the governor down to the last policeman, that it is my hope and expectation that they will cordially cooperate with me in my efforts to give our country the best government that it has ever had. Particularly, I want them to make the poor man, the man who lives in the barrio, feel that under our Government his rights are as much protected as those of the most powerful or the richest man in the Philippines. So I want every mayor, every councilor, every teniente del barrio , to tell the people that if they have any grievances to make, they must present them to the proper authorities for correction and redress. Particularly, I want the justices of the peace to realize that although they are the lowest officials in the judiciary, yet they hold the most important position. The common man in the Philippines, the man who lives in the far distant barrio, will know whether this is a just government or not only by the manner in which the justices of the peace perform their duties. I want every justice of the peace to know and feel that he owes his position to nobody in particular. It is true that I listened to the recommendations of those who knew possibly the best for appointment to these positions, but I did not appoint the justices of the peace in order that they may serve the interest of those who recommended them, but in order that they may do justice to the people.

I know that in the past your justices of the peace were political leaders. Now, there is no use denying that; I know it; I have been in politics for thirty years. I have forgiven and forgotten every justice of the peace who mixed in politics in the past because that was a fault everybody committed. But we are starting a new book, and, from now on, no justice of the peace must mix in politics except at the risk of losing his job. I want the justice of the peace to have the confidence of the people. I want him to make the people feel that they can go to him and obtain justice. The justice of the peace who does his duties well does not have to kiss the hand of anybody. The justice of the peace who performs his duties impartially, does not need to have political friends. His own protection will be the performance of his duties. But the justice of the peace who mixes in politics and decides questions in favor of his relatives or friends regardless of the merits of the cases at bar, cannot be saved even by the biggest man in the Philippines. [ Applause ]

I say the same thing about every other government official of the Philippines. Everybody is my friend, but nobody is my particular friend. Every one who complies with his duty is my friend, but nobody who violates the law or neglects to do his duty is my friend. [ Applause ] I have taken the oath to enforce the laws, and I will enforce them regardless of everybody. [ Applause ] My duty is to serve the people and the country, to lay the foundations of a Philippines that will live forever and be inhabited by a people who love peace and are prosperous and happy.

Fortunately, we have now at our disposal sufficient funds to start on our program of public works. At its last session, the National Assembly appropriated a vast sum for the construction of our national highways. For the province of Leyte some eight hundred thousand pesos will be spent. I am, therefore, confident in the hope that the people who want to work can be given work in the construction of these roads, and it is my order that the people be given work without considering their political affiliation. [ Applause ] Those who need work, and want to work, will be given work. This is the instruction that I am giving now to the district engineer of Leyte; he is the official responsible to the National Government in the construction of roads. I expect him to consult the governor and the town mayors in order that he will know the men who need the work most. I want him also to supervise his capataces for I don’t want them to have their protegees. Above all, I don’t want graft in the public works, and I want the governor, the engineer, and every official of this province, to go after the men who are doing some kind of connivance in these public works in order to defraud the Government.

We are going to construct more public buildings, open more schools, and employ additional teachers.

(“Your Excellency.'” shouted a man from the crowd.)

What is your question?

(“Your Excellency: in 1934 the Municipal Council of Tacloban imposed a tuition fee for the intermediate grades. In 1937, although the Municipal Council abolished the tuition fee, yet the Division Superintendent of Schools and the Supervising Teacher of Tacloban have been collecting the fee despite the fact that they have no authority from the Municipal Council.”)

I have here with me the Director of Education and he tells me that it has not been abolished because the plan of the Municipal Council to abolish it met with the disapproval of the Bureau of Education. I want to be interpreted correctly in this matter. The complaint of the gentleman, on behalf of the Parents’ Association, is that the school authorities are collecting a tuition fee for the intermediate schools. He says that in 1934 the Municipal Council of Tacloban approved a resolution imposing the tuition fee. But, he says further, in 1937 the Council approved another resolution prohibiting the collection of the tuition fee. Now, his complaint is that the Superintendent of Schools continues to collect the tuition fee despite the resolution adopted by the Municipal Council. The Superintendent of Schools claims, and I think he is right, that this last resolution of the Municipal Council of Tacloban had no effect because it was not approved by the Bureau of Education. Now it makes no difference whether or not the Superintendent of Schools has the right to do that. The practice is: if the Municipal Council of Tacloban does not want the tuition fee because the Council can appropriate money from the municipal funds for all the intermediate grades, I will tell the Superintendent of Schools right now not to collect those fees any more. But if the Municipal Council does not want to appropriate the money, and it does not want also the tuition fee collected from the children, I will tell the Superintendent of Schools to close all the intermediate schools in this town.

Now, what do you want me to do? I want the Mayor of Tacloban to answer this question: Do you have enough money to support the intermediate schools here?

(The Mayor: “No, Your Excellency.”)

Do you want the intermediate schools to be kept open?

(The Mayor: “Yes, Your Excellency, but we cannot do that because we have no money.”)

Do you want them open or not?

(The Mayor: “We would like them, but the Municipal Treasurer says we have no money.”)

Call the Municipal Treasurer.

(Addressing the Municipal Treasurer). Can the municipal government pay for all the intermediate schools here?

(The Municipal Treasurer: “Well . . . .”)

That is enough.

I want to tell you this: the National Government is going to assume the responsibility of maintaining the primary schools. Next year we will appropriate the necessary amount for the opening of primary schools in every barrio, and the National Government will pay the expenses of maintaining the schools including the salaries of the teachers. The intermediate schools will be under the responsibility of the municipal government. In other words, from now on, the National Government will pay every cent spent for the primary schools, while the municipal government will be fully responsible for the maintenance of the intermediate schools.

Now, let the people decide what they want: if the municipal government has sufficient income to open all the intermediate schools, it should appropriate the money for the purpose; if it does not have enough money, the people must pay the tuition fee in order to have the intermediate schools. Now, you people decide whether or not you want to pay the tuition fee; if you don’t want to pay the fee, close your schools; if you want to pay, keep them open.

Well, I suppose the tuition fee will not be obligatory. The tuition fee will be paid by the parents of children who want to study in the intermediate schools. But there is one exception to that. If a poor boy or girl proves to be unusually bright and good, the National Government will assume the responsibility for his or her education in the intermediate schools. I can say the same thing now about the high schools. By this, I mean that the academic high schools will no longer be supported by the Government. If anybody wants his child to acquire an academic instruction in the high school, then he must pay the necessary tuition fee.

I will explain to you now the reason for this new policy of the Government. Up to the present, the Government has been committed to the policy of opening all the primary, intermediate, and high schools; but, because there is not enough money to enable us to open primary schools in all the barrios, we have not been able to educate all the boys and girls who wish to attain even only a primary education. The result is that today there are still many illiterate children and grown-up boys and girls. Again, while we have complete primary and intermediate schools in the towns and high schools in the provincial capitals, yet we ordinarily have only one or two grades in the far-distant barrios. As a result of this policy many of the sons of the poor have not gone to any school at all.

So the policy of the National Government now is to open primary schools in all places so that every child of school age, particularly the sons of the poor who live in the farthest barrios, can acquire a primary education. We don’t want to deprive the child of the poor people at least of the knowledge necessary to enable him to read and understand his rights and duties. Now, after every poor boy and girl has gone through the primary school, the question of whether or not he should go to the intermediate school is entirely left to the municipal government. Then the question of entitling him to a higher education becomes the responsibility of the provincial government.

But I don’t want these boys and girls to take the secondary instruction without learning something useful in their daily life. We want to establish a secondary instruction that will be useful to the boy and girl who receive it. Our aim is to increase the people who make their living by producing something that will enrich both themselves and their country.

This is the present situation. Some poor boy finishes the high school course, but he does not know what to do except, perhaps, to be a clerk. He wants to be a clerk, but he can’t find a clerical job. This poor boy worked for four years to earn a secondary education; his parents sacrificed much in order to get him that instruction. Many of them still follow the profession of law or medicine, believing that in the end they could depend on a job for their livelihood. That means another six or seven years more of hard work and sacrifice for their parents. But what is the result? He leaves the university, but he cannot do any work. He has no job; he can’t find one. You have here a disappointed boy with very unhappy parents. They see that their sacrifice did not amount to anything; it did not help their boy or girl after several years in college.

In a final effort to land a job, the poor boy asks a recommendation from the town mayor; he goes to his governor or assemblyman for the same purpose. Then, everybody promises him a job but nobody gives him work. Before the election all promised him a job, but after the election everybody forgot entirely the promise. And the boy or his parents believe that the politician has deceived them. Perhaps, he was recommended to the President of the Philippines; but, let me tell you, the President of the Philippines does not have many jobs to give! Now that poor, disappointed boy becomes a demagogue. He starts his career by attacking everybody in his speeches. He is disappointed; he is unhappy; he thinks that he is not being justly treated.

Well, we have to change that policy. We must educate our boys and girls to be good fanners, good manufacturers, good producers. We have here a big and rich country. All that we need is to know how to make this country produce more.

I will tell you now why Japan, as a nation, is turning to be a success. Japan is successful not because she has a big army or navy. Japan is a very poor country; even the mountains are cultivated. If the Japanese people were to depend only upon their land, they would starve. But the Japanese does not live only on the land; he lives on what he produces through the many industries in Japan. And Japan is competing successfully with Europe and America. The reason for this is that in Japan every man and woman is taught some industry in the school. If the Japanese works in the farm, he makes good because he learned what he is doing. If a carpenter, the Japanese turns out to be an efficient one because he studied the technique in school. In fishing, the Japanese is an efficient fisherman because he studied that work in school. Do the Japanese come here in Leyte to fish? (“Yes, Your Excellency!” answered the crowd.) Now, you can’t compete with the Japanese! Why? Because you do not know to fish the modern way. You know that if we could the Filipinos how to fish we could make this country very rich just from our fish resources. You find out how much a Japanese makes when he goes out fishing, and you will discover to your amazement that he makes more money than a poor Filipino lawyer. Some of our lawyers can hardly make one hundred pesos in a month; but the Japanese fishermen who come here make more than that sum in the same period.

This is the policy that we will adopt. We will teach our countrymen to be good fishermen, good carpenters, good farmers, and good producers, to enable them to make more money than the ordinary lawyer.

Now, my friends, I have talked more than I expected to. I want you to know that it is my desire to extend all possible help and coöperation to your governor and Board. Leyte is one of the promising provinces of the Philippines. It is unfortunate that one of your products here—hemp—has gone down in price. In its last session, the National Assembly passed a law designed to help the hemp industry. Although I am not sure that the bill will remedy your situation, yet I will approve it in an effort to do something to help the hemp industry in the Philippines. We must do something for this very important industry. I want you to feel certain that if possible I will do all I can to bring about a relief to this industry.

My friends, I am happy to see you here, and goodbye to all.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1939). Messages of the President (Vol. 4, Prt. 1). Manila : Bureau of Printing.