NON-PARTISANSHIP IN THE GOVERNMENT AND GOVERNMENT POLICIES



I want to do away with partisanship in the government, that kind of partisanship which protects friends even if they are guilty or prosecutes enemies even if they are innocent.

Officials in a democracy deserve more respect, and are entitled to a greater cooperation on the part of the people, than those in a monarchy or an autocracy, for when you respect your officials in a democracy you are showing your respect for your own people.

Don’t wait for any manna; we can only progress if we exert efforts.



I have asked the men who are carrying those placards to stay because I want to know who are responsible for them. I want to know who wrote their wordings or caused them to be written. Every one of those placards contains a charge, a very serious charge, against the governor. The charges are presented to me, the President of the Philippines, in a public meeting, and I cannot ignore them. It is my duty to locate the person presenting these charges and to ask him to prove them. Now, I ask the question: Who is responsible for those placards? (“The Catbalogan Federation of Labor,” shouted a man in the crowd). Who is the man? (“Alejandro Cui,” was the answer). Let him come up. (Then some one said Cui was not present).

I am going to appoint Judge (Francisco) Enage, who is with me now, to investigate those charges. He is a man on whose impartiality and fairness I can entirely depend. If these charges are proven I shall take action against the governor; if they are not, I will instruct the provincial fiscal to prosecute those who made the charges.

I welcome the presentation of charges against government officials. In fact, one of the purposes of my visit to the provinces is to find out whether the officials of the Government are performing their duties or they are committing abuses. I am determined to have in our country a government that will do justice to everybody. I am determined to punish all public officials who commit abuses. I want every government official to know that the authority given him has been granted for the purpose of serving the people and not maltreating them.

I want to do away with partisanship in the government, that kind of partisanship which protects friends even if they are guilty or prosecutes enemies even if they are innocent. I want to prove to the world that in a democracy it is possible to have a fair and just government without any consideration of politics. And let every official of the Government of the Philippines beware of his conduct, for he who does not cooperate with me in my desire to show that democracy can be efficient and fair, will suffer for it. That is what I want to say to the governor and to every mayor, councilor, teniente del barrio , policeman, and official of the National Government in the Province of Samar.

Now, I want to tell the people this much: the officials of this Government are chosen by you, by a majority of the people. It is, therefore, the duty of every citizen after every election is over, to respect the authority of the man who won in the election whether he belongs to his party or not, and at the same time to offer him his cooperation. There are those who believe that in a democracy the government officials are not to be respected. There are those who think that when you speak of the sovereignty of the people, you mean that government officials deserve no respect at all. Now, the officials in a democracy deserve more respect, and are entitled to a greater cooperation on the part of the people, than those in a monarchy or an autocracy, for when you respect your officials In a democracy you are showing your respect for your own people.

When the Chief Executive of the Philippines was an appointive governor-general, you respected him and obeyed his lawful orders because he was a lawful official. He was a lawful official vested with authority and power under the law that entitled him to your respect and obedience. But, now, in place of that governor-general, you have a Chief Executive who owes you his office. I am your Chief Executive; I am entitled to your respect and obedience because I am, under the Constitution, the highest authority of the land. Inasmuch as in my person I carry the representation of the nation, therefore, I am entitled to twice a greater respect and obedience from you than my predecessors. What I have said of myself as the Chief Executive of the nation, I say of your governor here. He was elected by you; to be sure, by the majority of the people of this province. Such being the case, it is the duty of the minority to recognize his authority.

Now, if those charges were made due to political differences only, I want to tell you that the author of those placards has committed a crime not only against Governor Abrigo but also against the Province of Samar. So, I welcome those charges if they are true, for I want to punish the official who betrays his trust. But, from the bottom of my heart, I condemn the men responsible for those placards if what they contain is false, for they have given evidence of their lack of sense of responsibility and patriotism, and they have also shown themselves to be unworthy members of this community.

Well, so much for those placards; they can disappear now if they want to. Judge Enage will come back here to investigate the charges, and the man who can talk for the labor organization can present his charges and his witnesses.

Now, I want to say something about the rice that is being sold to the men working in the construction of roads. The governor says that they may have something to eat. I believe that should not have been done, it is not a question of whether the Government has made or is realizing a profit in selling rice or not. Even if it is true that it has, and I suppose that up to the present time that is true, nevertheless, it should not have been done that way. But I can say that that was not the fault of your governor. He tells me that he has not been given the authority he asked for, to enable the provincial treasurer to send rice to the camp.

I visited some of these new road projects; I found that some roads are constructed up on the mountains, far from any town. I saw some workingmen go to the place of work carrying the rice on their shoulders. I told Director (Vicente) Fragante (of Public Works), who is with me here, that that was unfair to the workingmen. Those poor men should not be required to carry their own food on their own shoulder. So, I instructed him to establish camps in places where they are building roads through the mountains,

That must also be done here in Samar; they should have camps for the laborers, and the Government should supply them with government rice which sells cheaper than that sold by Chinese merchants. If the provincial treasurer cannot buy rice at a low price, then, from here I shall order the NARIC to send some rice. I don’t want those men working in the construction of roads to pay a high price for their rice. Those men are poor, and they ought to pay as little as possible for what they eat. Of course, as I have already said, if the National Government did not authorize the provincial treasurer to do that, then, it was not the fault of either the provincial treasurer or the governor. The governor did what he thought was proper so that the men who were working there would not die of hunger. But if the governor had entered into a connivance with the Chinese merchants, he should be punished.

Right now, I authorize the provincial treasurer to send rice to all the places where roads are under construction or in towns where the people cannot buy the cereal. The money should be taken from the fund appropriated for public works. And the price charged the workingmen should be exactly what the Government pays for that rice. If the Chinese merchants here are selling their rice at a high price, I will fill the next boat that comes from Manila with rice that is cheaper than theirs. If these merchants want to sell their rice to the Government, they must do so at the price of the NARIC.

All right, now, I want to tell you that we are spending a lot of money in Samar. About two million pesos will be spent for roads in this province. All these years, Samar has been a wilderness except for the towns. You have had no means of communication except small boats on a sea that is sometimes very rough. This becomes more pitiful if we read that every typhoon in the Philippines starts from Samar. When I read all these weather reports, I wonder why there are people still living in Samar. But, in the next three years, I expect the people of Samar to communicate with one another without the need of defying the ocean for there will be roads.

Now, I don’t want you to thank me for that. I have not done that yet. I only recommended a program of road construction to the National Assembly. The Assembly may or may not approve of it Therefore, in the last resort, the credit will go to the National Assembly, and as far as the Province of Samar is concerned, I want to tell you frankly that the gentlemen who have given you these roads are Assemblymen Azanza, Tancinco, and Bocar. Of course, you are also particularly fortunate in the fact that Marabut, the man who holds the key to the National Treasury, is from Samar.  Marabut is very strict about spending the public funds; but I have noticed that if the expenses are for Samar he is blind, he never sees the figures. Marabut has the duty of telling me whether the budget is balanced or not. He always protests when a contemplated expenditure is going to unbalance the budget; but when the added expenditure is for Samar, he finds some way of balancing the budget.

Well, gentlemen, I am no fool, and Marabut cannot deceive me. I am going to tell you why I am impartially in your favor. It is not because I am swayed by either Marabut, Azanza, Bocar, or Tancinco, but because the National Government has been quite unfair to the Province of Samar in the past. You have here a great island, an island that, as I said before, suffers from typhoons almost yearly. If there is an island in the Philippines that needs roads, it is the Island of Samar because your ocean is very dangerous. Yet you do not have roads. It is time that Samar should have roads, and whenever there is a necessity for money from the treasury I will help Marabut or your Assemblymen to get it.

In education, a new day has also dawned. We are going to have schools in every barrio. I have told you already what the Government today will do to help you. Now, I am going to tell what you should do in order that you may continue to deserve the help of the Government. It is your duty to be faithful, orderly, and good citizens. It is equally your duty to comply with your obligations as citizens. That means that you have to pay your taxes. But you must not believe that you can get money from the Government all the time, even if you do not pay your taxes, for what the Government has is the money paid by the people. There was only one time when the people subsisted not through their efforts but through the manna that came from heaven. The Old Testament says that when the Chosen People went to the Promised Land they were given manna for forty days and nights. Now, my countrymen, God is not going to give us anything to eat unless we work for it. Don’t wait for any manna; we can only progress if we exert efforts.

I don’t believe I want to say anything more to you. I hope that the officials of this province are going to do their duties well. I hope also that the people will comply with their obligations, respect their officials and cooperate with them.

In particular, I want the justices of the peace to be fair and impartial in the performance of their duties. I don’t want the justices of the peace to mix in politics. Neither do I want them to be the instrument of any political party. The justices of the peace should realize that they are occupying a very important position. Their position and the responsibility and duty that go with it demand that they render justice to the common man. As long as a justice of the peace performs his duties impartially, he need not fear anybody. No one in the Philippines can do him harm as long as he does his duties. But a dishonest justice of the peace—nay, a partial justice of the peace,—cannot be protected by anybody. Let us have a good government, my dear countrymen. Let us have a peaceful and prosperous people.

Just one more word and I will be through. I want to say to you that I have received the cordial cooperation of your Assemblymen in the execution of my policies. I hope that the next National Assembly would be composed of men who would render me and my administration the cordial cooperation and support that the present members of the National Assembly have rendered.

Now, one last word. The governor says that they have prepared a banquet for me. I thank them for that. I thank the people of this town and province who have made a sacrifice to have that banquet, for me. But I have sent a telegram to all the governors that I do not want banquets, because I do not favor every visit of a public official from Manila to cost money to the officials in the provinces. Sometimes they pay for this entertainment from their own pocket; at other times they pay from the provincial funds with the permission of the Secretary of the Interior. Well, I do not want them to use their own money or the money of the province. I am going to stop that practice; so I am going to show Governor Abrigo that when I say something I mean it. Therefore, I thank him for the banquet, but I am not going to attend it. In my absence, they can drink to my health if they wish to.

I am thankful to you for the warm reception you have given me. I am thankful to those beautiful girls who gave me these beautiful flowers. [ Long applause ]

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library