Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines Upon Signing Bill No. 212

[ Released on November 8, 1936 ]

SIGNING BILL NO. 212, DEPRIVING S.P.C.A. AGENTS OF THE POWER TO MAKE ARRESTS FOR VIOLATION OF LAWS ON CRUELTY TO ANIMALS

(Released to the Press, November 8, 1936)

I have signed Bill No. 212, which amends Act No. 1285 in such a way as to deprive agents of the S.P.C.A. of the power which they heretofore had to make arrests for violation of laws regarding cruelty to animals. I approved the bill in spite of the protests of the representative of the S.P.C.A. because in my opinion it is fundamentally wrong and contrary to every principle of good government to give any private individual or association police powers or to delegate to private institutions the performance of strictly governmental functions. The bill corrects this very serious defect in one of the laws existing in our statute books.

The cruel treatment of animals is an offense against the State penalized under our statutes. There is no difference whatever between a violation of this law and the violation of any other law. Therefore, it is the Government, through its properly constituted agencies, that should arrest violators of said law. Had the bill under consideration attempted to repeal the Acts which penalize the cruel treatment of animals, I would have vetoed it. But fortunately the National Assembly did not do this. Cruelty to animals is still a criminal offense and no change has been introduced as to its penalty.

In order that the law may be properly executed, I am issuing an executive order directing every mayor of a chartered city, every municipal president, the Commissioner of Public Safety and the provost Marshal General as head of the Constabulary Division of the Philippine Army to detail special members of the police force, local, national and the Constabulary, to watch, capture and prosecute offenders against the law prohibiting cruelty to animals. I wish to take advantage of this opportunity to call the attention of the people of the Philippines to the fact that all civilized nations treat their animals with the same care and consideration as they treat human beings. It speaks ill of a people to permit maltreatment of their animals, and I hope that the public in general will cooperate with the Government in stopping this shocking evil.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library