SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

SPAIN’S CONTRIBUTION TO FILIPINO CULTURE AND DEVELOPMENT

[Delivered upon the acceptance of the chest donated by the Compañia General de Tabacos de Filipinas to the Filipino people, at the Tabacalera Building, Manila, January 11, 1936.]

As I accept today with fullness of feeling, in the name of the people and Government of the Philippines, this pre­cious chest, which is an artistic jewel of the highest value as well as an index and exponent of the age-old fame of the Spanish craftsman, I wish to ask Señor Correa to be so kind as to convey to the Compañia General de Tabacos de Filipinas, of which he is the worthy representative, our gratitude for such a magnificent gift. To every heart attuned to the things of the spirit, the beauty and luster of this work of art is heightened by its exalted symbolism.

The materials—steel, gold, and marble—which compose this marvelous creation of Spanish art, represent with the delicate charm of allegory, the three phases of the sentiment which gave life to this donation; namely, the firmness of the steel, the purity in the gold, and the eternity in the marble, of the bonds of affection and of the spiritual oneness which bind us to the Spanish nation whose noble purposes are so felicitously interpreted by the Compañia General de Tabacos de Filipinas in offering this gift to the Filipino people.

This institution, though of Spanish origin, was born and has grown in our country. It has at all times shown the greatest interest in the things of our land, as evidenced, for example, by the valuable collection of books which the Company had been building up for many years and later transferred to our National Library. Coöperating with us with warm constancy in its agricultural and commercial activities, in the material and cultural development of our country, your Company has made honesty its slogan and fairness its tradition in all its dealings. It has, thus, in all its varied endeavors continued the labors initiated and undertaken by the Spanish nation for three centuries. Now that the Filipino people, after a long and arduous journey toward their political emancipation, have almost reached the goal, I am persuaded that it is but just to dedicate on this occasion our grateful and affectionate remembrance to our former mother country for her great work for our civilization and nationalism. Such accomplishment was principally the diffusion of the gospel, and it is due to this mission that the souls of our forefathers were unfolded to the light of the dogmas and teachings of the Christian religion, which have been transmitted to us, their descendants, as a sacred legacy and a dynamic tradition. Likewise, we owe to Spain the principles of Occidental education which she implanted in these Islands, according to the modes and standards found in Latin countries. But above all, we owe to Spain the preservation for the benefit of our own people, of the soil of our country, as well as the laying down, by means of religion and education, of the foundations of our national unity. It is, thus, that the Archipelago, composed of numerous and isolated islands, which in 1521 was discovered by Magellan and was but a geographical expression apparently without any common interest or aspiration, is today a compact and solid nation, with its own history, its heroes, its martyrs and its own flag, a people uplifted by a consciousness of its own personality, feeling a deep sense of worth and inspired by a high vision of its great destiny.

If Spain had done nothing in the Philippines but the wielding of scattered and separate elements into the consummate structure of our nationality, which has not only enabled us to assimilate another civilization such as that brought to us by the United States of America but has also prevented the basic and distinctive elements of our personality from being carried away by strange currents, thus bringing us to the triumph of our aspiration to be an independent nation; I repeat that if this had been the only work of Spain in the Philippines, it would in itself be sufficient, in spite of the mistakes which, in the words of the poet, were “crimes of the times and not of Spain,” to raise in every Filipino heart—if this has not already been done—a monument of undying gratitude to the memory of Spain side by side with that which we should erect in honor of the American people. These two civilizations, the Latin and the Anglo-Saxon, which the fortunes of war have brought to us to make the soil of our land more fruitful, have moulded our national character in a manner so different from that of neighboring nations that in addition to the results of our own efforts, it may be said in truth that to both civilizations we owe in large measure our aptitude and fitness to assume the responsibilities of the present government and of the independent State which will inevitably follow.

Another reason for thanking your Company is the fact that this magnificent coffer is intended to be the depository for our fundamental law. Like the Ark of the Covenant, this chest will contain the precious conquest of our struggles for liberty, the remembrance of which will be rendered more vivid by a contemplation of this beautiful token of affection from you and the Spanish nation, during the decade of trial to which the patriotism and the capacity of our race will be subjected before the final enjoyment of complete independence. In accepting so precious a coffer for a jewel of such inestimable value as our Constitution, we cannot but admire and appreciate the happy and delicate idea which, reminiscent of Biblical times, is expressed by this eloquent testimony of your thoughtfulness and generosity. May the Almighty grant that, with better fortune than that of the people led by Moses, our nation may reach the Land of Promise which is today within sight, so that we may deposit this ark with the precious document which it will contain, in the tabernacle of the Temple of Liberty.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library