Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines At the First Meeting of the National Economic Council

[ Delivered at Malacañan Palace, March 30, 1936 ]

ECONOMIC PLANNING AND PROGRESS

Mr. Secretary Alas, Gentlemen of the Economic Council:

The National Economic Council has a role to play in the affairs of our country next in importance only, if not equal to that of the Cabinet itself. I congratulate you, therefore, upon your appointment as members of this Council and beg to extend to you, in behalf of the Government, my most sincere thanks for your willingness to serve the country, at a sacrifice of your valuable time, without pay.

The creation of this National Economic Council answers an urgent national need and formally commits this Government to a definite policy. We don’t believe in the economic philosophy of “laissez faire.” We favor government leadership in production activities. We believe in planning the national economy. The world has learned at a cost of untold economic waste and human suffering, after submitting to a very severe test the very foundations of the social order our civilization has created and erected, that governments cannot allow unlimited free rein to private enterprise without jeopardizing the public welfare in the interest of human greed.

Though the Filipino people, being a new nation with its economic development still in its formative stage, has been fortunately free from the ravages of a destructive industrial and economic competition which has been the lot of the more advanced nations, we have, however, kept our eyes open and have learned from the grim experience of others. The framers of our Constitution, seeing that the efforts of other governments to regulate the play of economic forces and when necessary to take part in the industrial development of the nation—all in the interest of and for the promotion of the public weal—have been thwarted by constitutional limitations intended for an age and an economic order long out of existence, saw to it that the Constitution of the Philippines left no doubt as to what our Government might do in this respect. And so section 6 of Article XII provides that “the State may, in the interest of national welfare and defense, establish and operate industries and means of transportation and communication, and, upon payment of Just compensation, transfer to public ownership utilities and other private enterprises to be operated by the Government.” Again Article XIII (sections 6, 7, and 8) as well as other provisions of the Constitution, grants to the Government all the powers that may be needed to regulate, direct and control the economic life of the nation.

In my message to the National Assembly urging the enactment of the law that would authorize and empower me to create this National Economic Council I outlined in clear, though general terms, the objectives to be sought by this Council. You are all familiar, I take it, with that message and need not, therefore, trespass upon your time reciting it. You are also informed of the Act creating the National Economic Council and the Executive Order issued in pursuance thereof.

We meet this morning, after you have been properly organized, to exchange views on the adoption of such plans as the Council in its wisdom may deem necessary or convenient to carry out the purpose of the Government in creating this Council. Every member of this Council is free to express his opinion honestly and frankly. Your counsel and advice would be of little or no value to the Government unless you felt that you are here not to follow blindly the dictates of anyone, but to contribute with your knowledge and experience on public affairs and private business to the solution of the grave economic and social questions confronting the nation. There is only one limitation to your freedom of opinion. Any one who believes in good faith, as a matter of principle, in the economic philosophy of “laissez faire,” or in the inherent unfitness of a government to own and operate an industry or any business enterprise, has no place in a council created by a law and under a constitution that professes an entirely opposite theory.

I have appointed you to this Council because I have faith in your patriotism, in your ability and experience. I trust that with your counsel and advice this Government will be able to promote the development of our natural resources and direct and partake in its economic advancement in a manner that will insure the progress, the welfare, prosperity and happiness of all the people—the rich and the poor alike.

Gentlemen, once more I congratulate and thank you.

From Messages of the Pres. (Rev. Ed.), Vol. 2, Part I, pp. 74-76

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library