SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

WOMAN SUFFRAGE

[Delivered before the Delegates to the Sixth Biennial Convention of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs of the Philippines at Malacañan Palace, Manila, November 25, 1936]

Mrs. Lim, my dear Ladies:

The Constitution requires a certain number of affirmative votes before women can exercise the privilege to vote. The framers of the Constitution have been very wise, for, after all, people are not entitled to enjoy a privilege or a right unless they are interested in it. And so, when the Constitution, or rather, the framers of the Constitution demanded that before you are given the right to vote a definite number of qualified women electors so expressed themselves affirmatively, their purpose was to see whether the women are interested or not in acquiring such privilege.

There are many women who do not believe in suffrage. This does not happen exclusively in the Philippines. There has always been opposition to woman’s suffrage in every country where it is recognized. There are some who believe that women’s activities should be directed in other lines. Some women fear that their participation in politics may mean a deviation from that course of conduct which is demanded by the high concept that we have of womanhood.

There are also many excessively conservative men—men who cling to things of the past—who are hesitant, if not afraid, of conferring new things on the women.

We have, however, to face the future with confident hope.

In your efforts to get a sufficient number of women voters, there will be a group working against you. You should not be surprised or disgusted. You can give no better evidence of your preparation for the discharge of democratic obligations than to show your tolerance of ideas that are not exactly like yours.

But I say, I do think that because of the forces opposing this movement, you ought to intensify your campaign. It is a question not only of convincing all the women to vote, but also of pointing out that it is their duty to do so in order that they may contribute to the improvement of politics as well as of social conditions in our country. It is a question of convincing them that to give their attention to public questions does not mean abandonment of their immediate duties; that it is possible for a woman to be a perfect woman even if she makes speeches for a given candidate or a given subject.

To be sure, there will be some individuals of your sex who would go to the extreme, but that ought not to be considered as evidence that the rest will do the same.

This Government being determined to carry out a policy which means everything to our country—the policy of social justice, I wish to emphasize the necessity not only of the Filipino women’s taking part in the discussion of political questions in the Philippines, but also of exercising their influence in their respective localities.

Women, if given a share in the administration of our Government, can do more towards the promotion of social justice in the Philippines than when such a task is left in the hands of men alone, for women have a keener sense of justice than men.

The time has arrived when the poor workers in the fields and factories in the Philippines must be given their due, for if they are not it will not be long before we will see repeated in the Philippines what we see in so many countries of the world today.

Our Government, our communities have to face the greatest revolution that has ever taken place since the dawn of civilization. It is the revolution that has shaken Russia, China, and Spain. In the Philippines, although we do not yet see blood running in the streets, our men are no longer willing to be exploited, nor will they any longer permit that the fruits of their labor be taken away from them.

It is not a question of enacting laws and complying with their provisions. Rather than establish social justice, it is more important to educate the people. The need of the hour consists in arousing their sentiment so that they could see that in what the worker is fighting for against the master simple justice is involved.

There was a time when my political enemies, either in good or bad faith, claimed that my advocacy of the rights of the poor was hypocritical, and that I had no real interest, but that I simply needed their votes. Now they cannot make that charge successful. Not only am I not a candidate, but also I cannot be a candidate, for, according to our Constitution, I can not seek my re-election.

Yet now, after I have been elected President, despite this accusation, my whole attention is directed towards the welfare of the more unfortunate portion of our citizenry.

As a result of what we are trying to do, we feel kindly towards those elements of our community for whom we are working, and as a consequence we hope to be able to create between employer and employee a feeling of mutual confidence.

It is only when the people of one country feel that in their respective stations they are getting a fair deal from the Government that they can be said to be happy. And the Government can depend on them that they would be ready to defend their country.

People no longer long for a country simply because they were born there. They must see and feel that in that country they enjoy a happy life, that they have every opportunity to improve their lot.

It is my ambition that every Filipino should love and be proud of his country. And this ambition makes me wish to have every Filipino enjoy the immense wealth with which the Creator has endowed this country.

I want you to win the vote so as to gain your support in this difficult task of having social justice reign supreme here without the necessity of public disturbance, of public disorder, and through the coöperation of all.

You can count on my support in your campaign for the success of the plebiscite on woman suffrage.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library