Mr. High Commissioner, Mrs. McNutt, Ladies and Gentlemen:

We have tendered this banquet to High Commissioner McNutt and his charming wife as a fitting climax to the ceremonies of the day. However, Mrs. Quezon and I are not only honoring the representative of the United States in the Philippines on this day, when the people of my country have given evidence of their sentiments and gratitude for the work done here by America, but we are also honoring a man who possesses rare qualities of A-1 statesmanship and who is endowed with manly virtues. It is a pleasure to see that his public demonstration of the sentiments of friendship and gratitude on the part of the Filipino people towards the United States should take place precisely at the time when the man who represents America in the Philippines also represents in his person the ideals which have made of America the one single inspiration of the whole world in these times of distress.

High Commissioner McNutt has given evidences, during the short time he has been with us, that he believes not only in the principles of democracy but also in the effectiveness of democracy. He has shown in deeds not only his belief that America is sincere in her intention to serve the Filipino people but also his conviction that that policy was right, for during the short time that he has been with us he has done everything he could to help the Philippines secure from the United States what further help she needed to make a success of the great responsibilities that have been placed in her hands by the United States in recent years. I desire to take opportunity of this occasion, Mr. High Commissioner, to express to you not only my own sincere appreciation but also that of my people for what you have done while in the United States to facilitate the work of the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs.

I have seen and known all the American Governors-General of the Philippines. Strange as it may seem, those who were popular with the Filipinos usually were not popular with the Americans, and vice versa. But where most of your predecessors failed, you have succeeded—for you have won the respect and admiration of both Filipinos and Americans. I wish to offer a toast to you for that success, to your health and prosperity, and to that I add the wish and prayer that Mrs. McMutt may soon grace the White House with her presence.

Pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and in line with the annual budget appropriation for Fiscal Year 2024, the Sangguniang Panlungsod of [City/Municipality Name] through Resolution No. [Resolution Number], hereby authorizes the City/Municipal Mayor to enter into a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) with [Partner Organization Name] for the implementation of the [Project Name] project. 

Ang nasabing proyekto ay may layuning mapabuti ang kalidad ng serbisyo publiko sa pamamagitan ng pagbibigay ng [Specific Service/Benefit] sa mga residente ng [City/Municipality Name]. Ito ay inaasahang makakatulong sa pagtugon sa pangangailangan ng komunidad sa larangan ng [Area of Need].

The MOA shall cover the following terms and conditions: (1) Scope of Work, detailing the specific responsibilities of each party; (2) Financial Provisions, outlining the budget allocation and disbursement procedures; (3) Duration of Agreement, specifying the project timeline; and (4) Reporting Requirements, ensuring transparency and accountability in project implementation. 

Ang paglagda sa MOA ay nagpapakita ng pagtutulungan ng lokal na pamahalaan at ng [Partner Organization Name] upang makamit ang mga layunin ng pag-unlad para sa ating lungsod/bayan. Ang lahat ng gastos na may kaugnayan sa proyektong ito ay sasagutin ng [Funding Source].

Therefore, let it be known that this authorization is granted with the understanding that the City/Municipal Mayor shall submit regular progress reports to the Sangguniang Panlungsod, ensuring proper monitoring and evaluation of the project’s impact and effectiveness. Approved.

*His Excellency, Paul V. McNutt, United States High Commissioner to the Philippines, delivered the following speech of response:

Mr. President, Mrs. Quezon, Ladies and Gentlemen:

What you have done tonight has been done with characteristic generosity. For that, Mrs. McNutt and I are deeply appreciative.

I wish it were possible at this time, and on this occasion, to adequately express the feeling of gratitude to you, and to those whom you represent, for these months which have been spent in a cooperative effort to achieve mutual aid. Most of my life has been spent in the public service, but in all these years I have never had a more cordial, a more friendly relationship with any official in the public service anywhere than with you here. This has indeed been a very happy period of service.

By our mutual confidence, which is absolutely essential, we have dealt with a situation unique in the annals of history–a situation which to my mind is the greatest experiment of a government anywhere in the world today. On behalf of my fellow countrymen, Mr. President, may I tell you how deeply we appreciate the sincere manifestation of friendship and gratitude which this day has brought.

Occupation Day, which has meant much to all those who participated in that struggle 40 years ago, has taken on a new meaning, has brought a new luster to itself. For the first time in the history of civilized nations, a people who once felt the force of arms celebrate the day of victory by an expression of gratitude. All of us who are here, and our fellow countrymen in the homeland, feel deeply this very fine expression. I think you know by those things which have happened during the past 40 years that the feeling of friendship has been reciprocated from the very start because here has been a demonstration of a policy announced in the very beginning and carried out faithfully.

To the rest of the world America’s sovereignty in the Philippines has represented a relationship between a mother country and a colony. But the men who have contributed to the success of the experiment–the men who have done their share in the administration of affairs here–have looked upon it not as a colony or as a relationship between a trustee and a ward, but as a partnership,–in the beginning a senior partner and a junior partner, but with the hope that the aspiration of a partnership between equals might be eventually realized.

After a period of the experiment had elapsed, those at home and here realized that there have been ample demonstrations of a capacity for self-government, a policy which has been freely given to the Filipinos from the beginning; and now the great interest at home and here is the preservation in this Pearl of the Orient of that thing which gave our own birth—the right of men to govern themselves, the right of men to worship as they see fit—FREEDOM, with all that glorious word means.

All of us here tonight realize that we live in a distressed, a bewildered, a bedeviled world. We look with anxiety to the hagglings of each day and wonder what the future has in store for us, for our children and for our children’s children. We wonder if the world itself will recognize the right upon which our nation is founded, upon which this new nation finds its rock of security.

Today there are nations that would divide the world into spheres of influence and which would deny that the earth belongs first to the Maker diverse and then to His children. It is not their earth; it is God’s earth on which we live; and the right which He gave to all of us is the right to be free. That right the United States seeks to guarantee to all her people, to all those who have come within the sphere of her influence. Disregarding any material benefits which may have come to the Philippines by reason of the 40 years of America’s occupation in these islands, the one thing, Mr. President, which I hope is the principal heritage of these people is freedom—the right to live, the right to work, the right to be human beings, the right to enjoy all those things which are the heritage of human beings. As you so kindly said this morning, the relationship between the United States of America and the Philippines is thoroughly spiritual relationship. That relationship cannot be destroyed; it will not be destroyed.

You said today that you could not forget. I say to you, Mr. President, that there are those who have looked upon you during these years of development and growth who will not also forget. The ties which have been made shall never be severed as long as men live.

Therefore, I have the honor to propose a toast to the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and to the people whom he represents.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library