Speech of Senate President Manuel L. Quezon Accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines

Mr. CHAIRMAN, GENTLEMEN OF THE COMMITTEE, FELLOW-CITIZENS:

It is with a profound sense of gratitude that I received in the presence of this vast multitude the formal notification of my nomination for the Presidency of the Commonwealth. A party nomination for the highest office within the gift of the people is in itself a great distinction, but when the nomination comes under such auspicious circumstances as have attended that which is now proffered to me, I regard it as the greatest honor that can be accorded to any public man short alone of his actual election to the Presidency.

Ever since the approval and acceptance of the Independence Act there has been growing among the people a feeling of deepest concern over the difficult problems and impending responsibilities which will confront us upon the inauguration of the Commonwealth. While the Constitutional Convention was in session, partly fostered by the spirit of national solidarity exhibited by the members of that body, the anxiety to prepare the country adequately to meet these problems and responsibilities became articulate in an increasingly popular demand for national unity, that political parties give pause to partisan strife, that the leaders of the vital forces of the nation join in their efforts for the attainment of the common goal, and that the entire country resolve to support loyally the man who may be entrusted with the national leadership so that through the Government of the Commonwealth the foundations of the future Philippine Republic may be solidly and firmly established.

Resolutions were passed by municipal councils as well as by civic and social organizations, including labor unions, demanding a coalition of the two great political parties as the most practical means of obtaining this unity of effort. Before the Constitutional Convention adjourned the cry of national unity was taken up by the League of Provincial Governors Without regard to party affiliation and voicing the prevailing sentiment in their respective provinces, these spokesmen of our local governments unanimously joined in the general appeal for unity.

Lastly, prominent Filipino business men, professionals and leaders in agriculture, industry, and labor formally submitted to the directorate of the two political parties a concrete proposal that the two parties nominate jointly the candidates for President and Vice President and thus insure the cooperation of all the vital forces of the nation during the first and trying the years of the Commonwealth. When the two parties held their respective national conventions they readily responded to this popular clamor and forthwith agreed to form a coalition and to nominate the same candidates for President and Vice President.

Neither Senator Osmeña nor I sought these nominations. We made no preconvention campaign nor did we have any desire to secure them. We entered public life about the same time thirty years ago both pledged to the cause of independence. The vicissitudes which have been our lot during these years are not now to be recounted but as I look back upon our joint efforts in the attainment of the goal which we set out before us I feel happy that at the end of the long struggle we can face our people standing on the same platform, our pledge fulfilled, our mutual friendship and regard enhanced, and still enjoying, I hope, their continued confidence and support.

With the approval of the Independence Act and its acceptance by the country we believed that our extended public service could at last come to an end. We would have been content as private citizens to lend our unstinted support to the new Government. But it seems that our fellow-citizens have once again chosen to place upon our shoulders the new responsibility of organizing the Commonwealth and leading the nation during the early years of its existence. The nomination that has been proffered to us attains the category of a call to duty which no public-spirited citizen may evade or disregard. I, therefore, Mr. Chairman, make public announcement that I accept the nomination for the Presidency which has been tendered to me, deeming it my bounden duty to do so, and I accept it with the most profound sense of the responsibility that it entails and the deepest feeling of gratitude.

Having been nominated under the circumstances I have mentioned, I cannot afford to speak in uncertain terms. The need of the hour is for fixed orientation, clear statement of policies, and a definition of the national purposes. In the course of the present campaign I shall have the opportunity to discuss all the important questions before the country. For the present I have to limit myself to a few of them.

THE PLATFORM

The Coalition platform meets with my wholehearted approval. I took part in the drafting of that document and I make my own every commitment contained therein.

THE CONSTITUTION

I look upon the Constitution of the Philippines as the expression of the sovereignty and of the aggregate will of the Filipino people. I shall abide by its provisions. I shall uphold the democratic principle underlying the institutions that it establishes. I am opposed to a dictatorship. I maintain that no man who believes in a dictatorship can with safety be entrusted with the reins of executive power under our Constitution. Democracy can only survive if those at the helm of the Government believe in the people’s right to rule and have faith in their inherent capacity to decide rightly important public questions.

I will hold inviolate and will defend to the utmost the individual rights and liberties. I shall safeguard free speech, the freedom of the press, and the equality of every man before the law however poor or ignorant. I shall insure for every citizen of the Philippines, from Luzon to Mindanao and Sulu, the right to worship God as his own conscience dictates.

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH

We are entering a new era. We are on the threshold of free nationhood. The Government of the Commonwealth that we shall establish derives its powers from a constitution approved by the people themselves. It may truly be said that it is a government of our creation to be administered for our own welfare.

Except in a few specified cases, it will be free from American control in the conduct of domestic affairs. Only in our foreign relations do we remain subject to American supervision, and this because of the continuing responsibility of the foreign aggression during the life of the Commonwealth. Hence, the Government of the Commonwealth will be, in fact not in name, an independent government under the protection of the United States.

The immediate task before us is to set up the new Government,–a task that will require all the foresight, the wisdom, and the courage of the people. Then we must adopt such measures as will insure the stability of our national economy, and provide for the honest and efficient administration of the affairs of the government. Equally important is to make adequate provision for the defense of our country against external aggression or internal disorders.

I favor a simple and economical government, one in keeping with the limited resources of our country but which is capable of ministering to the needs of the nations.

I shall be unsparing in my efforts to carry out the mandate of the Constitution regarding the civil service. Merit and character alone will be the qualification for office or promotion. For the highest responsible posts I shall call on the most capable, honest, and patriotic citizens, regardless of political affiliation or religious belief. This is no time for placing party considerations above the common weal. In fact, one of the main purposes of the coalition is to secure the cooperation and help of the best available men to insure the success of the Commonwealth. I shall tolerate neither corruption nor inefficiency in public office.

FINANCIAL POLICY

The financial stability of the Government depends upon our ability to keep expenses within our income. At the time when other governments are resorting to loans in order to meet their obligations we can take pride in the fact that we have been able to maintain a balanced budget. Under our Constitution the responsibility for maintaining a balanced budget falls mainly upon the executive. I pledge myself to maintain the credit of the Government and at all times to balance the budget and keep our finances in a sound condition.

I shall keep our present currency system in all its integrity and will allow no change that will affect its value. If new conditions should require such a change it will be done only after the most careful study and consultation with competent experts. For the present I can see no reason for any radical modification in our monetary system.

TAXATION

Irresponsible demagogues have tried to arouse in the hearts of our people the hope that under an independent Philippines there shall be no taxes except upon the rich. It is my duty to warn the credulous against such misrepresentation Governments can be supported only through taxation. It is a primary duty of citizens to contribute to the support of the Government, but taxation that does not take into consideration the relative financial ability of the taxpayer is unjust. I favor a complete revision of our Astern of taxation with the best technical advice available. I advocate that the burdens of the state be equitably disputed in proportion to the means and possibilities of the taxpayer. We shall make a general reduction of the assessed value of real property in accordance with present prices.

PUBLIC WORKS

The so-called pork barrel system, as known in the United States and as sometimes practiced in the Philippines, must definitely be discarded. It is a waste of public funds. I am in favor of continuing the building of roads and schools, in accordance with a carefully-prepared plan to be followed systematically in the order of their relative importance to the general public.

PUBLIC INSTRUCTION

I stand by the educational policy enunciated in the Constitution. The principle underlying this policy is the training for useful, well-disciplined, self sacrificing citizenship that draws its breath of life from Filipino patriotism. Our system of education should be revised so as to accomplish that aim still more effectively. The State is in duty bound to maintain a complete and adequate system of public education, providing at least free public primary instruction and citizenship training to adult citizens.

My attention will be especially devoted to making it possible for every child to go to school. Adult citizenship training will be carried out in accordance with a broad and systematic plan. To the end that poverty may not prevent gifted young men and women from developing their talent, the Government should create the largest possible number of scholarships for them in all branches of learning. Our educational objective should fit in with our economic policy. I am for greater emphasis on vocational and agricultural training in the intermediate and high schools, but the instruction should always be in keeping with the economic conditions of each region and of the country as a whole.

ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE

An independent judiciary administering justice without fear or favor promptly and impartially to rich and poor alike is the strongest bulwark of individual rights and the best guaranty against oppression and usurpation from any source. Equally important is the maintenance of the confidence of the people in the courts. I will appoint no man to the bench without having satisfied myself, after a thorough investigation, of his character and ability.

To strengthen the faith of the common people in our courts, it is necessary that the utmost care be exerted in the selection of justices of the peace. These courts are often the only tribunals accessible to the larger portion of our population and it is essential that they be maintained Worthy of their confidence. If the disinherited cannot obtain redress of their grievances or vindication of their rights in these courts, they have no further recourse, for the Courts of First Instance and the Supreme Court are often beyond their reach. By the impartiality and integrity of the justices of the peace, therefore, the judiciary of the Philippines is judged by the millions of our countrymen who live in the barrios and distant places. I pledge myself to do everything in my power to maintain these courts free from political or other extraneous influence and to appoint thereto only men of proven ability and integrity and of the broadest human sympathies.

SOCIAL PROBLEMS

The welfare of the people should be the concern of the Government. The helpless and the needy, the jobless, as well as the workers in the factories and in the field have a claim upon the Government to safeguard their health and well-being. The contentment of the masses is the first insurance against social and political disorders. It is the duty of the Government to protect the working men against social and political disorders. It is the duty and exploitation to secure to them fair wages and return for their labor.

Let us beware of men who deliberately, for political or selfish aims, stir up discontent among the masses. They preach subversive doctrines, speak of evils and abuses that do not exits, or magnify those which often are inevitable in democracies. These men are those worse enemies of society, more dangerous to the community than ordinary criminals. They have no sympathy for the people, but are mere self-seekers, intent only in securing either pecuniary or political advantage for themselves. If as a result of their preaching disorders occur, they cowardly disclaim all responsibility for that which none other than themselves had brought about. He who tries to carry favor with the masses by appealing to the passions of the people, stirring up their prejudices, or capitalizing discontent or human suffering, is unworthy of public trust.

LANDED ESTATES

The ownership of big landed estates by corporations or absentee landlords have invariably caused discontent and unrest among the tenants or occupants of such estates. The discontent among the tenants of the Friar lands contributed to the causes which led to the rebellion against Spain. Those Friar lands have been acquired by the Government and sold in small lots but there are still a few large haciendas particularly in Luzon that are the hotbeds of discontent and unrest among their tenants. Not only for the sake of these tenants, but also in the interest of peace, every effort should be made to acquire these haciendas, at a fair and just price to be sold in small lots to the tenants.

There are complaints in certain places that the tenants are the victims of unfair practices on the part of their landlords. These abuses must be stopped and the tenant protected in his rights.

LABOR

Fortunately for our country, we have had no sharp cleavages between labor and capital. Strikes have been few and far-between, and they have never been long-drawn-out or general. That we have so far been spared the extremities of class warfare, is no proof that we shall forever be exempt. Our good fortune should rather teach us to seek the means to preserve the country against such conflicts by the only method which experience has shown to be effective; namely, by taking steps designed to prevent the exploitation and oppression of the working men and thus assure their happiness and contentment.

Filipino laborers, compared to those of other oriental countries, receive higher wages and are much better protected in their rights by legislation. We have enacted many laws protecting labor. In all earnestness, however, I must say that we must go further in this direction. The experience of centuries shows that the one sure way to Protect society against class war is to secure to wage-earners their due.

I am against communism. I am a firm believer in the institution of private property. I contend, however, that whenever property rights come in conflict with human rights, the former should yield to the latter.

If we would preserve the institution of private property, we must hold fast to this principle, in the determination of conflicting rights between man and man. It is thus that we may draw the line between the rights of labor and capital and erect an economic structure based on the Principle that human life is the measure of all other values, that considerations of possession and profit must give way to the supremacy of human existence.

CAPITAL

A change in the political status of a country always gives rise to fear and misgivings. Not only among Americans and foreigners, but even among a few Filipinos, the impending political changes have caused anxiety as to the future.

There is no justification for these fears. I give assurance that peace, order, law and justice will reign supreme under the Commonwealth, and that the rights of foreigners and nationals alike will be safeguarded. Existing investments, whether foreign or national, will receiver every inducement to stay, and outside capital will be welcomed. We especially desire that new American capital should come and help in the development of the country.

NATIONAL DEFENSE

I believe in the efficacy of the instrumentalities of peace, such as the League of Nations or treaties of neutrality. In due time we should apply for admission o the League and urge the negotiation of a multilateral treaty for the neutralization of the Philippines. However, we cannot ignore present-day realities. We cannot rely exclusively on these implements of peace for our national defense.

I favor preparedness for national defense. We cannot afford to have, nor do I approve of, a large standing army or costly military establishments, but we must have a regular army of sufficient size for our requirements and a trained citizenry ready to be drafted into service in any emergency. For the proper planning of our defenses and organization and training of our regular and citizen army I shall secure the best expert advice.

OUR RELATIONS WITH AMERICA

It should be our constant endeavor to maintain the most friendly relations and closest collaboration with the United States. We owe much to America and we are grateful to her. Our present economy is tied up with the free American market. Many of our industries depend for their existence on our reciprocal free trade relations with the United States, and we should try to maintain these trade relations if possible, even after independence. I shall spare no effort to obtain the elimination of the export tax provided in the Independence Law. I shall work for the repeal of the excise tax on coconut oil. I shall endeavor to take such action as may be required to place our trade relations with the United States on a truly reciprocal basis, so that they may be continued after independence for the mutual advantage of both countries.

FOREIGN RELATIONS

As already stated, our foreign relations will be under the control and supervision of the United States during the Commonwealth; but there is nothing in the Independence Act which prevents the Commonwealth from beginning to lay the foundations for our future relations with foreign nations. Indeed, the period of transition having been provided t give to the Filipino people time to prepare themselves for the responsibilities of an independent government, it can be rightly assumed that the United States meant to give us the opportunity, under the Commonwealth of initiating both political as well as trade relations with other countries, subject to its supervision and control.

We shall request the State Department at Washington to permit the Commonwealth to send men as attaches to American legations or embassies as well as to American consulates in order that these men may acquire the knowledge and experience in the diplomatic service and provide our government with needed information concerning foreign trade.

It will be necessary and to our advantage besides to win the good-will of, and maintain friendly relations with, other nations. But to accomplish this aim, mere protestations of good purposes are not enough. We must deal fairly with all nations and respect their rights. We must secure to every foreigner who lives with us full protection of our laws. His life, his property, must be as safe among us as they are in his own land.

During the transition period we shall endeavor to find new markets for our products so that if and when the market of the United States shall no longer be open to us except on a competitive basis, we may not be left without outlet for our products.

PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE

The question of Philippine Independence has been settled. The Independence Law sets the day for independence and prescribes the process leading to its consummation. We accepted the Independence Law, we have approved a Constitution pursuant to its provisions, and the people by ratifying it with practical unanimity have agree to the grant of independence under the terms and conditions prescribed by the Congress. Independence, therefore, is no longer an issue either in the United States or in the Philippines. Insofar as the terms and conditions of independence are concerned, we made it plain when we accepted the Independence Law that we reserved the right to petition Congress for their modification with a view to making them less burdensome for our people and more adapted to the attainment of the purpose for which Congress intended them.

We consider the economic provisions of the Independence Law not entirely fair to the Philippines. We regard legislation recently passed by Congress imposing greater restrictions on our free imports to the United States or authorizing the collection of exorbitant taxes on some of our products sold in that country, not only discriminatory, but a virtual violation of the solemn covenant between the two countries We shall exert every effort to secure the repeal of hose discriminatory measures and to obtain amendments to the Independence Law looking to a more equitable trade arrangement between the United States and the Philippines during the Commonwealth.

In relation to the transition period, the Congress of the United States fixed the term of ten years considering it necessary to allow the Philippines gradually to adjust their national economy to the conditions which will obtain when independence should eventuate and to permit the Filipinos to prepare themselves adequately for the responsibilities of independent nationhood. It was, therefore, chiefly for the benefit of the Philippines, rather than of the United States that the intermediate period of ten years was fixed. While there may be differences of opinion as to whether this period is too long or too short all must agree that if our trade relations with the United States during the Commonwealth should prove more injurious to our country than they would under complete independence, the Philippines would then do well to hasten the date of separation from America. This fact will not be revealed to us until after the first years of the Commonwealth and we have known the result of the economic conference between representatives of the United States and the Philippines which, I trust, will be called by the President of the United States at an early date.

Meanwhile, I consider it a most disturbing influence which will retard our work of economic readjustment and reconstruction, for anyone to advocate now the shortening of the transition period. What the country direly needs to-day is a period of stability and business confidence so that we may proceed unhampered in the task of erecting our new Government and building up the national economy to increase the wealth of the nation, promote commerce, agriculture, and industry; improve the condition of our wage-earners, and create economic opportunities for all our citizens. We need to give capital reasonable certainty as to those conditions which affect investment; we need to assure the industries that are dependent upon the free American market that no radical changes will take place which will bring about a sudden loss of the market on which they depend; we need above all to provide economic security for the masses of our people which can only be accomplished through the maintenance of stable business conditions.

I yield to no one in my fervent desire to see the Philip-pines independent as soon as possible, but I cannot close my eyes to the fact that a difference of a few years may mean a great deal to the well-being of our people and the permanence of our national liberty. Besides, we should not be deluded into believing that it is possible for anyone at this time to obtain from Congress the shortening of the transition period. All the pleas that may now be submitted in support of this action had already been considered and passed upon by that body. No new reason can be advanced that had not been already submitted. Therefore, making an issue of the shortening of the transition period is unfair to our people and most injurious to their interests.

I am anxious to see our independence established at the earliest possible date. I look upon it as the most precious reward for the many years of ceaseless efforts that I have spent in its quest. I pledge myself anew resolutely to take all necessary steps leading to the advent of independence, and to do everything in my power to make the Philippine Republic strong and enduring, and the blessings of liberty not only the cherished possession of this generation but the priceless heritage of the Filipino people for all the time.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library