SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

COOPERATION WITH THE SECRETARY OF LABOR; STRIKES; AND THE TRUE VALUE OF MONEY

[Delivered before labor leaders upon the induction into office of Honorable Jose Avelino as Secretary of Labor, at Malacañan, Manila, May 1, 1939]

My Friends:

I will take advantage of this gathering occasioned by the induction of Secretary Avelino into his new position, to speak a few words which I would like the labor leaders—who will stage demonstrations with their respective organizations on this clay—to convey to their fellow members.

I regret that I cannot be present at such demonstrations; however, Secretary Avelino will act as my representative who will address you. The new Secretary of Labor was the first to establish a labor organization in Samar; hence, you can count on him as a true supporter of aspirations to promote the economic well-being of laborers. I am not giving you a Secretary of Labor who will start, just now, to study the matters that must necessarily be accomplished to attain your objectives. His heart and his mind evince an inclination for the laborers, so that I hope he will be able to help you and the Government in the realization of our desires. I hope that all the labor leaders and their respective organizations will cooperate with him wholeheartedly.

I do not wish to let this occasion pass without mentioning the name of Secretary Torres. Much as I regretted it, I was forced to accept his resignation because of my policy of changing the members of my Cabinet after every three years that correspond to the term of each legislature. Secretary Torres, although he is not a workingman or a labor leader, is imbued with a true passion to be of assistance to the laborer. He cannot, in that sense, be surpassed any other person that I know of today. My only criticism of him is that sometimes his recommendations, had I followed them, would have drained the coffers of the Government for the benefit of laborers without leaving anything for others. That is why I desire you not to forget the time when Secretary Torres was in office, just as I have not forgotten it.

Secretary Villanueva followed him in office. However brief the period he had cooperated with you, yet he was not behind in his desire to protect you; and if I had been obliged to accept his resignation, it was because Secretary Villanueva—even at the time I had offered him the post which he subsequently held—told me that his high blood pressure ailment was not yet fully cured then, which he surmised would in all probability oblige him to tender his resignation however inopportune it should be. I shall not forget his services, not only when he was Secretary of Labor but also when we were together in the Philippine Senate.

I am reiterating my request to you that all cooperation be given to Secretary Avelino. The cooperation that labor leaders can give not only to Secretary Avelino but also to my Government should be for you not to induce your comrades to use means that would bring about disorders. That is similar to what I said in a speech or in a message to the National Assembly regarding strikes.

A strike is a weapon which laborers can employ within the bounds of law. It is not prohibited here; but a strike is a weapon that not only hurts or which may hurt whomsoever it is used upon, but also may hurt those who are actually using it. And you should especially consider that although one could plan a strike, yet from its effects the sufferers would be not only labor and capital but also the public at large; more so if a strike were to be staged against public utilities, such as transportation, electricity, or an estate, as when rice tenants declare a strike. Such strikes make the townspeople suffer most; hence, as much as possible, I request you all not to resort to such method.

We have a Department of Labor, and we also have a Court of Industrial Relations. Bring your complaints and charges before them. Not only that. I will ask Secretary Avelino and the Secretary of Justice to have their departments combine in sending investigators to conduct investigations as to whether the laborers are being treated unjustly or their rights are not being respected by their employers.

If you really have faith in our Government, as I believe you do, such is only what I request of you on Labor Day. Perhaps the labor leaders who read of the happenings in other lands may say that the concessions received by our laborers in the Philippines are still few. I will, however, relate to you an incident which occurred here in 1918, while I was President of the Senate, which would show you that we have already accomplished much although we have not yet gone far.

In that year, a strike was declared by cigarmakers who composed what was, at the time, the only established labor organization in Manila. The laborers asked that I be made arbitrator in that case. Because of my high position, they hoped that the owners of the factory would not refuse any intercession on my part should I be the arbitrator. I asked for nothing except that a committee of laborers be allowed to confer with a committee of the owners of the factory. When I mentioned this plan of mine to the factory owners, they answered me that they would not want to settle differences with their laborers, but that they had no objections at all to dealing with me. Think that it was not so long ago when business executives considered it humiliating for themselves to confer with the representatives of labor. I replied that it was necessary to negotiate with the laborers, because if I, who was President of the Senate then, could confer with them, why shouldn’t they? They agreed to do so. Upon attaining that, I told Potenciano Salita that such was already a big concession, and that it was necessary for him to demand things which could be granted in order to win in that first battle. The workers won then, and I decreed that labor and capital should cooperate in developing the industries—a condition which, up to now. I consider should actually be.

Today, can there be anyone, however prominent he is in the Philippines, who could say that his personality would be sullied if he were to talk with a committee of laborers? None!  . Do not be over impatient. Have a little fortitude. All that are lawfully yours, you will obtain through the assistance of the Government.

I would like to remind you of another matter which you should consider: with what you receive, money has no actual value. Money has no intrinsic value and no worth. Do you know what happened to King Midas in the early days? It was said that God had asked him what he wanted most, to which this King—who considered nothing better than gold—replied that he wanted everything he touched to turn to gold. That wish was granted and everything he touched was transformed into gold. Even his food was changed into gold; so much that he became so hungry as to disavow his coveted power. Contemplate the meaning of this legend.

The benefit of money lies in the things it can buy; therefore if we are to discuss wages, we must base them on what we can buy with the amount that we shall earn. For example, the P3 that is earned daily by a laborer cannot be compared, if the prices of what he will buy are high, with the P1 earned by another if what the latter can buy are cheaper things. Money is truly not the measure of the needs of man, but the measure of what money can buy and of what man will need in his lifetime.

I am not going to prolong my discourse on this subject for lack of time; besides, you will yet have to stage your parade. I wish to inculcate in your minds, however what I have just said about wages, which you must not forget.

I ask once more your cooperation with our new Secretary of Labor, and the cooperation that you can give him will also be your cooperation with my administration. I repeat: Before you declare a strike, bring your case to the Department of Labor or to the Court of Industrial Relations first.

That is all, my friends.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library