SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is an honor to be here today to address you on a matter of great importance to our nation – the ongoing efforts to strengthen our disaster resilience and ensure the safety and well-being of our citizens.

Bilang Pangulo, tungkulin ko na pangalagaan ang bawat Pilipino, lalo na sa panahon ng mga sakuna. We have witnessed firsthand the devastating effects of typhoons, earthquakes, and other calamities. These events not only cause immense suffering and loss of life but also disrupt our economy and hinder our progress.

Kaya naman, prayoridad ng ating administrasyon ang pagpapalakas ng ating kakayahan na humarap sa mga sakuna. We are investing heavily in early warning systems, disaster preparedness programs, and the construction of resilient infrastructure. We are also working closely with local government units to ensure that they have the resources and training they need to respond effectively to emergencies.

We are committed to building a nation that is not only prepared for disasters but also able to recover quickly and efficiently. This requires a whole-of-government approach, as well as the active participation of the private sector and civil society organizations. Sama-sama nating harapin ang mga hamon na ito, at sama-sama rin nating itayo ang isang mas ligtas at mas matatag na Pilipinas.

I would like to express my gratitude to all those who are working tirelessly to protect our communities. Your dedication and selflessness are truly inspiring. Let us continue to work together to build a brighter future for all Filipinos. Maraming salamat po, at mabuhay tayong lahat.

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

ESSENTIAL QUALITIES OF BOY SCOUTS

[Radio broadcast on the occasion of the third anniversary of the approval of the law creating the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, October 31, 1939]

Major Stevenot, Boy Scouts, those who are looking at me now, as well as those who are only listening to me through the radio: I have come to show you by my presence the interest I have in your organization, and to deliver a short message to you. I am not familiar with your by-laws. I am sure I do not know as well as you the special objectives of the boy scouts organization. But I do know what to expect of the boy scout in the Philippines. I am proud of the fact that I took part in the enactment of the law which permitted the creation of this organization. But I want you to bear in mind that I am interested not so much in having a boy scout organization of Filipinos as in having that boy scout organization live up to the ideals and objectives of the scout movement in other parts of the world. In other words, I would feel gratified that I have been in some way instrumental in making possible the organization of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines only when I learn that the organization which we now have is better than the one which you used to have before the Boy Scouts of the Philippines was organized.

In judging your organization, as well as others of similar kind, my motto has always been “Quality rather than quantity.” It would be a fine thing if the Boy Scouts of the Philippines grew so much as to have a boy scout organization in every municipality; but more important than having a boy scout organization in every municipality is having those you organized be of the best type. I would rather have only ten boy scouts everyone of whom is the living example and realization of the ideals for which the organization stands, than have a thousand scouts who are not good and worthy.

Addressing a convention of teachers recently, I said that if I were a professor, or an educator, or a school teacher. I would be teaching my pupils their duties rather than their rights. In no organization is it so important that every member be taught his duties and how to comply with them as in the boy scout organization. You are here to do something for somebody else. You are here to show that you are not living for yourselves, that you are not satisfied merely to live and let live, but that your ideal is to live and help others live. So every boy scout must make it his duty not only to live up to the ideals of the institution but to see to it that every member of the institution does likewise. You have been taught from childhood one great principle of life, and that is. that life is worth living only if we use it to render service to others. It is love of humanity that must be instilled in your hearts—love of your fellow men, and not only of your own countrymen. That is the quality that must differentiate the boy scouts from those who are not. The boy scouts must serve humanity. When you see one who is in danger of losing his life, you go and give him your help without asking his name, without asking his nationality, and without looking at the color of his face. When you see that there is a human being who needs your aid, you go and give yourself to help that human being. That to me constitutes the essential quality of a good scout.

I congratulate you upon the third anniversary of the approval of the law which authorized the organization of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. Let me look to the future with confidence that the National Assembly, which has approved this law, would find in the work of the scouts of today and those that will succeed you the realization of the supreme ideal of serving humanity and improving mankind.

Boys, goodbye.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library