SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

SOCIAL JUSTICE, LABOR UNIONS, AND PUBLIC WORKS

[Delivered at the public plaza, Virac, Catanduanes, June 8, 1938]

Mr. Governor, Mr. Mayor, Assemblyman Vera, Ladies and Gentlemen, my Countrymen:

It gives me a great pleasure to see, for the first time in my life, this magnificent island of Catanduanes and this beautiful town of Virac. Especially, it pleases me immensely to witness this hearty welcome that you have corded me. I am an old politician and I know all the methods used in the Philippines in receiving, when we wish to, a man from other parts of the country who holds a public position. What you have done today, the smiles that I have seen in the faces of the people, old and young, have made my heart beat fast for they have convinced me that even those whom I have never met before think well of the government that I am giving to our country. My friends, I have reached a point in my life where I may truthfully say that I no longer want the powers and privileges that a public position, especially one as high as the one I am occupying, can give. There is no reward that you can give me except the satisfaction of believing that I am doing the best I can for your interest. I want you to know that I have but one purpose in the exercise of the authority and in the performance of the duties of my office—to do justice to the poor and the rich alike. Justice alone can justify the existence of a government. And justice is the first objective of government. It is my hope that every official of this province, from the sub-governor to the mayor, down to the last teniente del barrio , will realize that he can coöperate with my administration only by not committing abuses and permitting no one to commit them. The justice of the peace court is the lowest rung in our judiciary, but every justice of the peace occupies what can be called the most important position in the judicial system of the Philippines, for it is to the justice of the peace that the poor can take his grievances, and it is the justice of the peace, by justly performing his duty, who can best convince the people that we have in this country of ours an independent and fair judiciary. I want every official of the Government of the Philippines to realize that his position has been given to him, not for his own welfare but for the purpose of serving the people of this country.

I have come here to let you know the objective of my administration. I have also come to you to tell you that within the means at the disposal of our Government, the National Assembly has started a huge program of public works and of improvement of the public school system in the Philippines. In line with this program, you will have before the arrival of the next term of office of Assemblyman Vera, if you reelect him, a road that will go around this whole island, putting in communication every municipality that will communicate with said province. Before his next term of office shall have expired, there will be no barrio in the Province of Catanduanes without a school building for the girls and boys of that island.

I have not come to advocate the reelection of Assemblyman Vera, but I do want to take advantage of this opportunity which is also my first visit here to tell you that I am very much pleased with the services he has rendered in the National Assembly. [Applause] You know that I have not always been a political friend of your assemblyman. I have no doubt that from this very platform Assemblyman Vera must have told you what a terrible man I am. But I don’t care about that; I judge men not by their words but by their acts. And I have watched the conduct of Assemblyman Vera in the National Assembly and I am convinced that he is doing his best to serve not only the people of this town but also the people of the Philippines, and that is enough for me.

I have seen and noticed these different placards that you have presented to me. I have particularly observed one which has already disappeared. I don’t know where it is now.

(The placard was brought to the President and it read as follows: “Political influence, compadre system and bribery should not deprive one of work in the public works.”)

I suppose you understand that, don’t you? Who prepared that? I want to know what this means. Does mean that in this province political influence, the compadre system and bribery play a part when the government officials give work to the people? Is there anyone now who is ready to tell me that he knows and he can prove that an official of this Government has been bribed? If so, let him speak out. I want to know it.

This is a serious charge and no responsible person will make it unless he can prove it. This is a charge against the whole government of Catanduanes and no one, unless he could prove it, should have made that charge in the presence of the President of the Philippines. Now, I want to say something in connection with the public works. I understand that that placard has been prepared by the labor union of this province. Now, gentlemen, I am a friend of labor. I have no objection to the workingmen organizing themselves and forming a union. But I want to call the attention of the laboring people that they must beware of those who organize them into a union. It is my hope that labor unions will be organized by laborers themselves, but that their leaders will be taken from amongst those who actually do work like the laborers, so that when the labor leader speaks for the interest of the organization, he speaks for his own interest also. Sometimes the dangers in labor organization come when self-appointed person lead a labor movement, not because they are interested in the workingmen and women, not because their hearts go out to those who have to work in order to make their living, but because they are interested in securing something for themselves through the organization they have formed. The workingmen in the Philippines should have confidence in their local officials and go to them for redress of then-grievances. And I want to say to the public officials not only of this town and of this province, but also those of other towns and provinces all over the Philippines that it is their first duty to see to it that the man who works gets his proper reward. We shall never win the confidence of our people in our Government until, by deed, we prove to the people that we are interested in safeguarding their interests and in protecting their rights.

Now, as to public works. The Government is the one responsible for carrying out public works. The Government deals directly with the workingmen. The Government will not use labor leaders to secure workingmen, and the workingmen need not go to any leader in order to secure work. I have given instructions to all the district engineers to give work to the person who needs the job regardless of the political party to which he belongs. [Applause] I expect the engineers to carry out faithfully those instructions. I have with me the Director of Public Works and I expect him to make the men under his bureau comply with those instructions. I expect the subgovernor, the mayors, and the tenientes del barrio , to see to it that the people in their respective municipalities and barrios get work when they need it. But you cannot get work by threatening the Government. You cannot obtain work by making an irresponsible denunciation against everybody. If you have a complaint and you can prove it, don’t be afraid of anybody, present it. But if you are only mad at some body for personal reasons, don’t make any noise. If your resentment is only political and not based on facts, keep your peace until the next election. When you have a reason to complain, then present your complaint.

In the past the amount of money which the provincial government could spend for these public works was rather limited. It was especially true with this little Subprovince of Catanduanes. I don’t suppose you have had much money before, and, therefore, it would not surprise me if somebody who wanted work, did not get it. At the last session of the National Assembly, however, we appropriated a large sum of money for your roads and I am going to tell the engineer to give work to those who want work, especially to those who really work. But we want men who will work and not men who will talk.

Now, my friends. I have talked more than I expected to on this visit. I want to assure you that we expect, during the next three years, to provide your island with the improvement that you have never had before and perhaps never dreamt of. [ Applause ] You know I come from a very poor town myself. Therefore, I know what the people of those poor towns feel when they see that their community has very little of the comforts that other communities have. It gives me, therefore, great satisfaction to be able to tell you that the day is nearing when your hope to see this province progressive will be realized. [ Applause ]

Ladies and gentlemen. I thank you from the bottom of my heart for this generous and hearty reception you have given me. May God bless you all. [ Applause ]

Source : Presidential Museum and Library