HEMP INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT POLICIES

Pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and in line with the thrust of the national government to promote transparency and accountability in local governance, the Sangguniang Panlungsod of [City/Municipality Name], during its regular session held on [Date], enacted Ordinance No. [Ordinance Number], entitled: “An Ordinance providing for the Annual Budget of [City/Municipality Name] for Fiscal Year [Year].”

WHEREAS, the Annual Budget is a comprehensive plan of financial resources and expenditures for the operation of the local government; 

WHEREAS, it is incumbent upon the Sangguniang Panlungsod to appropriate funds for various programs, projects and activities that will address the needs and aspirations of its constituents; 

WHEREAS, after thorough review and deliberation, the Sangguniang Panlungsod finds it necessary to enact an ordinance appropriating funds for the operation of the local government for Fiscal Year [Year];

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of [City/Municipality Name] in session assembled, as follows:

SECTION 1. Title. – This ordinance shall be known as the “Annual Budget Ordinance of [City/Municipality Name] for Fiscal Year [Year].”

SECTION 2. Appropriation. – The total amount of [Amount] Pesos (₱[Amount]) is hereby appropriated for the operation of the local government of [City/Municipality Name] for Fiscal Year [Year], to be allocated as follows:

[Detailed breakdown of appropriations]

SECTION 3. Sources of Funds. – The funds for the operation of the local government for Fiscal Year [Year] shall be sourced from:

[Detailed breakdown of funding sources]

SECTION 4. Effectivity. – This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its approval and after compliance with the requirements of law regarding publication and dissemination. 

ENACTED, [Date].

I am for the proletariat, but I am not a communist. I am in favor of the proletariat because as you increase the buying power of the masses, you multiply enormously the wealth of the country.

The Government of the Philippines cannot give you wealth even if it wants to. The Government of the Philippines cannot give you knowledge even if it wants to. But the Government of the Philippines if it wants to, and if the officials of the Government are honest, sincere, and patriotic, can give you justice and a good, honest, and decent government.

I want the governors, the mayors, the councilors, the tenientes del barrio , and every man with authority to always remember that their authority has been given to them not to promote their own personal interest but to serve the people who elected them. And when I say “to serve the people,” I don’t mean to serve only the people who voted for them. They have to serve every citizen whether he voted for them or not.

It is more important that a justice of the peace should win the confidence of the people through his fairness and sense of justice than that the members of the Supreme Court of the Philippines should do so. * * * If the justice of the peace is fair in performing his duties, the poor people of the Philippines will have faith in our Government.

Pursuant to Section 13 of Republic Act No. 9995, otherwise known as the Anti-Photo and Video Voyeurism Act of 2009, and its Implementing Rules and Regulations, the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), through its Cybercrime Division, conducted a series of surveillance operations against individuals suspected of engaging in online sexual exploitation of children (OSEC). 

Base sa mga resulta ng surveillance, natukoy ang isang online group na tinatawag na “Dark Web Predators Philippines” na aktibong nagpapalitan ng mga larawan at bidyo ng mga menor de edad na may nilalamang seksuwal. Ang nasabing grupo ay gumagamit ng mga encrypted messaging applications upang itago ang kanilang mga aktibidad at maiwasan ang pagkakakilanlan. 

On February 16, 2024, the NBI-Cybercrime Division, in coordination with the Philippine National Police-Women and Children Protection Center (PNP-WCPC), conducted a series of simultaneous search and seizure operations in the provinces of Bulacan, Pampanga, and Metro Manila. Ang mga operasyon ay nagresulta sa pag-aresto ng labing-apat (14) na suspek at ang pagkumpiska ng mga computer, cellphone, at iba pang electronic devices na naglalaman ng mga iligal na materyales. 

Further investigation revealed that the suspects are members of the aforementioned online group and are actively involved in the production, distribution, and possession of child pornography.  Kasama sa mga naarestong suspek ang mga guro, empleyado ng gobyerno, at mga estudyante. 

Ang NBI at PNP-WCPC ay patuloy na nagsasagawa ng mga imbestigasyon upang matukoy ang iba pang mga kasabwat at upang masugpo ang online sexual exploitation of children.  The NBI and PNP-WCPC are committed to protecting children from all forms of abuse and exploitation.

Mr. Governor, Friends of Maasin:

I know the reason why my friend, Assemblyman Oppus, has requested Assemblyman Tan to be my interpreter. Oppus is a great orator in English, in Spanish and, of course, in Visaya. And yet he does not want to be my interpreter. Do you know why? Because he wants me to speak well of him. Well, I am going to disappoint Oppus because I am not going to say anything about him. I don’t have to speak of Oppus; he is from your town, and you know him from childhood. It would be presumptuous on my part to speak of him to you. What Oppus is as a man, you know better than I. What Oppus is as an assemblyman from your district, you know perhaps as much as I do. What Oppus is as Chairman of the Committee on Appropriations of the National Assembly, I know more than you do, and as such chairman I can tell you that I have found in Assemblyman Oppus a man who has sincerely, cordially, loyally, and devotedly cooperated with the policies of my administration. And I want to take advantage of this opportunity of a visit to his town to give public testimony of his valuable services as chairman of that committee.

Assemblyman Oppus has kept asking me since long ago to come and visit Maasin. It has been also long ago when Assemblyman Tan, my nice friend, at present interpreter, invited me to visit Ormoc. The members of the Assembly from this coast of the Province of Leyte have wanted me to visit you long ago. This is my first time to enjoy the pleasure and privilege of seeing the towns on this coast. But I hope I am not telling you anything new when I say that even before I landed on this beautiful shore, this part of the Province of Leyte had been already dear to my heart. Ever since I exercised some power in the Government, I have contributed greatly to the improvement and progress of the towns on this coast. I had something to do in giving you a court here, and I have something to do in giving you better means of communication. At the last session of the National Assembly that body, which has the exclusive authority and power to appropriate the funds of the National Government, appropriated large sums of money for this province and for Samar, which in the past had not been particularly favored by the National Government. Aside from the fact that roads in themselves constitute the best means of promoting the material development of a country, at this particular time appropriations for roads and public works for Leyte are of great significance in that you need employment because of the bad price of hemp. These appropriations will provide employment for the poor people of this province. I have given instructions to the Bureau of Public Works to start these projects right away. But that will not solve your problem. Your problem today is to find some means of helping the hemp industry to get a better price. I am afraid that this is a very hard problem to solve. The National Assembly, owing to the efforts of the assemblymen hailing from the provinces where hemp is produced, has authorized the use of several million pesos for the purpose of helping the hemp industry. I am not sure—in fact I have very serious doubts–whether with this appropriation the corporation that is to be created under the provisions of this law will give the result that many expect. However, I am going to sign that bill, and I am going to organize that corporation because I want to try and see whether this means, which the National Assembly has conceived of to help the hemp industry, will be successful. We may lose a few million pesos if that method fails but it will be worth trying because the hemp industry, in my opinion, is the most important industry in the Philippines. It is much more important than the sugar industry; it is as important at least as the copra and rice industries. The sugar industry, by its very nature, tends to accumulate money in the hands of a few and leave very little to the workingmen. The owners of the sugar centrals make more money than the owners of the land, and the owners of the land make much more money than the men who work the land. Generally, in the sugar industry, the land is owned by a few individuals. On the other hand, in the hemp industry, with very few exceptions, the land is divided among small landowners who work on the land themselves. In this way the benefits from the hemp industry, when the industry is prosperous, extend to more people than do the benefits from the sugar industry.

My friends, my well-known sympathy for the masses of our people, my desire that the wealth of the country be not accumulated in the hands of a few individuals, but distributed among the great masses of the population, are not only due to a human sentiment that makes my heart go out to the poor; they are also due to a realistic view of what is best in the long run for the nation as a whole. I am for the proletariat, but I am not a communist. I am in favor of the proletariat because as you increase the buying power of the masses, you multiply enormously the wealth of the country. I am going to give you an illustration of local appeal. Suppose in the town of Maasin you had one or two millionaires and the rest of the people had nothing, no property, and earned only very low wages. Do you think that the merchants could make any profits? Do you think that they could make business prosper in this town? Of course, not. The millionaire, no matter how rich he is, has very limited needs even if he wants to throw his money away, he can not have as many clothes as all the clothes that the twenty thousand people of Maasin need. He cannot eat, either in quantity or in value, as much as the twenty thousand here can eat. He cannot spend for his personal and family needs as much as the twenty thousand poor people in Maasin can spend. Give those twenty thousand people money and you will see what they will buy. Business will prosper. That, however, is only secondary to the most important consideration of all, which is that every human being is entitled to live as a human being.

Well, that is the advantage of the hemp industry. If the price of hemp is good, those people who own small lots can make money, be prosperous relatively, and contented and happy. Therefore, I say again, although I am not sure that this bill which has been passed by the National Assembly will really bring relief to the hemp industry, I will sign it and run the risk of losing millions of pesos in an effort to help the people of the Philippines who are dedicated to the hemp industry.

In two ways at least, I believe that this law will be beneficial. For one thing the corporation can buy the hemp directly from the farmers themselves, and thus offer competition to the middlemen,–those merchants who are exploiting the farmers. Then there is another thing that we can do through this corporation. The freight rate on hemp from Manila to Europe or America is very high. This corporation, after buying a sufficient quantity of hemp, could export it directly. By getting its own ships the corporation would save in transportation expenses, which would redound to the benefit of the farmer himself.

I have spoken to you of things–roads and the hemp industry–that affect your material well-being. Now I want to speak to you on things that affect your moral contentment. Thanks to the excise tax on oil, the Government has been in a position to appropriate large amounts of money for roads, and it will be in a position to appropriate large amounts of money for school buildings. This excise tax on oil is of temporary character. For the maintenance of roads, and for the maintenance of schools, we must depend on our own taxes at home. The National Government is going to assume responsibility for the maintenance of primary schools exclusive of the intermediate schools. But so far we do not have enough money yet from our income to maintain these primary schools and to meet the yearly increase in these schools. For the extension of the schools this year alone, I was forced to suspend the money appropriated by the National Assembly because we do not have enough money to keep open all the schools that were opened last year. It would be illogical to open new schools if we could not keep the old ones open. Well, now we can open new schools and keep the old ones open if the members of the National Assembly, like your representatives, Oppus and Tan, want to do it; it is all in their hands. I have recommended to the National Assembly, in its last session, the increase in the taxes paid by the rich, and if those taxes are levied you will have money for primary schools. The income tax in the Philippines is very low. A man, for instance, who receives an annual income of thirty thousand pesos, pays less than 5 per cent a year from that thirty thousand. Is there anybody in Maasin who has an income of thirty thousand a year? I suppose everyone of you believes that nobody has a right to get thirty thousand a year. Do you know that we have persons who have each an income of one million pesos a year and who pay only a few thousand pesos in the form of tax to the Government? Now, tell me, what do you think a man can do with a one-million-peso income a year? Don’t you believe that we ought to take from that man at least one hundred thousand pesos to give to the schools for the boys and girls of the poor? We are not even doing that much. It is very fair that a man who gets too much income should pay part of it for the support of the Government, schools, and the roads. So if you want to have more schools, you tell Oppus to vote for those laws, and if he does not vote for them don’t reelect him.

I have suspended the expenditure of the appropriation for school extension in order that the people in the provinces may ask their assemblymen to vote for those new tax bills at the extra session. I am telling you now that unless your assemblymen approve those new tax bills there will be no extension schools. Make them do it and you will have extension classes. We have to have more schools, we have to give to every boy and girl, no matter how poor their parents, an opportunity to have at least the rudiments of education that every man and woman should have.

Roads and schools are important, but there is something more important still than roads and schools and good price of hemp, and that is honesty, fairness, and justice in the Government. I am visiting the provinces in order to tell the people that I expect every Government official to comply with his duties to protect the people from abuse, and principally to avoid the commission of abuses on the part of the officials of the Government. The Government of the Philippines cannot give you wealth even if it wants to. The Government of the Philippines cannot give you knowledge even if it wants to. But the Government of the Philippines if it wants to, and if the officials of the Government are honest, sincere, and patriotic, can give you justice and a good, honest, and decent government. I want the officials of the Government to realize this sacred duty that they have toward our people. I want the governors, the mayors, the councilors, the tenientes del barrio , and every man with authority to always remember that their authority has been given to them not to promote their aim personal interest but to serve the people who elected them. And when I say “to serve the people,” I don’t mean to serve only the people who voted for them. They have to serve every citizen whether he voted for them or not. I have been a candidate of the Nacionalista Party; I have won as the candidate of the Nacionalista Party; I am the President of the Philippines. It is my sworn duty to exercise my powers in the interest of all the people of the Philippines, not in the interest alone of the Nacionalista Party. And if my party is aware of its responsibility, it will be the first to be proud of the fact that the President of the Philippines is not serving the Nacionalista Party but is serving the Philippines. What I say of myself as the President of the Philippines, I say of the governors, of the mayors, and of all the officials of the Government.

One word with reference to the justices of the peace, and I shall be through. The justices of the peace in the past had been political leaders; the justices of the peace in the future must not be political leaders. It is more important that a justice of the peace should win the confidence of the people through his fairness and sense of justice than that the members of the Supreme Court of the Philippines should do so. As far as the people in general are concerned, they do not care what the Supreme Court is; they never get their cases to the Supreme Court. But the man in the remotest village knows what a justice of the peace is, and knows that the justice of the peace has the power to decide his little question, and that he must go to the justice of the peace. If the justice of the peace is not fair to him, that poor man has no other recourse. That poor man will feel that the Government is not fair to him. If the justice of the peace is fair in performing his duties, the poor people of the Philippines will have faith in our Government.

With very few exceptions, I appointed most of the justices of the peace upon the recommendation of the members of the National Assembly from the district to which that court belongs. But I told every member of the National Assembly that I had accepted his recommendation upon the ground that I have the right to assume that a member of the Assembly is fully aware of his responsibility as a member of that body, and that he has recommended to me a man not because he is his friend but because he believes that that man will do his duty honestly and justly as justice of the peace.

Now, I want to tell the justices of the peace that while the members of the National Assembly may have had the chance to recommend them and secure their appointment, the members of the National Assembly will not be able to save them if they do not perform their duty. If a justice of the peace from the district of Assemblyman Oppus should prove to be a crook,—he may be his friend, his relative, his brother, or his father,—I would also dismiss him from the service and Assemblyman Oppus would not be able to save him. I want the justice of the peace to be free, to be impartial, to be independent.

Now I am through. I feel very grateful, deeply and profoundly grateful, for this warm reception that I have received in this town of Maasin. I am pleased and thankful to the members of the National Assembly who have supported the policies of my administration. These policies have not been, as yet, carried out completely; we need the enactment of a few more laws if the people of this province think that my policies are favorable to the people of the Philippines, if the people of this province approve of my administration. But I want to ask you to return to the National Assembly men who are supporting the policies of this administration.

My heartfelt thanks to the people of Maasin, particularly to those beautiful girls who sang a hymn for me. /Applause/

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library