Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Ideal Partnership of Landowners ad Tenants

[Delivered at a gathering of his tenants in Arayat, Pampanga, on March 30, 1939]

My Friends:

The word kasama, which is the term in Tagalog for tenant, means partner; and this term, which has come to us from our ancestors, properly defines the relationship between the landowners and their tenants in our country.

In fact and in law, they are partners; for the landowner puts in his capital in the form of land, while the tenant works the land; and the two divide the produce of the land. In the old days the tenant was not only a partner, but he and his family were also considered and treated as members of the family of the landowner.

This was a most humane and beneficial relationship. However, in the course of time, avarice and greed transformed the kasama into the victim of the landlord. The kasama was cheated of the product of his labor through various devices, of which the most common is charging usurious rates on the debts he contracted.

The Philippine Legislature tried by legislation to remedy this intolerable, cruel, and inhuman situation. But, although many of the old and bad practices have gradually disappeared, abuses are still being committed against the kasama, and these abuses have caused serious troubles in many instances.

We have owned this land for several years now, but we have not done anything about it. One of the reasons why my wife and I bought this farm is my desire to carry into actual practice my idea of the treatment that landowners should accord their tenants. I have been consistently preaching social justice, but I believe that it would be better if I myself set concrete examples.

We are going to be real partners. We shall divide the produce of this land in equal parts, and if you will do your work diligently and conscientiously, we shall reciprocate each other accordingly in the future.

We will give you working animals free; take good care of them as if you had bought them. We will not deliver the carabaos now, lest you sell or lose them. You shall pay for these animals in small yearly installments; but those of you who show industry in working the land and who take excellent care of the carabaos will receive back their money.

But one thing that we shall do for you now is to cancel your old debts. Those who were indebted to the former owners of this land may, henceforth, consider their debts as paid, although in the purchase of this land your debts were transferred to us.

Whatever you may owe us in the future, such as advances for your food, clothing, and other necessities in life, shall be lent to you without interest. The rice that you take, you will return in kind; and if you pay the money loans in rice, we will credit you at the current market price of rice.

However, we will not lend you a single centavo for betting in cockfights, for we will not allow you to gamble.

Each family shall have one-half hectare of land to plant vegetables or bananas on, and to use for raising chickens or hogs. We shall also introduce improvements on the land, so that it may yield better crops without any additional cost to you.

If you have any complaint, present it to Mrs. Quezon or to me. And if you do not get justice from us, take us to the courts for, like all other citizens, we are subject to the jurisdiction of the courts if we commit any injustice or if we violate the laws.

Work hard and well. Consider the land that you work on as your own. And as long as you comply with your part of the contract, you may rest assured of its use as long as you desire it.

Here you will be free to be a communist, socialist, or a Popular Frontman. Although I am a Nationalist, yet you need not belong to my party or vote for our candidates. The fact that you belong to another political party will not be sufficient cause for mo to send you away. Nor shall I hold it against you if you have any complaint to make.

I shall do the best I can for you. I will not only give you everything that you are entitled to under our laws, but if you are a hard worker, I shall also give you extra compensation.

But, remember, I shall do nothing for the man who does not work. Nobody has the right to live at the expense of others. Any one who spends his time scratching his head or taking care of his fighting rooster, will have to find some other place to stay idle in. As long as you do your part, I shall do mine.

Let us be real partners. Let us bear in mind that what is good for you is also good for me. And what is good for me is good for you, too. With this understanding, we shall not only be partners but also friends.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library