Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Government Cooperation and Military Training

[Delivered at Tuguegarao, Cagayan, February 28, 1936]

Mr. Governor, Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I hope I will not disappoint you tonight. Very seldom do I claim any credit for anything I do in my public life. After listening to the speech of Governor Formoso, however, I feel that I have the right to claim at this time something which I have done not only for the Province of Cagayan but also for all the provinces constituting the Cagayan Valley. If I had not heard the speech of Governor Formoso, I would not know how well he has supported me all these years. If I were not sure not only of his loyalty but of his personal friendship as well, I would believe that his speech was in the main devoted to a criticism of the National Government. The first thing I heard from him is that the road which made it possible for people from Aparri to go to Manila in comfortable automobiles did not do any good to the Province of Cagayan. I still remember the time when I went to Aparri on horseback, passing over the mountains separating Nueva Vizcaya from Nueva Ecija, and it almost killed me. But now I am here in Tuguegarao when I only left Manila day before yesterday. If I am tired, certainly it was not because of the trip, for I made it in a comfortable automobile. I am tired because I have been talking too much in every town along the way.

The road may benefit the Provinces of Nueva Vizcaya and Isabela more directly, but certainly it has also benefited the Province of Cagayan. To show Governor Formoso and the people of Cagayan how really important it is, try to close it to transportation! And I want to warn Governor Formoso that if he makes the same remarks again, I will close the road—for the Province of Cagayan only—not for the Provinces of Nueva Vizcaya and Isabela [ Laughter ], for I was responsible, one of the two men mainly responsible, for the building of that part of the road. Governor Harrison was the other man. It was through our common efforts that we secured from the Legislature sufficient funds to connect Nueva Vizcaya with Nueva Ecija by highway. Let me tell you that that short road alone, connecting those two provinces, cost the National Government P1,800,000. Now if you do not like that road, I will close it for you. [ A voice of protest .]

Governor Formoso also complained about water transportation. My dear friends, when I first came to Cagayan, you had neither a road from Aparri to Manila nor any kind of a port at Aparri. I promised the people of this Valley then that I would do what I could to open such a road and also to give Aparri a port. Through my efforts and, of course, with the cooperation of the senators and representatives from this Valley, I succeeded in getting an appropriation for the Port of Aparri, on which, though we have already spent half a million pesos, we are still spending money. Listening to Governor Formoso, it would seem that we have done nothing for Aparri. Now, gentlemen, I want you to know that I am not God. God alone has the power to bring light with the words “Let there be light.” I cannot build the Port of Aparri by saying “Let there be a port in Aparri.” It takes time for the labors of men to achieve anything, and the kind of work that is being done and has yet to be done in Aparri will take time. We are on the way and we have already spent P500,000 as I said. The work will require P500,000 more, and right now we still have P300,000 available. So I am proud to say to the people of Cagayan now that I am here again, and that what I promised I would do on my first visit is now a long way towards complete fulfillment.

But, my friends, you seem to believe that everything has to be done for you by the National Government. You are not satisfied with having this road opened entirely at the cost of the Insular Government and your port built also with Insular funds. You still seem to feel that the National Government is neglecting you. I do not blame Governor Formoso for asking for so many things. Every man has the right to ask for what he wants, but the question is whether he has the right to get it or whether he can get it

The first mistake that I made as President of the Philippine Commonwealth was what I did for the people of the Province of Cagayan. It was a mistake for which the municipal presidents of this province and the Provincial Governor have given me their thanks. That mistake was my condoning the payment of 20 per cent of your land taxes. Let me tell you in all sincerity that I do not want you to thank me for what was a mistake on my part. Now I want to take seriously. I made that mistake knowingly. I did it because I had authorized Governor Formoso to tell the people of Cagayan that I was in favor of doing that for them, and since I had made that promise, I did not make it with the idea of winning the votes of the people of Cagayan. I made it because at that time I thought it was safe to reduce the tax. I felt that Governor Formoso, the Provincial Board, and the municipal councils of the Province of Cagayan were right in asking what they did from the National Government. Therefore, I caused Governor Formoso to secure that the condonation and told him that if he did not get it from the former Governor-General Murphy I would see to it myself later.

When the matter was submitted to me it was after my inauguration as President, and I saw that many people in Cagayan had already paid their taxes in full, and felt that if some people had done their duty there was no reason why others should not also do so. But I had promised, and thus you did not pay, and were not good citizens. [ Applause .] I should not have encouraged that. I was a party to your failure in the performance of your duty to our country by doing what I was asked to do, although I saw that most of you could have paid if you had wanted to. But, as I said, I made my promise and I did not want the people of Cagayan to say that my word could not be relied upon.

Let me tell you frankly and sincerely now not to ask me again what I should not do, for I would not grant your request. How can Governor Formoso expect me to do all that he asks for in the way of public improvements, if he is the first in asking that you be allowed not to pay your taxes ? Where do you think the National Government would get the money with which to provide these public improvements, if every province asks the National Government for funds and at the same time asks the President not to collect their taxes?

Let us have a very plain talk tonight. My friends, the National Government is not receiving special help from God. The Insular Treasury is not filled with gold coming from heaven. The money which is spent on our public improvements, on our roads, must come from the people of our country. We cannot take it from Japan, America, England, or Russia. If the people of some provinces pay their taxes and others do not, what are we going to do?

I did not take a very deep interest in the welfare and prosperity of the people of this Valley, as I said, until I made that trip years ago when you had neither a road to Manila nor a port at Aparri. From then on I have taken an interest in this region of the Philippines. When I saw these wonderful rich fields lying idle, when I saw this beautiful country, one of the most beautiful in these beautiful islands of ours [ applause ], and with but few people to enjoy all this wealth and beauty of Nature, when I saw all that, I at once realized that the only reason why the Cagayan Valley was not as developed as the Central Luzon region, was that it lacked means of access, and I, therefore, immediately proceeded to do what I could to extend transportation and communication facilities both by land and water to this wonderful part of our country. I sincerely hope that it will not be long before the Port of Aparri will be able not only to shelter those little Compañia Tabacalera boats but also the largest boats plying between America and the Philippines. [ Applause .]

But, my friends, you must earn that. You must show me during my administration that you realize the new responsibilities devolving upon the Filipino people and that you are ready to bear your share of them if you are to continue receiving help from the National Government. If I see that the attitude that you take here is to leave everything to the National Government without doing something yourselves, your province may lose the help I am giving you. I want to be frank with you, and I say that if I find that all you do is to ask for money, you will get nothing at all. I wish every one to cooperate in every way, and the one most important way for you to cooperate with your Government is to pay your taxes. Take note of that—your Government.

Is there any one of you here who does not know the change that has taken place in the Philippines in the political situation of this country and in our Government? Do you know that the Government of the Philippines today is truly and fully a government of the Filipino people, for the Filipino people, and by the Filipino people? It is, therefore, your Government. We have been fighting centuries back to become some day a free people, to become self-governing, to have our own independent national existence. At last the dreams of our ancestors are to be realized. Independence will be ours ten years from now. Today in all matters affecting our domestic affairs, we alone have the authority and the power to determine what shall be done. The Chief Executive of our country is no longer an American appointed by the President of the United States. He is a native-born Filipino, elected by the voters of the Philippines. He is the President, the highest executive authority, not by virtue of his own will, not because he has wrested that authority by force from any one, but because the people of our country, in the exercise of their right to choose their own President in a fair and free election, have elected him to be at the helm of the public affairs. So that today, the Government of the Philippines, I say it again, is in our hands and is our Government. The power and authority which are vested in me by law, you have given to me. It is my duty, my sworn duty, to make the Government of the Commonwealth one of the best governments known to men. [ Applause .] It is my duty and it is my determination to give you, my people, the best government you ever had since our country has been governed by any one. [ Applause .] I am ready to give everything that there is in me to make it possible for you to have that government. I am sparing no effort in order that you may realize what a great thing it is to have a government of your own.

But I cannot give you the kind of government that I want to give you, that you are entitled to have, and that it is our common duty to establish in memory of those who fought, bled, and died for the freedom of our country, unless the people and the provincial and municipal officials cooperate with me. That is why I am traveling through the provinces—so that I may get in touch with the common people, so that the local officials may know the responsibilities of the new Government and so that, in common consent and agreement, we may all get together, each one to do his part in the tremendous task of nation-building that is before us.

The duty of the provincial and municipal officials is to see to it that the laws are complied with. Their duty is to give you in every municipality and in every province an honest government, a government which will render you service without the necessity of your paying something extra for the service that you are getting. [ Applause .] The law prescribes the salary that every official of the Government receives, and whether that salary is big or small, the official who accepts a position has no right to expect more than the salary provided by law, and no right to take advantage of his office either to get some present, a “gratificatión,” as we call it here, or some indirect advantage through which to enrich himself. It is the duty of the officials of this Government to give the people an efficient government; which means that everybody must work and work well, do his job well. The Government must be just, must protect the people from abuses and wrongdoings; and if anyone violates the law or commits abuses, it is the duty of government officials to go after such man, regardless of who he is. [ Applause .] We must have but one norm of conduct in our dealings with the People. The law must be the same for the powerful and for the weak, for the rich and for the poor. That is the kind of government that the people of the Philippines are entitled to have and that is the kind of government that I want to give to them, and I am sure I will be able to give it to them if I shall have the support of the provincial and municipal officials and especially of the people at large. [ Applause .]

I am very much concerned about this question of the payment of our taxes. First, because in every country that is the first duty of a citizen—to pay his tax. All this talk about “I love my country and I am ready to sacrifice my life,” is nonsense. The one way of really showing your” love for your country is to pay your taxes. I am tired of hearing, “We are ready to die,” for nobody is asking you to die. It is not necessary, not yet, anyway. But we have to pay our taxes first, if we want to be independent, because the responsibilities of an independent government are greater, much greater than the responsibilities of a colony, and those responsibilities have to be met with money, and don’t forget that.

Once more I say to you that money is not coming from America, England, nor even from heaven; the money must come from us. Under the Independence Act it is provided that if the Philippine Government or any of its dependencies or instrumentalities should fail to meet its financial obligations, the President of the United States may order the High Commissioner to take over the Customhouse and use the income therefrom for the payment of those financial obligations. So that one of the few circumstances under which America may again interfere with us in the government of our country, is when there is a financial obligation on the part of our Government, whether provincial or municipal, that we are unable to meet. Now is there any good, handsome Cagayano who is willing to see his country humiliated, as it surely will be humiliated if America should seize our Customhouse to force us to pay our obligations? Is there any Cagayano? I hope not one of you. And let me tell you if there is any one, I am going to compel him to pay anyhow. [ Laughter .] This is not a question of whether he wants to or not; the law requires it. So do not talk about this condonation anymore and do not send representatives again, not even Governor Formoso, for they will not get it. [ Applause .]

In order that there may be no anti-tax-paying leagues hereafter, I am going to tell you what I have in mind. I have noticed that some are beginning to take as a joke this payment of taxes because in the past the Government has found itself unable to meet the situation created in some places. When the Government takes a piece of property for nonpayment of taxes, it has to sell it or keep it. If it keeps it, the property is of no utility or good to anybody. If it sells it, a few rich fellows in the town get the property, and the result is a serious agrarian situation. I have conceived a new plan and that is to recommend to the Legislature, unless I see the people are paying their taxes, that whenever a landowner does not pay his tax, the Government take over his land as is being done now, but that instead of selling it to any individual, it be divided among the poor of the town. [ Applause .] There are many people who would like to have land, and if the proprietors do not want to pay their taxes, their property will go to the people. The result would be that there would be more people in the Philippines owning lands. While there might be two or three people in a locality who might feel they were harshly dealt with, yet there would be fifty or more that would be made happy. Therefore, you landowners, make your choice, and avoid a mistake. Go back and tell your friends that all their land will go to those who have no land if they do not pay their taxes.

Independence does not mean, as some demagogues have been saying, that everyone will be able to lead a fine life of ease and pleasure, with nobody working, nobody paying taxes, and everybody rich and happy. Now, that is not independence, and securing you such a life is not my job. My job is to give you a government that will give you every opportunity to improve your lot, but you must do your own part before it will improve. We will open roads for you, and will give you schools with the taxes, of course, that you yourselves pay. We will prevent monopolies by the rich so that the poor will have equal opportunity. We will see to it that the man who works in the fields or in the factory gets the proper return for his work, and will not let anybody exploit him like a beast. [ Applause .] That is my job, but you see you will have to work to improve your condition; you will yourselves have to take advantage of the opportunity that the new Government will create for you. I am not going to put money into the pockets of anybody for I have none to give, and even if I had I would not do so The government is not a charitable institution to which men who are invalids or who are just lazy and do not want to work, can go and apply for something. Let us take seriously the job that we have before us. Let us take it seriously, my fellow citizens. We can build up a great people and a magnificent country if we have the right idea as to what we may expect from the Government and what we should do for ourselves.

Oh, this is a great country, eminently rich in its natural resources, and we have capable people here that can tell us what to do and lead us through the right path but let us do away with the small vices that we have. Let us not have so many fiestas and spend everything we have for them. Let us keep something for tomorrow. Let us not gamble all the time. Let us gamble occasionally, if we must, but not all the time, for God’s sake! [ Applause .] Now I am not a perfect human being myself, as of course, you know. I suppose some of you have heard that I am not much more than trash! The human being that does not want to enjoy life is not a human being. It is true that this is the valley of tears, but God did not mean that we should all be crying all the time. God is not cruel; He is our father. He gave us a beautiful world with opportunities for enjoyment, but he imposes upon us the obligation of earning our livelihood. So let us have good time, but not all the time. Let us have fiestas, but not spend everything. Let us have nice clothes, but not borrow money to get them. Certainly, the first thing that the Filipinos must do before they talk of economic development, is to economize. I am sure that if I performed a miracle here, which I cannot do, by virtue of which all of you here would be converted into rich men, and you did not learn to economize, you would be in the same place again after a year. What is economy? If you want to dance, don’t dance for P10 if you can dance for P1. If you want a fiesta, don’t kill all your “baboys” in one day. If you want a car, buy only one that you can pay for, and don’t borrow money to buy an expensive automobile. If you purchase it by installments, which means that you only borrow it until it is fully paid for, you are running the risk of losing what you may have paid even to the extent sometimes of starving your family, whenever you fail to keep up the installment payments. Are we going to continue doing all this? If we do, we might as well quit now and say, “It is impossible; the people of the Philippines can never be anything but slaves.”

One of the reasons why I am advocating military training is to have men properly trained to fight to defend our country if necessary, and also to develop a class of men who will look at life more seriously than some of our people now do, men who will be taught in the training camps the virtue of hard labor, the virtue of methodical life, the virtue of discipline, the virtue of self-sacrifice. For men of this sort are the men capable of building a nation of real men, the men who can make the Philippines a country that we all long to see, not only independent, not only self-governing, but a country inhabited by men conscious of their rights and responsibilities, determined to fight for them and to die if necessary. [ Applause .]

I have almost given up hope about the possibility of improving the character of the men of my generation. It would be largely a waste of time anyway, as we shall all die within a few more years. But the next ten years will give us the opportunity to bring up our young men and make every one of them a real man. In the training camps they will not be wasting their nights dancing. They will not be wasting Sunday going to cockfights. They will not be wasting their time at fiestas or in thinking up a lot of foolish ideas. They will be there building themselves up physically and morally in order that they may be truly the worthy compatriots of men like Rizal, Bonifacio, and Mabini. The National Defense Act is not necessary for the defense of our country alone. We may never have to fight another nation, but I believe that if we carry on successfully this compulsory military training, if we build men of the type that will come out of those training camps, there will be no nation on earth that will not respect us. We may never have to fire a shot, but through this military training, we will build up a new nation, a nation of workers, a nation of serious-minded individuals, a nation of men who want to do their duty and do it well.

My hope is in you, young men, and my hope is in you young women, and I want to tell you, young men what I said in Ilagan this morning. What I am asking; you to do is to undergo military training for a few months, an insignificant length of time as compared with the two years I was in the field. We roved the mountains. We had no barracks; only a nipa shack occasionally. Many a night we slept on the bare ground, in the mud with the rain pouring down on us. Many a day we had nothing to eat but wiId fruits. I went through all kinds of hardships and sacrifices as a soldier, and I did it for two years. After that I contracted malaria from which I suffered for another ten years. As a result, I later on contracted tuberculosis from the effects of which I have only recently recovered. That is what I have done for our country. I think I have a right to ask you, young men, to do so much less than that—to go to the fine barracks for a few months where you will get good food, good beds, and good guns, real guns. Why, my gun was so bad I almost killed myself with it.

Now don’t let some fools tell you this military training is a revival of the “quintos” system. Don’t let them insult you with such remarks. Under the Spanish “quintos,” one man out of every five was compelled to serve as a soldier in the Spanish army, but the son of the rich or the influential was never taken. Those soldiers were compelled to fight for the Spanish government and the Spanish flag. Under the National Defense Act, the son of the richest man in the Philippines will have to undergo military training in the camps. My own boy will have to go when he reaches the required age. I regret my son is not yet old enough, otherwise I would see to it that he is the first one to go to training. [ Applause .] You are going to the camps not to serve a foreign flag or government, but to serve our flag, to serve our Government, and to serve our country. [ Applause .]

You will probably hear some people say that it is not necessary to undertake all that now because for the next ten years we will remain under the American flag and America is compelled to defend us. They say we better spend the money for other purposes. That just shows that some people never learn, not even from experience. They evidently think that since America will still be here we can postpone training until ten years hence. Then, they believe, we can improvise a Philippine army. They have so soon forgotten what happened to the army we improvised before and which was licked like hell after a few encounters, and I was one of the runners. It is true that in the beginning that improvised army was able to beat the Spanish soldiers, because most of them were recruits, not real soldiers, not veterans, and naturally the Filipinos with bolos alone were able to give them a good fight, but it was not so when we faced the American soldiers, for as I told you, we ran like hell all over the country because we did not know how to handle our guns. Ten years is not too long a time to build up a real army.

So, my friends, get ready. Men of age, please Steady. Let me say that you are good fellows, without exception, ready when it is necessary to show in deeds your love for the Philippines, ready to die if necessary for our country which is entitled to all devotion, all patriotism.

My dear compatriots, God has been so generous with the Filipino people that he has given us one of the most beautiful, one of the richest countries upon the face of the earth. I have been around the world many times, but never have I seen a land so beautiful as this country of ours. Are we going to let anybody take from us that which has been given us by God? I say with you, “No, never!” [ Long applause .]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library