SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

RESPONSIBILITY OF PROVINCIAL TREASURERS

[Delivered at a luncheon in honor of provincial treasurers, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, February 22, 1938]

Mr. Secretary, Gentlemen:

I am very glad of the opportunity to meet the provincial treasurers of the Philippines, and I am going to take advantage of this occasion to tell you a few things I have in mind with reference to your work. I think the last time I met the provincial treasurers, was soon after the inauguration of the Commonwealth Government. Then, I emphasized one fact: that provincial treasurers must not be involved in local politics. Since that time the administrative functions of the provincial treasurers have been transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Finance.

Now I want to say a few words to you explaining the reasons why this transfer was made, so that you may see the objective we had in mind. In the first place, under the Tydings-McDuffie Law, the National Government is responsible not only for the national finances but also for the finances of the provincial and municipal governments and all other subdivisions of the Government. It was necessary, therefore, that a consistent policy be adopted in the management of the finances of the Government and that the Department which was in charge of the financial affairs of the National Government be held also responsible for this and take care of the financial affairs of the provinces and municipalities. The transfer of your office from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Finance does not convert the office of the provincial treasurer into an office entirely disconnected from the provincial government.

You are the financial agents of these provinces; you are the connecting link between the provinces and the Commonwealth in their respective financial affairs. As a provincial official, it is naturally your duty to cooperate with the provincial governor. Do not think that because you are no longer under the Department of the Interior, you should feel no responsibility toward the affairs of the provincial government, or that you should feel entirely out of the provincial government’s machinery. While you are the agents of the National Government in the provinces and municipalities, you are at the same time the financial officers of every province. It is in such capacity—as the financial officer of every province—that you should try to coöperate, in fact, coöperate cordially, with the provincial governors by giving them, in order to avoid conflict, your advice if your advice is sought or voluntarily giving your advice if you think that they are attempting to do something which you will have to disapprove in your capacity as provincial treasurer. But in the performance of this duty, try to show the governor of the province the respect and consideration which he, as the head of the province duly elected by the people, deserves.

I was shocked to learn of the malversation committed by the provincial treasurer of Surigao. I am going to see to it that he receives the maximum penalty the law imposes in this case. I was further shocked to learn that the same crime had been committed by the postmaster of Baguio. Gentlemen, it is almost disheartening to see that in the first few years of the Government of the Commonwealth such crimes could be committed. The outside world has always been doubting the ability of the Filipinos to govern themselves, precisely, because they dare charge government officials in the Philippines with lack of integrity and honesty. It is doubly your duty to disprove that charge by being strictly honest in the administration of the funds placed in your hands and by being rigid in your supervision over the municipal treasurers in each province so that they may not easily appropriate or misappropriate government funds.

I have invited the Auditor-General to be present at this luncheon, not only because his office has a great deal to do with the offices of the provincial treasurers, but because I want to say to him in your presence that I do not consider the office of the provincial auditor as being absolutely free from blame for these occurrences. The case in Surigao is terrible. The misappropriation of the funds of the province had been going on for many years and if the auditor of that province was not criminally guilty, then he was criminally inefficient. If it was the fault of the system, and not the fault of the auditor of Surigao, then the Auditor-General cannot escape some responsibility for similar occurrences.

Now, gentlemen. I want to tell you this: I am going to change the policy heretofore adopted by the government that when some officials of the Government, who are occupying responsible positions, commit a fault—unless it is of a criminal nature—they are merely transferred from a big province to a smaller one or suspended from office. If a responsible official commits a grievous act under my administration, he will be punished by only one method: he will either be compelled to resign or be expelled from the service. Why? Because an official occupying a responsible position cannot remain in that position after he has shown his negligence, his inefficiency or his lack of integrity, and when you punish a provincial treasurer or an engineer or any other official of the Government occupying a similar responsible position by transferring him from a large to a smaller province, you are punishing the province instead because you are sending to that province an inefficient or an irresponsible official. Irresponsibility of a provincial treasurer—and I am speaking of the provincial treasurers because I am addressing them—is the same although he is the provincial treasurer of the small province or the provincial treasurer of the large province, for even if the work in a smaller province yields a lower pay, yet the same responsibility holds, the same kind of integrity, the same kind of honesty, and the same love of service are required of him. Therefore, there will be no transfer for him to a smaller province; there will be either resignation or expulsion. If the fault committed does not affect the integrity of the official but only his efficiency or industry, I will permit him to resign. If it affects his integrity or character, he will be expelled. This will be, without exception, the norm in every branch of the Government. I am told that the treasurer of Surigao had already committed several faults in the service and the Department of the Interior only deemed it sufficient to transfer him from a big province to a smaller one. And what is the result? He took P92,000 when he had a chance to do it.

There is another reason why no official of the Government should be kept in the service after committing a fault for which he should be punished. If a man is occupying a high position and you reduce him to a lower category, he will not work as industriously as before. And if he has been doing it badly, he will do it in a much more inefficient manner, for he will have lost hope for improvement in the service. The hope or ambition to improve, or the hope to achieve improvement, is one of the most powerful human incentives which could make a man do his work well. What do you do then when you punish an official by transferring him somewhere? You are keeping in the service an official who has a grudge against the Government, one who is resentful, and one who has no ambition. Don’t do an absurd thing like that. It is better to get rid of him.

Every department of this Government has personnel that should have been fired long ago, but the policy of transfer ring has been the deterrent factor. It is well when, as punishment, officials are only transferred from a high position to a lower one; but, sometimes, when he is a man of influence and he has friends one cannot punish him for inefficiency, because his friends will push him up. That is why we have had officials in the Government who were raised to good positions because their friends worked for them. Whenever such persons are appointed, they prove to be incompetent to do their job. They are only weeded out when they are changed with competent and more efficient officials. They are only punished when somebody tells them what they are. They are told: “What do you know about service? You have been a pensionado of the Government for twenty-five years.” I have had similar experiences when I decided to get rid of inefficient officials who were in the service for a long time. They always asked, how about our services?

You have been a pensionado all that time. You have no claim against the Government, your retirement had already been given to you even before you were retired! So there you are.

I have had some special cases. I do not want to mention the names of these officials but I have had occasions where the men affected were my old friends. But I knew how incompetent they were. I had tried again to get rid of them for the last five years. And when I became President, I tried again to get rid of them and it took me two years to find out that they were still in the service. When I learned that they were still in the service, I did not wait. I told them to resign. Today, they are out of the government service.

The provincial treasurers have made a wonderful record in the Philippine service. Most of the men who have occupied high positions in the financial department of Government were formerly provincial treasurers. You know that Don Miguel Unson, who became Secretary Finance, was once a treasurer. Carmona, I think, was a treasurer; so was Wenceslao Trinidad. Marabut was also a provincial treasurer. Gentlemen, you see that there is no limit to the opportunities before you. Don’t you think that we have changed our policies about giving the provincial treasurers a chance to rise when they prove to be good executives? I have appointed some provincial treasurers to the position of mayor. I may, however, rectify some of my appointments. I do not believe that I ought to appoint treasurers to political positions, because that would be forcing the political virus into the blood of the provincial treasurers. I think I ought to keep the provincial treasurers entirely free from the political virus. Do you know that you are treasurers holding important and responsible positions? That fact speaks highly of you, collectively. I hope the provincial treasurers will keep up that reputation. Keep it up through the efficient and honest service that you render the Government; through your love for self-improvement and your devotion to duty. Remember that you are, as I said in the beginning of my remarks, exercising a very important function. You are the agents of the National Government who are charged with the duty of keeping the finances of the provinces and municipalities in a stable condition. Always try to be the best treasurer. Don’t be satisfied with being rated as second-class treasurer, regardless of the class or the category of the province where you are; be a first class treasurer for a first class treasurer can fit in, in any situation. Don’t let the governors treat you as their mere clerks for you are not. Treat them, as I said, in a spirit of helpfulness. Don’t antagonize them, don’t show them that you consider yourself superior. There is no sense in that. Only a small man is preoccupied with the question of whether his job is big or small. It is not what you think about the importance of your job, but your manner of performing your duty that will impress the people. Recognize the governor as the head of the province, elected by the people. Try to help him; be considerate with him. Show the people that you recognize him as your superior in hierarchy, not your superior in office, but only your superior in category. That has nothing to do with you. He can’t boss you and tell you what to do. You assume the responsibility for your job because you cannot save yourself by having the support of the governor if you don’t do your work well, nor can you save yourself by passing the buck to the governor just because he asked you to do the work for him; such actions wouldn’t save you. So you had better coöperate with him.

I am giving support to the governors. I am going to consider them heads of the provincial governments, but I have told them also that the agencies of the National Government are not under their control and will not he under their control so long as I am President of the Philippines unless they become appointive officials, in which case they may be the representatives of the President in each province. Gentlemen, I do not want politics in the Government. In the case of the provincial governors they can play politics but not too much. They can play politics by doing something for their friends which is neither illegal nor unjust to others. For if they favor their friends by an unjust or an illegal act, I am going to dismiss them. They can play politics, but only honest politics. You cannot even play honest politics. Just have nothing to do with politics and do not pay attention to anybody who comes to ask you for favors. Nobody can save you, not even the Secretary of Finance. A secretary of a department should tell officials of his department that under civil service rules they are prohibited from taking part in polities. You know why it is important for you fellows to stay away from politics. Because if you participate in politics, your action will become your funeral. One day you may play politics in the manner that a governor likes it. Another day you cannot please him the way the governor wants to; then, of course, he goes after your scalp. So, don’t play politics; as long as you comply with your duties and you don’t insult him or do anything that will give occasion for him to say you are trying to humiliate him or to minimize his authority or to ridicule him before the people of his province, you will get along.

I am placing a great deal of confidence as well as hope for the success of my administration in the provincial treasurers. You can have no better chief than the present Secretary of Finance. I am positive that he will demand of you and expect of you a diligent performance of your duties as provincial treasurers, and I am positive, too, that as long as you thus act, he will give you all his help, support, and cooperation. That is one policy we have to adopt, and I am looking at my friend Medina because I think he is going to do it. We have to transfer the provincial treasurers periodically. We cannot keep a provincial treasurer too long in any one province. I am not going to do it frequently because that means ruin for you fellows who have to carry your baggage every month. We always provide a reasonable time and if it is necessary to revise the law or the regulations whereby the provincial treasurers can be transferred from one province to another, the transfer will be made so that it will not cost him a cent. No treasurer should get the same amount for the transfer as would a treasurer who has a wife and twelve children; for another may have a wife and one child or another may have a wife and no children; others have no wives at all. If you give the same amount for the transfer it is not fair. The amount given should correspond to the actual expenses of transferring the movable properties of the provincial treasurer. Do not carry your pet animals or domestic animals or fighting cocks and expect the Government to pay for their transportation. You must carry only those things which constitute your family needs. We make the transfer for you because we want to protect you.

Unfortunately, our people do not know yet that the provincial official has some duties to perform according to law and that, much as he regrets it, he has to comply with those duties. Our people do not understand that. Most of our people believe that if they are your friends, anything they ask you as favor is your duty to perform. If you don’t do it, they resent it and say, “ Masamang kaibigan iyan .” (He is not a worthy friend.) Now, you try to do a favor to one and you find a million others asking the same favor. If you don’t, they will say, “ Bakit si Fulano ay binigyan at ako ay hindi ?” (Why was Fulano given that and I was not?) Then your office becomes nothing. It is very hard for our people to understand that.

So do not permit yourselves to be tied up by friendship that will make your friends impose upon you; it is much better to make these transfers. If we make an exception for one, we have to make exceptions for others. Our Government cannot be successfully carried on unless you have principles and you apply them to everybody regardless of personal consideration. Such is hard, especially hard for me, because I love my friends, for sometimes by declaring these principles and enforcing them. I deprive even my friends of my help. It hurts me to do so; but those are the penalties of office, the penalties of duty, to do things that may hurt you. I cannot conceive of making a government more successful other than by laying down definite principles and applying them equally to everybody, friend or foe. When a man in my position yields in one particular instance to a request that is contrary to the policies of the Government then he must never deny to anybody what he has given to others. I will not do it for when I do that, then we do not help the Government. So those are the policies that we have to adopt. In the United States, this practice is not done. In the first place, the people reside in big towns, cities, counties or states, and their relatives are not so many. Besides in the United States the relative goes no farther than the mother, father or brother. Even the brother is not a relative in the actual relations. But here even the cousin of the fourth degree has to be renumbered. I can tell you that relatives of mine who come from our original line of ancestry which has existed for 300 years, perhaps even before the Spaniards came here, are many in Baler and they are either my uncles or my cousins, and that I either kiss their hands or they kiss mine. As I was telling Secretary Marabut, it will take generations before we can accustom our people to see that the Government has nothing to do with relatives and friends. Ami when they learn that, they will not feel bad when something affects their adversaries. All that we can do is avoid the occasion and when at last we are faced with the situation, stand by what is right. You fellows have to do the same.

This is all I want to tell you. Now, I repeat: you have a secretary who has my full confidence, a secretary in whose honesty and sense of justice I thoroughly believe, a secretary whom I know to be interested in you. It has been very difficult for us to transfer the positions of treasurers to the Department of Finance because something peculiar happened once. At the time the Secretary of the Interior (Alas), now the Secretary of Finance, was in favor of the transfer. Then he became the Secretary of Public Works. When he became the Secretary of Finance, he was against the transfer, and for a time although the question had been decided in the Cabinet there was no way of carrying out the decision until finally I had to intervene. Well, I am through with the argument. Gentlemen, I have had enough of the argument. It had to be done. I was told some treasurers did not feel that this was a good move because of the complications arising with respect to their offices. Now I want to ask you if you have anything to say on whether this transfer has created any special trouble for the provincial treasurers or has made it impossible for you to do your duties efficiently as provincial treasurers. Now, tell me the truth. Don’t be afraid; I want information. Do you find that it is harder for you to do your work properly now than it was when you were under the Department of the Interior, because of the complications in the provincial government? ( Somebody stood up and answered in the negative .) So you prefer the status under which you are placed now? I want to know it because there was really the impression, or at least I was told that it would be more difficult for the provincial treasurers to do their work under the Secretary of Finance, because the importance of their positions would be diminished. That is not true. I can say, however, that the second part is not true. You do not have to tell me about it. It is not true because it is clearly defined that you can not be controlled by the provincial governors by the mere fact that you recognize the Secretary as your superior official. Usually, under the Department of the Interior, a conflict between the governor and the provincial treasurer could not be decided because it was difficult for the Secretary of the Interior to side with the treasurer; the treasurer always tried to please the governor and whenever he could find some way of pleasing the governor, he did it. Now with the establishment of the Department of Finance you do not have to please the governor The Secretary will consider on its own merit every case that may arise between you and the governor as considered from the point of view of the Department of Finance. It is possible that the Secretary of the Interior may like to fight when the final change takes place, and when such conflict arises I never favor one side or the other. I do not try to please either side; I simply consider the merit of the case and I stand by the treasurer if he is right, or by the governor when I think the governor is right. The governors cannot scare me. I do not need their votes; they cannot use any undue influence and the only influence that can be exercised over me is what is best for the administration of the Government. What is wrong with that? The roads are being built. You will feel more free to act now, in accordance with your judgment, on every case that is presented before you. Only don’t feel aggressive. Don’t show the governors that you are not giving them your recognition. Don’t forget that the governor is the head provinces; give importance to the fact of the election itself. Even if you should find that a particular governor is inefficient, just keep it to yourself. Treat him as if he were the greatest governor who ever lived. When you find him like that, show him that you want to help him, instead of humiliating him. And don’t help him in a way that will make him feel hurt or humiliated, that the people of the province will say. “ Este gobernador está mangonado …” (This governor is tampered with.) On the contrary, make him believe that you will obey him even if he does an absurd thing. It is in the interest of the Government that you should help him. All right, gentlemen, I am very happy to have met you. Good-bye.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library