

The trouble with us Filipinos is that we forget what is truly our own.

We can have no remedy for our livelihood unless we ourselves make it. Let us do away with laziness, discrimination against manual labor, and government aid; the people, not the Government, should take care of themselves.

Work is not a punishment of God to man; it is a blessing, because work gives man his life.

We should strive to work, we should forget foolish pleasures and stop wasting time in town fiestas.

Let us place our hopes in our bone and brawn, in our individual industriousness.

One of our shortcomings is that we permit others to handle the rice industry for us, and they are the ones who make a lot of profit. The profiteers are like a saw; the saw eats be it pulled up or pushed down, and we Filipinos are the ones being eaten.



Mr. Governor, Province-mates:

I have paid you a visit to let you know how the law on the excise tax on coconut oil was enacted.

On my last trip to Mindanao, the people of Cagayan de Misamis asked me to remedy the precarious situation of the people who depend on the coconut industry. To them I gave the following reply: “You know that I come from Tayabas, a province which is essentially dependent on the coconut industry. You should realize that if I only could do something to abolish the coconut oil excise tax, you would not find it necessary to tell me so.” That answer of mine to the people of Cagayan de Misamis significantly showed that it is not within my power to do away with the oil excise tax.

To you, people of Tayabas, I propound the following questions: Is there anyone among you who would not exert his best efforts to bring about an improvement in copra prices? And who among you will dare say that he can do what really cannot be done? If anyone contemplates doing either, I shall stay away from the Province of Tayabas.

You should understand, you should believe me when I say there is no suffering which you feel that I do not also feel. If I have desired to serve the country, the more has been my desire to serve the Province of Tayabas, because it is there where I first saw the light of day and also because you, its people, were the first to help me attain the public position I hold today. You must understand that if I have not done anything so far to improve the price of copra or to remove the excise tax, it is because two years ago the prices of copra arose up at the very time when the excise tax was already in force. Within the first year after Congress had passed the tax on coconut oil, the prices of our copra surpassed those which had prevailed during the World War. You cannot deny, therefore, that the excise tax is not to blame for the present low copra prices, for if such were true those prices would have never risen anymore.

The Price of any of our export commodities depends upon the foreign market. Copra, as you all know, is sold in the United States, not here. Its price is set by the purchasing country and by other oil-selling competitors; it is not fixed by the Commonwealth Government. IF our copra were only sold and consumed here, we could then name our prices. Since it is not sold here, can we then say to our foreign buyers that this or that should be the price for our copra? Or can we tell them that we will not sell them our product if they cannot meet our price demands? What shall we do if nobody pays the price we ask? Would it not be folly for the Government to buy copra at a high price only to sell it later at a reduced cost? Will copra price in Tayabas improve if the product is purchased with government money? If I could only do something to help you, I would not even mind my own living. Why shouldn’t I do so for the Province of Tayabas? You have, since the very beginning, shown me loyalty and faith. You were the first to elect me to public office; the first also to elevate me. Could I then forget you?

When the United States Congress first planned to impose an excise tax on coconut oil, I appeared before that body and voiced opposition to the proposed measure. I requested the President of the United States to help prevent its enactment, and the President sent a message to Congress asking it not to pass the excise tax. Congress, nevertheless, passed the measure.

It would have been also possible for Congress, without anybody being able to stop it, to decree that the excise tax collection should accrue to the Treasury of the United States. However, I made the request that collections from the tax be returned to the Philippines. Congress granted this request, but it placed a proviso that upon return of the collections to us the money be not used to benefit the coconut planters; and should that proviso be violated, the refund of the excise collections would be stopped immediately. If I had not agreed to it, even under such restriction, the tax money would have remained in the United States. The power to decide the matter rested with them—not with us. And if I did agree to the refund—as it is being refunded today—even under a restrictive condition, is it not anyway for the welfare of the Philippines? The welfare of the Philippines, let me tell you, is also the welfare of Tayabas; hence, I believe I made no mistake in my decision regarding the excise tax refund.

We are receiving the excise tax refunds to the benefit of our Government. I may add that Tayabas is also benefiting from such refunds, for where would the two million pesos allotted to Tayabas for public works come if there were no excise tax? So far, that benefit is not apparent because the road contractions have not been completed yet. “That the Government cannot do, however, is to give you funds as aid to the coconut industry; if it does that we will lose the excise tax refunds. In this connection, you should also know that an excise tax is also levied on our sugar export to the United States. It is likewise prohibited to use these sugar tax refunds for the purpose of aiding our sugar industry.

One of the recommendations of the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs is to allow the Philippines to use the excise money, if the tax will not be abolished, to revise the coconut and sugar industries. During the closing work of the Preparatory Committee, I insisted that it recommend the Commonwealth Government be allowed to aid the coconut industry. It did so and even recommended the abolition of the excise tax. I cannot then be said to have done nothing, for I really did my best to obtain the amelioration of our coconut industry.

Speaking of Assemblyman Lavides—like others, he is an assemblyman not only of his province but also of the whole Philippines. You should not blame, nor be angry at, Assemblyman Lavides and believe that he has done nothing regarding the excise tax. The truth is, I almost reprimanded Lavides for insisting on passing a law which would appropriate government funds to help the coconut industry. Had I agreed to it, Congress would have surely stopped the excise tax refunds. I know that Lavides cannot be surpassed by any other man whom you may put up as candidate for the second district. And if you harbor any rancor for him because he was not able to push through any bill seeking to aid the coconut industry, then blame it on me for it was I who prevented him from doing so—as I would prevent any other assemblyman who should present a bill of the same nature. As before, I am ready to stand for my section because I know that any such legislation will be against the provisions of that Congressional measure.

I ask you to be indulgent for I am expecting that the United States Congress, in its January session, will agree to have the excise tax refund used in improving our coconut industry. Congress had, in the past, refused to do so because of the power and influence of competitors to our oil which sought to ruin to our coconut industry. Today, however, the report of the Joint Preparatory Committee graphically portrays the United States that unless we are given an opportunity to help our industry while the American flag still waves over us, the day of our independence will be our coconut industry’s doom! Do not wait for the United States to abolish the excise taxes on coconut oil and sugar. They will not do so and you should not expect them to. Let us hope that they will allow us to use the excise tax refunds to revivify our sugar and coconut industries because upon attaining our independence, collections from the tax—which will still remain—will no longer be refunded to us.

Citizens of Tayabas: Let me know in what way the Government will be able to help you. You need not mention road constructions and repairs, however, because we can do that in the manner we know how.

What we Filipinos should do is study the different possibilities of the coconut. We may even learn to supplement our rice with coconut products. The coconut, after all, is more nutritious than rice. When I was a young boy, we ate coconuts whenever we did not have any rice. Let us again make the bukayo (coconut sweetmeat) because it is very delicious. Also the matamis sa bao (coconut jelly). When I was a young student, I always asked money from my mother with which to buy matamis sa bao from the Chinese store near the school. The trouble with us Filipinos is that we forget what is rally our own. We have so many needs and uses for our coconut. Why don’t we rediscover them so as to increase not only export but also our local consumption of coconuts? The National Development Company has several expert chemists studying the different uses of the coconut; more important, however, is to have our own coconut planters take full initiative on this matter.

One of our defects is that when a proprietor has two hundred, four hundred or a thousand coconut trees, he no longer personally harvests his nuts or converts them into copra. Another man does the work for him; hence his income is lessened. In the United States the landowner farms his own land; here in our country many of our landowners spend their time in the town or in the cockpit.

We can have no remedy for our livelihood unless we ourselves make it. Let us do away with laziness, discrimination against manual labor, and government aid; the people, not the Government, should take care of themselves. Our properties are few, and if we refuse to work, what then will happen to us? In the United States, a single farmer tills and plants twenty-five hectares all by himself. That is possible there because he uses farm machines. We also can acquire and use farm machines if we should want to. The difficulty, however, is that many of us do not like to work. How many of us would like to push a plow? A great many think only of wearing costly suits; they have loathe to have their hands soiled. They think it is shameful to work. But I myself pushed a plow. I was neither afraid nor ashamed to do it! I pounded palay and I was very proud of my manual efforts. Work is not a punishment of God to man; it is a blessing, because work gives man his life.

I believe in a biblical narration, granting it was true, that had Adam and Eve—after creation—done nothing but eat luscious fruits, take pleasure in watching the beauties of nature, and in hearing the songs of birds or looking at the beatitude of the heavens and offering prayers, the number of people on earth would not have increased. But God blessed the people with work; Adam and Eve, therefore, also performed earthly labor resulting in the increase of population and the improvement of our world.

If a planter with a thousand coconut trees works his own grove, he will make bigger profits from his copra sales. That is the first secret of making a living; the more work we do the greater our profit. It is imperative, of course, that we work. If our land is small it is needless to hire a laborer because we can do it by ourself; if our land is big, however, then it is the time to call in hired help. We should strive to work, we should forget foolish pleasures and stop wasting time in town fiestas. As I notice it, we have too many saints to whom we offer feasts—fiesta for San Pablo , for San Juan , for San Antonio , and a host of other saints. And during those town fiestas we spend large sums of money. Every home has a heavily-laden feast table; but to tell the truth, although I do not mean all, many of those hosts simply borrow the money which they so lavishly spend.

What benefit will such a native custom give us? Rather than pay our land tax we put up a lavish fiesta, and if we are asked why we no longer have more money we answer: “Coconut prices are bad!” During fiestas we have lechon and delicious viands; we dress elegantly to be admired by friends and acquaintances; but after spending all our money on such merrymakings, we blame the Government for the low price of coconuts. The same thing—lavish feasting—is true during town and barrio weddings. We spend too much for wedding dresses! Why should we give a party at the wedding of an offspring when it is unnecessary to matrimony? I mean this: If we are marrying off a son or a daughter, we need not invite the whole town, for surely we will have to feed them all. Frankly speaking, when my wife and I were married, we simply went to Hongkong without much ado,

We should think seriously about our future economy when our free trade relations with the United States are terminated. Prayers won’t help us because God is always busy in heaven. We are the ones who ought to help ourselves. The Government cannot give us anything because the money of the Government comes from us. Whatever the Government plans are, it is best that we first do things for ourselves by stopping our habit of wasteful spending. If we don’t do that, back to bondage we shall go even if we attain independence.

The might and strength of Japan do not come from her armies but from here national industries. I was in Japan when a flood and an earthquake occurred—calamities which, had they happened here, would have made Filipinos believe that the end of the world had come. But the Japanese still went on with their daily tasks, they did not stop working. Their lies strength of Japan. They love work—a virtue which we must acquire if we Filipinos want to preserve our national economy. Let us place our hopes in our bone and brawn, in our individual industriousness. Later we can pray for help from God and the Government.

I cannot remedy the low price of copra. The excise tax will not be abolished. I can only say that I vigorously opposed the excise tax plan when Congress first thought of it. When I gained nothing there, I asked that collections from the excise tax be refunded to the Philippines. I really did my best to have the money refunded to the coconut growers, but restrictions were imposed regarding the expenditure of such money. Nevertheless I still expect that such restrictions will be removed; and once that is realized, we will make appropriations for the establishment of different coconut enterprises that will profit to the people.

Let us make things clear. The assemblymen whom you may elect will not be able to do anything about the excise tax, for which reason, don’t make Lavides the target of your ire. He did his best and nobody else could have done what Lavides did. What the Government and I can do is this: we will speed up the sending of funds here for road constructions so that those who are unemployed will be benefited. Last you don’t know it, I have raised the wages of laborers. These men will receive ONE PESO a day once we start spending the two million pesos allotted to Tayabas. That is the only way I can help you. Next year all barrios will have school buildings and, in June, no poor man’s child will be refused admission. There will also be enough public school teachers. All barrios will have their roads repaired or improved.

Commissioner Guinto told me that you also want to hear something about the rice situation. Let me inform you that the Government has established the NARIC so that the price of palay will not be so low nor the price of rice to high. One of our shortcomings is that we permit others to handle the rice industry for us, and they are the ones who make a lot of profit. The profiteers are like a saw: the saw eats be it pulled up or pushed down, and we Filipinos are the ones being eaten.

The NARIC cannot immediately remedy the present rice situation because retailing rice is not the hands of Filipinos; thus, whatever the NARIC does still retailers will always raise the price of rice. I know that in two days the NARIC will reduce the price of rice; but the price will not always be brought down unless there is justifiable reason for it. The men who run the NARIC have been appointed by the President and they are doing what they can for the people’s benefit. I will dismiss them on the very day I see that they are not doing right. What happened in the past—when the price of rice soared so high that people were almost unable to meet it—will not happen today, for the minute the profiteers take advantage of any shortage in the local rice supply I will immediately place orders for Saigon rice.

Let me assure you that if it is only within my power to help you in your economic plight, I will never abandon you, my Tayabas province-mates. Love between you and me is mutual. I will do what I can within my powers and I leave the rest to you.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library

Quezon, M. L. (1938). [Excise tax on coconut oil, the coconut industry, and the rice situation]. University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library.