SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

DUTIES OF THE CABINET AND AIMS OF THE ADMINISTRATION

[Delivered before the numbers of the new Cabinet, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, November 26, 1938]

I wish to reiterate at this first meeting of my new Cabinet what I have stated individually to each one of its members, that I am determined more than ever to give to the Philippines not only an efficient government, but also a government that will be just to all, and one which will promote rapidly and soundly the enduring interests of our nation.

I have chosen the new members of the Cabinet purely on the strength of their proven ability and experience, particularly in the field of their respective departments, and with due regard to their demonstrated loyalty to the public service. These same considerations, and these alone, have induced me to retain the other members of my former Cabinet. I regret that I should now be deprived of the assistance and counsel of some members of my former Cabinet, whose resignations have been accepted upon their urgent request. I trust, however, that I shall be able to count upon their services in other important fields.

With the enlarged and increasingly complex activities of the Government, it will not be possible for me to exercise detailed supervision over the Departments. It would be physically impossible for me to do so, even if such were my desire, which is not. I, therefore, wish formally to advise you that it shall be my policy and purpose to rely completely upon the Secretaries of Departments for the direction and efficient operation of the executive branch of the Government. I shall devote myself mainly to the task of formulating general policies and ensuring that the activities of the Government are conveniently directed towards the execution of these policies. I wish the Secretaries of Departments to feel that they have my full confidence and that I do not expect to be consulted by them except in matters involving important new policies or modifications of those that have already been adopted.

I trust that intimate and effective cooperation will exist among the different Departments. Greater efficiency and much economy would be secured if this cooperation should exist. This could best be attained, I believe, through frequent exchange of views among members of the Cabinet to the end that, through common counsel, important problems facing one or several Departments might be met and solved with the coöperation of all the agencies of the Government.

My desire to give to the Philippines the best government of which we are capable is inspired by more than merely the considerations that should actuate a man who is elevated to the presidency of a free country. I feel that my duty in this regard is more imperative, because of my deep feeling of gratitude to our people for the unstinted support that they have given me in the past and the unswerving faith and trust that they have reposed upon me throughout the long years of my public service and of leadership in our struggles for self-government. I feel keenly that I owe it to them, to give the country not only an efficient government, but also one under which they will find opportunities and propitious conditions for social contentment and individual happiness. This is my uppermost thought and ambition as I start the second half of my administration. I look back with satisfaction upon the first three years of the Commonwealth Government, believing firmly that we have made a good beginning and have laid the foundations for future progress. I am not aware of many things in which we could have done better; I am convinced that, in all respects, I tried to do the best I could for the public welfare, sparing neither effort nor my health in the task. My fervent wish is that at the end of my administration, the people would feel that I had done everything within my power to safeguard their liberties and their happiness, that I had been faithful to their trust, that I had been just and righteous to all, and that I had administered their affairs according to my best lights, both of heart and mind, under the guidance of a Divine Providence whose aid and blessings I invoke continuously for the security and welfare of our country.

As your President and your friend, I bespeak your unstinted coöperation in the fulfillment of this aim.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library