Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On lease of, and on, the Buenavista Estate

[Delivered before the tenants of Buenavista Estate at the San Ildefonso Elementary School hall in San Ildefonso, Bulacan, February 24, 1939]

Countrymen:

I have invited the municipal mayors, councilors, and barrio lieutenants of these two municipalities in order to announce to them the final word of the Government with respect to this hacienda, so that they may, in turn, make the inhabitants of San Ildefonso and San Rafael understand its decision. When I came here for the first time, I informed you that we would hold a plebiscite so that the inhabitants could express their stand as to whether they would like to have the Government intervene in this dispute or not. I promised then that whatever action the two municipalities might decide upon to take would be the one to be done by the Government.

I have received information from different persons to the effect that the two associations here, the Handa Na and Dumating Na , at the behest of Mr. Rustia, are inducing the people not to vote in the plebiscite. Although I am not telling it to you, yet you know already what the motive of such movement is. I have thought of holding a plebiscite because I desire the inhabitants to express their free will on this question; but it has come to my knowledge that the decision of the above association is this: “Do not vote and watch those who will vote in the plebiscite.” Because of this fact, I feel that you will be prevented from the free exercise of your right; hence, I will not proceed any more with the holding of this plebiscite.

You know that the two associations referred to are not the Government of the Philippines; that my power is not based upon the will of any association but upon the will of the people, aside from our Constitution which gives power to the Commonwealth Government to intervene in the troubles here arising from the strained relations between the owners of landed estates and the farmhands or the tenants; and to do such other acts, as it may deem proper, so that all may respect the rights and prerogatives of everyone. I have to discharge that duty which does not emanate from anybody, because it is given to me by popular will.

I am informing you right now that the decision of the Government on this question is to lease the estate and administer it for a few years. Should the Government find it best to buy the estate for subdivision and resale to the inhabitants of these municipalities who may be willing to buy it would do so. If none here is willing, the Government will sell it to others who are interested; but the first to be given the opportunity are those who work on its fields, the tenants who lease their lands, or those who have succeeded their ancestors that originally made clearings on this place. The tenants who hold large tracts of land exceeding 25 hectares will not be given the chance to have the Government sell them land. The lessees holding 200 or 100 hectares under cultivation will not acquire them all but the amount they have paid and which give them right over such lands as tenant-lessees, will be returned to them by the Government as compensation for the work done by their ancestors in clearing the new land under discussion. Before doing this, the Government will study how much it will pay for the expenses incurred by them; however, to enjoy this right, not more than 25 hectares may be held as a matter of right. Any excess over this area will be sold to those working on the land. The sale will be exclusively in favor of the farmhands, especially those who have been tilling the soil for 20 or 25 years, and payments on the land which they may acquire will not be made burdensome for them. For this they will pay an interest of only 4 per cent a year; however. it is not the Government that will do the collecting but the association to be formed by tenants. This is what we will do and anybody who does not concur with this arrangement can leave the estate. We will not force you to get your land, if you do not desire, but this is for those who are desirous to acquire landholdings and are eager to work.

What I will tell you which I also ask you to inform Rustia of is this: whether he could promise the people that those who disagree with this proposition can still work on the land. If he says “Yes,” then follow him. I am telling you that Rustia can not make this promise because I will not permit him to do so. Moreover, if the Government holds this land, it will be obliged to have you discharge your duties, for we shall not able to live here nicely if nobody will recognize and respect the laws.

I know that Rustia told you that I had supposedly called him for a conference at Malacañan. I did not call for Rustia; I do not need him. I do not need Rustia in the activities of the Government; he has no land here. He had requested, through Secretary Roxas, that I receive him. So I did, because I always receive anybody who desires to see me. He informed me that he and the people did not understand the proposal or plan of the Government. It seems that his complaint has something to do with the question as to why the tenants would not be given land; he did not mention to me the farm laborers. He asked me why the tenants making payments on their lands or clearing such lands for cultivation purposes will not be given their due. He alleged further that the tenants who have paid for their lands should not have these confiscated from them. I replied to him that it could not have been or it was not what Secretary Roxas had told them. What the latter said was that the land to which they are really entitled will not be taken by the Government, and that the excess of the area they have cleared will be paid for by the Government on the basis of the expenses they have incurred in clearing or preparing the soil. These excess areas will be sold to the farmhands or tenants at present; hence, there will be no holdings of more than 100 or 200 hectares as are allowed now. If we permit this, where will the Government secure land to be distributed afterwards to the many people needing it? Without it how can the “have nots”, for whom the Government is exerting its efforts, be redeemed and made content?

So I told Rustia that he should not be foolish. I have given him leeway because, sometimes, I myself feel unpleasant over the regulations imposed by these landed estates. Hence, I allowed him to go on. But I know and Rustia knows very well, too, that you will not win in this present case. If the Government could only know that you would win in this case, because the said land is not hacienda property but the Government’s, then it would exert all efforts to utilize its legal counsel in determining and defending its rights. And if the Government knows that you are the real owner of these lands and not the hacienda, will it permit Rustia to look after your well-being when the Government is duty-bound to serve you and look after your welfare? I have told this in the presence of your governor, and I told Rustia pointblank that he could not deceive me because I am also a lawyer.

I wish you to understand that the intervention of the Government in this question will not in any way curtail your right to proceed with your case or stop it. If you should win your case, whatever amount you have paid would be reimbursed by the Government will administer this estate and it will not neglect you. Hence, you must hope for what the Government will do and not what anybody else will.

Countrymen, please listen to me. I am not misleading you. I beseech you to repose your confidence in me. I have nothing to gain from this case. You, barrio lieutenants and councilors, hear me: your duty is to help the Government, and I will be forced to dismiss anyone among you who will be recreant to his duty.

The farce in which you have taken part against the Government is ended. What is the matter? Have we an uprising here? Let us stop the formation here of associations, which you follow instead of the Government when the latter is the real authority to which every good citizen should owe his loyalty and reverence.

It is not a hidden fact to you that the interest of the Government in intervening in this estate is to look after your own good. The Government will open barrio roads; construct sewer systems; dig artesian well; build schoolhouses; lay out irrigation systems; and construct other facilities that will be for your benefit. It is indeed sad to think that behind these good intentions, you still plan to boycott the proposed plebiscite. Is that the dictate of prudence? You have spent much in court proceedings. You have also exerted much energy and sacrifice without any practical benefit in return. But you should bear in mind that all that we would do here will be for your well-being arising from the desire on our part to help you out of your predicament.

If your desire is to possess the land without paying for it, that can not be done. You know that that will never do, and I will not permit it.

I am planning to return to this municipality after a year and a half. If by then there could be any man who would see me to say that what we have done here has prejudiced the interests of the people and their economic welfare, I would return to Manila no longer a President. I would resign right away. Or I could make reimbursements to compensate for the damages you might have suffered. Under the present plans of the Government, it is not you who will suffer but those who live today on your contribution. The ones to be prejudiced are those who would like to manage your rightful share and live at your expense.

The fieldworkers, I assure you, will not suffer any damage. This is our first opportunity to impose as interest of 4 per cent only upon an association for what the Government may loan to it; in turn you will have to pay the association an interest of 6 per cent for whatever sum you may borrow from it. Who in the Philippines can give this very low rate of interest of loans? You will be the first ones to enjoy this boon. If I did not believe that this association could give you facilities and extend its help to you, I would not exert any effort to execute the plans of the Government for Buenavista.

I wish to inform you that when I went to Baler, my hometown, I advised the people to form a cooperative association, even though they have no landed estate there, because I do not want that you, the people here, would be the only ones to reap the benefit of paying only an interest of 6 per cent to the money which might be loaned to you.

I will not be telling this to you if I do not believe in it. Indeed, I believe in this kind of association. Anyone among you who does not desire to purchase land must sell his lease holding to the Government in order to register or enter it in the books of the cooperative association. Do you think that I will impair the plan or scheme of the Government which will help you? No. I really can not let my conscience accuse me, in the last analysis, of having failed to discharge my paramount duty to you. I can not, therefore, permit this great undertaking of the Government in your behalf, fieldworkers of this hacienda, to fail.

Sometime next month, the Government will send here its representatives who will organize your cooperative association. Their first job will be to investigate who the actual tenants and fieldworkers are. Such tenants as would like to continue under the new setup should inform the representatives of the Government of their intention to continue as such tenants or “inquilinos.” They will not be allowed to get more than 25 hectares. They should, however, inform the estate administrator of the legitimate expenses incurred by them in improving such areas in excess of 25 hectares.

Those who need land will be provided with it, but they shall register themselves as members of the cooperative association. Those who do not need it may say so. We are not forcing anybody on this matter. To those who do not wish to work on this hacienda, we urge them to go to Mindanao, where they will be given their respective lots to work on.

Municipal mayors and barrio lieutenants, you are the officers of these towns; you are my representatives in these political subdivisions. It is your duty to help the Government; if not, you can tender your resignation right now.

Lastly, I want to say that we will not conduct a plebiscite anymore; that it is high time to suppress untoward acts; and that what we need here is a nice way of living and a peaceful existence. The Government will administer your affairs here.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1939). Messages of the President (Vol. 5, Prt. 1). Manila : Bureau of Printing.