Gentlemen:

This banquet is given in honor of Floor Leader Paredes of the National Assembly, who is about to depart for the United States to join the Philippine mission there. He will help the mission in its work of securing congressional enactment of a law that would solve the problem of our national economy so as to place it on a more solid foundation. In honoring Floor Leader Paredes, I am, likewise, honoring the Speaker and the members of the National Assembly whose magnificent work in the session just closed is a justification of the honor I am now rendering to its Floor Leader. I made a very short speech on the day the National Assembly adjourned, expressing my appreciation of the work it had performed. I desire to add a few words to what I said then.

The First National Assembly made a splendid record. I said so before and I repeat it now. But, somehow, the people of this country had the impression that the Assembly worked under the lash of the President of the Philippines. It was a wrong impression, for that Assembly merely cooperated with me and followed my leadership, as it should, if we are to have a responsible party government in this country. The measures enacted by that Assembly, after all, were the legislation that the party—to which we all belong—had promised the country. The fact that I had taken the initiative in recommending the enactment of those legislative measures did not excuse the First National Assembly from the duty of enacting them, for its members were elected under a platform carrying those measures and they were, therefore, committed to enact them all. In this connection, I was only the instrumentality through which the party presented those matters to the National Assembly for its consideration and disposal. It could be said perhaps, that my repeated appearances in the legislative hall and my personally discussing matters with the members of the First National Assembly gave the country the impression that I had been exercising too much influence over that Assembly.

The Second National Assembly has, no less than the first, cooperated with the Executive; and, as I said before, it has followed the leadership of the head of the party and carried out its commitments. Yet the country has said nothing about the undue influence that the Chief Executive might have exercised over the present National Assembly. The reason for this is that the leaders of the Second National Assembly have assumed the responsibility of leading that august body; whereas in the first Assembly, the leadership was supplied by the Chief Executive. It is unnecessary to say that the Second National Assembly has done better in this respect than the First National Assembly, for it assumed full responsibility for the enactment of the measures it had committed itself to enact.

I hope our people will not misunderstand the theory of the separation of powers as to mean that for the Legislative Department of the Government to show its independence from the Executive Department, it is necessary that there be a fight between the Legislative and the Executive Departments of the Government. For the separation to exist in theory as well as in practice, it is not essential that there be constant friction between those Departments. On the contrary, in order that this theory of government can succeed, there must be coordination in the exercise of the powers of the several departments, because it is only through such coordination that an effective and efficient government can be given to the country.

This National Assembly has developed a leadership that has never been surpassed in the past. In this present leadership of Speaker Yulo and Floor Leader Paredes, we find the same effective leadership that was obtained in previous epochs of our country’s contemporary history—a leadership that, while cooperating with the Chief Executive, reserves to itself, as the National Assembly now does, the right to determine how far and in what manner the recommendations of the Executive are to be acted upon.

I have revived, as you know, the Council of State. In the Council of State, the National Assembly is represented always by its Speaker and its Floor Leader and, sometimes, by the Chairman and members of some of the legislative committees. While these gentlemen had voted for some of the measures discussed in the Council, yet they maintained their independence; hence, when the measures were finally brought up before the House, they recommended to that body or to its representative committees such amendments as, in their opinion, would improve the proposed legislation. We worked in such manner during the last session—each branch of the Government contributing its legitimate part in the long process of lawmaking, as provided in the Constitution—thereby giving the country such important and wholesome laws as those enacted by the Second National Assembly. For this reason, I want to make public acknowledgment of the brilliant record of the Second National Assembly and of the leadership of its Speaker and Floor Leader.

The sending of Floor Leader Paredes to Washington must not be understood as in any way suggesting or indicating that the Government is not pleased or entirely satisfied with the work that the Vice-President, the Resident Commissioner, and the other members of the Philippine Mission now in the United States are doing. They have done and are doing the best they can and, when it had been suggested that I should go to Washington because the Senate Committee wanted to confer with me, I considered the trip unnecessary because I was satisfied, as I am now, with the work being performed by the representatives of this Government there. And I will not go unless the Senate Committee expresses directly to me that my presence there is desired. Should it do so, my going would be a matter of courtesy, if not of duty. But I am positive that it is not necessary for me to be there.

We are sending Floor Leader Paredes; first, because he took part in the deliberations of the Joint Preparatory Committee; second, because he has made friends in Congress to whom he could personally appeal for the speedy enactment of legislation favorable to our interest; and, third, because I want the members of the National Assembly to feel that they are taking part in Washington. I feel, therefore, that it is not only a matter of form but also of convenience that the Floor Leader should go; for that reason, I asked the National Assembly to send him there. I want it clearly understood that this should not be construed to mean that we are displeased with the work of the Mission and I am sure that, in saying this, I am voicing the sentiment of the National Assembly.

Gentlemen, it is now my intention to discuss at length the subject which, after the one and a half hours’ talk I made on it before the Executive Committee of the Nacionalista Party this morning, I feel I can only pass lightly upon. I hope I can make a similar speech, which is an evidence that I am not running for reelection. I know that Assemblyman Kalaw is not here to support my statement.

In the first place, I want to say something about the amendment of the Excise Tax Law, which has been recommended by the Senate Committee, exempting coconut oil for non-edible purposes from the payment of the excise tax. The impression seems to be current that this amendment to the Excise Tax Law will result in the improvement and rise of the price of copra in the Philippines. I instructed Secretary Vargas this morning to write a letter to Mr. Day and ask him how much more one would have to pay for copra should Congress approve that amendment. I do not know if he has already received a reply; I assume, however, that he will tell me if he does. Anyway, whatever be the price of copra in the market, we are going to pay it.

Gentlemen, Vice-President Osmeña has supported that amendment in behalf of the Government of the Commonwealth. I do not want you to believe that it will be a blessing to the Government and to the people of the Philippines. We will support it, as we are supporting it now, because we have asked Congress to repeal that provision. We opposed this tax when Congress proposed to impose it; and we have asked, ever since, that such tax be eliminated. But now I have my doubts as to whether, should that tax be eliminated, the Filipino copra producer would receive the benefit of the abolition of that tax.

It must be borne in mind that the tax will not be eliminated completely. It will be eliminated only in those cases where coconut oil will be used for non-edible purposes. Now, can you be sure that they will pay one price for coconut oil that will be used for butter, and another price for that which will be used in the manufacture of soap? Will there not be just one price? Will it be the difference between the price of copra which pays tax and the price of copra without tax? or, will it be such difference, but bearing in mind the proportion between the copra utilized for non-edible purposes and the copra for all other purposes? That, however, involves a tremendous mathematical operation and I am afraid that, to save themselves from such bother, the manufacturer will simply pocket the difference in prices. In other words, the benefit to be derived from the elimination of this tax, instead of aiding the producers of copra, will only go to the pocket of the purchaser in the United States. The benefit may go to the soap distributor in America and, in turn, to the consumer; but I am not sure that it will be of any good to the producers in the Philippines.

On the other hand, what will be the result if that tax is removed? Our income will be reduced annually by over P20,000,000 an amount that comes from the excise tax. This yearly income, after 1940, 1941, 1942, 1943, 1944, 1945, and 1946, or after seven years, will mean a loss of P140,000,000 in our income. How will such reduction affect our finances? In the first place, I will be forced to veto a large proportion of appropriation for public works, and I may have to suspend many if the constructions under way which are for the improvement of our means of communication and the economic development of the country. And I want you to remember, gentlemen, that I will not leave my successor in office empty-handed, much less leave the government of the Philippines—when it shall have become independent in 1946—with a problem in its hands: the lack of funds in the Treasury. No matter how much it may affect the success of my administration, even if it should mean the difference between a successful President and a failure, I would prefer to leave my office and be pointed out as a man who had failed rather than have the future of the Philippines exposed to bankruptcy.

I am not interested in what I, myself, may do now. I am not interested in what the future might write about me for what I had accomplished during my term of office. I am more interested in the future of our country, and I will not sacrifice that future or subject it to any risk for whatever temporary victory I may win during my administration.  Hence, I am not going to take any chance. If the income of the Government is to be reduced substantially, I shall start closing the Treasury so that my successor in office and, more so, the Government of the Philippines will remain on solid foundation and be able to withstand the hard times that may come or which may likely come.

I will now discuss the question of the proposed changes in the Constitution. At a caucus I held with the members of the National Directorate of the Party, we agreed to call a convention of the Party believes that the Constitution should be amended as regards the term of office of the President, the revival of a bicameral legislature, and such other provisions of the Constitution as might be found advisable to amend. As I had told the Directorate of the Party, I was to make this banquet the opening fire of the campaign to be launched by me. But, being tired, I do not feel equal to the occasion. Besides, I feel that after all, I have already half won the National Directorate to my side. At any rate, I will have other opportunities when the public bears what I have to say.

I have not formed any opinion yet on my whether or not the provision of the Constitution regarding the term of office of the President should be amended. I have only a definite opinion insofar as it affects my own term of office. In my speech before the National Assembly and in my conference with the press, I left the door open for a possibility for me to consider my reelection if my term of office is not extended to more than eight years. I want to say to you that ever since I made that speech expressing willingness to have my term of office extended for two more years, I have receded from that stand. The more I think of it, the more I feel inclined to get out in 1941, so that this talk about the necessity of continuing my term of office has begun to weaken. I suggest that as time for the election of my successor draws near, we ought to begin talking about the others instead of me.

I have started the ball rolling. If I do not propose to have my own candidate, I shall remain neutral when the fight for my successor comes. Do not believe that my neutrality would be altogether absolute. I shall be neutral only with respect to men of my own party. But I will be an aggressive campaigner against other men. I intend to be neutral because I do not want to embarrass my successor and because I am determined, when I leave office, to be completely out of it.

To tell the truth, gentlemen, I should like to continue being the President of the Philippines if I were sure I would live one hundred years. Have you ever known of anyone who had voluntarily renounced power unless it be for a lady who, in his opinion, was more important than power itself, or because of the threatening attitude of the people? Everybody likes power. It is the greatest urge of human nature—power. I like to exercise power. But, because my main consideration is the interest of the country, I am stepping out of office when the time comes for me to do so. And when I am no longer in office, I will not want to be a boss; I do not want to be a power behind the throne.

I do not believe that anything could be more unworthy of us and greatly disastrous to our people than having somebody outside of the Government attempting to direct the affairs of the country. Certainly, I would not be that one. If I should fall under the temptation of wanting to continue in power, I would fight the whole country to retain it. Since you are offering me reelection, I could just as well accept it and exercise the powers as Chief Magistrate of the Nation in accordance with the Constitution and assume all the responsibility of that great office. However, in no case will I exercise power without responsibility. If I take a very active part in the choice of my successor and work for him, upon his election the people will say: “That fellow is doing what Quezon tells him to do.” If he believes in my policies and adopts them, people will say: “Well, he is just a mere figurehead; after all, Quezon is not the gentleman farmer that he assumes to be.” If he does not follow my policies, and adopts others that are not good for the country, I shall feel obligated to fight hum and I would do it, too.

I do not want the people to think that my successor will follow my dictates. I have only two more years within which to remain President and the only fellows who fight me are those voices I cannot hear. Everybody here is giving me his support and his help. Do you not think that I should give my successor the opportunity to work out his own administration, free from any inopportune advice from me, much less interference in the form of criticism? Let me watch. I am going to listen. I have a powerful ear and I always know which way the wind blows. I will not work for the election of anybody who, in my opinion, does not have any chances. But I will not work for him openly; I will not even let him know I am doing the pushing for him so that he will not look upon it as a favor. And you know that I can do such pushing without anybody knowing it. It is all that I will do; I will go no further. Upon his election, I will step out of office.

Once there was a job I had wanted to have. That was the position of Resident Commissioner in Washington. When I had been nominated for the Presidency, I had wished I could induce someone to take my place. Had they offered it to me, I would have chosen the position of Resident Commissioner. I love that job. It has, for me, some memories which have now become sentiments only. I am attached to it, and I would have liked to finish my public career holding that post. Frankly, my onetime position as Resident Commissioner had pushed me up. I would have liked to end my political career as such. But ever since I started this social program in my own farm, I have lost even the desire to become Resident Commissioner. There is nothing more delightful to me than to go to my little farm, which is not producing anything. I just love to be there. Mount Arayat faces me; Baluyot, with his autocratic government, threatens me on one side, and the socialists and the communists on the other.

I am not going to be a candidate for the reelection, although I may be induced to. But what I am really interested in, as I said this morning, is in having a bicameral legislature. I know that some of my progressive ideas will be termed as reactionary, because I believe in a bicameral legislature. I am not simply a progressive; I am a revolutionary. I believe in political reforms and changes in our social institutions. A revolution, as always, brings more evil than good; so, despite my revolutionary ideas, both in politics and in my social life, I prefer to go about as I am. Democracy is an experiment only. We have been experimenting with democracy here for the last forty years and while we all know so much about democracy—and I have no doubt that some of us could talk of democracy better than any constitutional lawyer in the United States could—yet when it comes to the actual practices of democracy, we have to admit that we are still helpless about it.

As I said in my conference with the press, the safeguard of democracy is not the Constitution, nor the written laws. The safeguard of democracy is self-restraint the exercise of political power, and that restraint comes only after using that power for a long time. The unicameral system in a democracy is an experiment. All the old powers of the world have bicameral legislatures. America, England, France, Japan—they all have bicameral legislative bodies and democratic governments, although perhaps I can hardly include Japan in that group. But I do not know of any country which, after adopting a unicameral legislature, has succeeded in making that institution permanent. So, I think that we had better be a little more conservative and create a bicameral legislature. I will not discuss my reason for it, because I already stated it this morning. The creation of a bicameral body is my main interest. I can leave the presidency without forebodings of the future if, by the time I leave Malacañang, we already will have established a bicameral legislature. I would feel then that a democratic institution in this country had been established.

Gentlemen, I desire to close this speech by repeating my sentiments of profound admiration for the National Assembly, for its Speaker, its Floor Leader, and its members, and my sentiment of gratitude for the evidences of loyalty and affection which they have given me. Above all, I am very happy to say that my old friend, Quintin Paredes, has done a very admirable thing by assuming his new responsibility. Quintin Paredes is one of the ablest men we have in this country. I have known him for many years. He was still young when he was appointed Attorney-General of the Philippines; but, despite his age, no other Attorney-General has proved himself superior to Paredes. He was just one day older than he was as Attorney-General when he became Secretary of Justice. His record as Secretary of Justice was superb.

I want to say that, for a time, I had a feeling that the Floor Leader thought that I was no longer his friend. But no one can be more enthusiastic about him for what he has done well then. I wish him success in his undertaking in Washington. But whether or not he accomplishes something, it would not and should not, in my opinion, lessen in any way the merit of the work accomplished by him in the Assembly. The beauty of this present arrangement is that he and the Speaker are such good friends that they can be depended upon to cooperate in the same way that Speaker Yulo and I have cooperated. It is not a prophecy when I say that twenty-five years from now, they would want to fight each other but, if they did, they would be too old to do so.

Gentlemen, I want you to drink to the health and success of our friend, Floor Leader Quintin Paredes. [Audience: Mabuhay! ]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1939). Messages of the President (Vol. 5, Prt. 1). Manila : Bureau of Printing.