SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

SECRETARIES ELPIDIO QUIRINO AND JOSÉ YULO

[Delivered at a luncheon given in their honor, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, September 27, 1938]

Gentlemen:

In view of the fact that within a few minutes I shall have to leave, my remarks will be brief. And in view of the fact also that if I allow Secretary Quirino to speak, there will be no end to his speech, I am not going to allow either of our guests of honor to say a word.

Gentlemen, I have asked you to join me in honoring Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo, who will soon cease to be members of my Cabinet. This is a very sad occasion for me and I cannot and do not feel, as people in monarchies feel when, upon the death of a monarch, they proceed at once to say, “Long live the King!” There will be no kings who could fill the places that will be left vacant by Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo such that the Government will not feel their loss. Both have rendered services which everyone of us could well envy. Both are leaving behind them records in the Executive Department of the Government that none of their predecessors has excelled. Although I realize how much the Executive Department will lose with the resignation of these distinguished members of my Cabinet, I have nevertheless agreed to let them go because their services in the National Assembly, if elected, will be at least equally as important as the services they have rendered in the Executive Department of the Government. Not that an individual member of the National Assembly has a responsibility equal to that of a Department Secretary, but because under the present circumstances, for many considerations, the resignations of Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo from their respective portfolios to seek seats in the National Assembly, offer a lesson of great significance to the country.

We Filipinos have been schooled in democracy for only a few years, and we still have certain notions that need revision. We have the idea that once a man has reached the position of Department Secretary, he acquires a sort of title to that position, and that he cannot leave the position without disgrace or at least an admission that he has failed. It is well that I should let go these two members of my official family, who are known to have won my absolute confidence, so that our people may learn that it is perfectly natural for one man to be a Department Secretary today and a private citizen tomorrow. Again, the fact that a Department Secretary gives up his position to seek a seat in the National Assembly will certainly have the effect of raising in the estimation of our people the standard of the National Assembly.

I am afraid the country is beginning to think or feel that the National Assembly is a place where men who are worthless can go and find employment. Our people are beginning to lose sight of the fact that in this democratic government of ours, as contemplated and created by our own Constitution, the powers of government are divided into three equal coordinate branches—the Executive, the Legislative, and the Judiciary—and that the National Assembly, under the Constitution, plays as important a role in the shaping of the policies of the Government, in the steering of the ship of state, as that of the Executive Department. I hope that these Department Secretaries, if elected, as I think they will be, will set a patriotic example to other Filipinos who, up to the present time, would not think it their duty to leave their business or a high or better-paid position in order to offer their services to our country through the legislative branch of our Government.

There is another consideration which moves me to let Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo go. I want to show the country that this Government can enforce the electoral laws impartially, even when the candidates to an elective position are men who enjoy the love, the affection, and the respect of the Chief Executive. I want to say right here that if Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo are elected to the National Assembly, they will be elected only through the free choice of their constituents, that the machinery of this Government will not be placed at their disposal to secure their victory. They will have to take their chance just like what any other citizen of our country, seeking a seat in the National Assembly, must take; and I know that both Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo are proud of the fact that they can give me this opportunity to show the Filipino people that our interest in a clean election, in the enforcement of the electoral laws, is such that we can forget that we have in the field of politics, battling for their lives, two of our most distinguished and beloved companions in the Government.

Lastly, I want Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo to have the chance of going to the National Assembly to show the country, and the members of the National Assembly themselves, that a member of the National Assembly is not a representative of his province but of the whole country. With the responsibilities that these men have had in the National Government, responsibilities which are of the whole country, it is impossible for them now, if they should go to the National Assembly, to feel that one is only representing Ilocos Sur and the other Occidental Negros. I hope that with the election of Assemblyman Quirino, the Ilocano “nation” will disappear.  Gentlemen, what is going on in Europe is a good lesson for us. Let no one believe that I would allow any province in the Philippines, or any group of provinces, the right of self-determination to be either independent or to belong to some other country.  I am not passing judgment upon the issues now before the great powers of Europe and which threaten the world with war but I am stating for us that the issue of separation of provinces has been settled in the American Civil War; and that issue has been settled for us too. There will be no nationalities here.  We are one nation, and we will live and die as one nation. In order that we may live and die as one nation, we must put an end in the National Assembly to that feeling of responsibility to one district. Not long ago, a good friend of mine, speaking of possibilities of appointment, called my attention to the fact that certain regions in the Philippines should be represented in the National Government. Let me say right here now that when I am choosing officials of this Government, I do not inquire from what province they come, and any province that should come to me and recommend an appointment on the ground that that province should be given recognition. will lose all chances of my giving that appointment to a man from that province as long as I am President of the Philippines. It is important that we should feel and think like Filipinos—nothing more, nothing less. There are no separatists here. If there are, let us throw them overboard. They are better dead than alive. I hope, therefore, that these Department Secretaries, if they go to the National Assembly, will oppose every movement in that body that is not inspired by lofty motives, by motives of national spirit.

That is all I have to say. I am broken-hearted but I am consoled by the thought that these associates of mine are going to a new field of public service where the country needs them, and that even though hereafter we shall be concerned with different work, that bond of friendship and of love which has united us will remain firm forever. I wish Secretary Quirino and Secretary Yulo success. I know that in whatever field they may choose to go they will succeed. God bless them!

Source: Presidential Museum and Library