Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines To the First National Assembly On the 21st Anniversary of the First Meeting for Woman Suffrage and Civil Rights and Social Responsibilities of Women

[Delivered at the Villamor Hall, Manila on October 28, 1939]

Mrs. Alano, Ladies,—I ignore the gentlemen: [ Laughter .]

I did not know that the founders of the League of Women Voters started on this work when they were hardly five years old. But that seems to be a fact, since we are now celebrating only the twenty-first anniversary of the first meeting for woman suffrage, and we have before us the leaders who founded the League. [ Laughter. ]

At the outset, I wish to warn you that I may not please my audience tonight for I do not intend to say anything that will flatter them. [ Laughter. ]

I voted in favor of granting the Filipino women the right to vote. I have always been in favor of granting them that right, not because I believe that the country will, in any new way, be more benefited by the vote than without it, but because women in the Philippines had, as a matter of fact, not only influenced but also decided our elections long before they ever voted. We are only recognizing as a matter of right what they had already been exercising as a matter of fact, so that I did not expect anything new after we have granted them the right to vote. In this connection, I want to tell you that the only occasion I fought to have myself elected was when I was for the first time a candidate for governor of Tayabas. And frankly speaking. I had been elected governor possibly because women had supported me. [ Laughter .]

There is no special reason why we should expect anything unusual, because women have been given the right to vote; and those who believe the contrary, are simply deceiving themselves. Why have we granted the women the right to vote? Simply because we consider them as capable—or as incapable—of voting as the men. I am emphasizing this fact so that the country, as well as the women themselves, may not be disappointed if nothing miraculous happens, which is quite possible, merely by giving the women their suffrage. Will anybody tell me if there is any politician who has been prejudiced since women in this country voted? No! Has there been any fundamental change in our politics since women voted? No, because as citizens the women are like the men. We have the same ideas as to what is good and what is right. We have similar ideas as to what is best for our fellow men. There are exceptions, of course; but, as a general proposition, men and women who have the same ideas react in the same way.

The man who is talking to you is a politician who has been in politics for a long time; he is a married man, and therefore knows many men in public life who are also married. I know how women react to political situations; but when it comes to the actual exercise of their duties as citizens. I do not see any difference among us. So I want to warn you concerning the scope of this change in our political life. Do not expect anything new, otherwise you will be disappointed. Do not believe that, because women are voting today, every public official will automatically and spontaneously be of the first class type, and that dishonesty will at once disappear in our Government, Reforms in the government may be effected only by the joint efforts of the whole citizenry, but not by the enfranchisement of a new class of voters.

Mrs. Mendez said that she hopes to be able to tell her grandchildren, when she becomes a grandmother, that women owe to President Quezon their right to vote. Well, that appraisal is true, but I am not claiming the credit. I am making the following statement merely as matter of historical record. Without my aggressive support, you could hardly have had the necessary vote in the plebiscite because, as a matter of historical fact, the majority of you women were against your own suffrage. Yet those anti-suffragists are now exercising their right to vote, so that in the final reckoning those who believe in suffrage really triumphed.

A Filipino is fervently respectful to women—even to his wife—and in the Philippines men have voluntarily given women the right to vote without much struggle on their part. It is only in this country that the women acquired suffrage easily. In America and England the women struggled long and hard, and at times employed physical violence. On the other hand, here you received that right without exerting great efforts. That does not, however, diminish the credit which belongs to the organizers of the League, for courage was required on their part at that time when the Filipinos, both men and women, laughed at the mention of woman suffrage. I doubt very much if without their initiative the Filipino women would be exercising that right today. But, while I recognize that fact, I have to warn the women that they have not wrested that right from the men. The men willingly gave it to them.

Mrs. Mendez also spoke of certain rights the women of our age enjoy. I agree with every statement that she made. While I claim the credit of being the first in the Legislature to advocate the granting of some civil rights which the women enjoy today, yet I am not as yet satisfied. I am for giving the women even greater rights than what they have now, so that they may have civil rights which are commensurate with their great responsibilities in society.

I am not one of those who talk and preach and yet do not put into actual practice what they preach. In my home, for example, my wife has the sole power and right over our children. It is only when Mrs. Quezon is away that I perform that responsibility. So I go farther than Mrs. Mendez, for I am willing to give women more rights than those already granted. I will give them more because it is their paramount duty today to educate, direct, and shape the character of their children. That is the greatest duty a woman has to perform as a citizen.

I make that statement although I have absolute faith in woman suffrage and in the right of women to take active part in our public affairs. Still I am old-fashioned enough to say that the women have another duty—a primary duty—to perform, and that is: the direction of home affairs and the building up of the character of the children.

This vital duty of the woman to the home is primarily responsible for my actuation of granting a government employee her leave of absence with pay when she is performing the obligation of motherhood. I am also ready to advocate that measure to a larger degree, so as to include the employed in private corporations. [ Applause ] In this connection, let me tell you this: Not long ago, soon after I learned of it. I reversed the policy of the Bureau of Health which compels every nurse who gets married to resign from her position. So a nurse today ran be married and still retain her job. [ Applause .]

I will now tell you how the women can help the Government in its work on social justice. You are supposed to have a kinder heart and to feel deeper sympathy than the men. You know how our poor people live, how much help they need not only from the Government but also from those who have created a public sentiment in their favor.

I am not sure that I favor the creation of a bureau for women as a means of securing the help of women in the Government, because I am not in favor of differentiating the men from the women in the public service. Why can we not appoint women to some of the bureaus? Well, you will perhaps say: “Why have you not done it? You have the power to do it.” At this point. I must confess that it takes time to introduce and adopt innovations. There is still prejudice against women in the Government service. But the movement towards recognizing in women the ability found in men is rapidly gaining pace.

Mrs. Kalaw mentioned the fact that many women were elected in the last election. That is true. And I want to tell you that I prefer to create in the public mind an attitude which will consider the right of women as a matter of course, rather than establish any difference between the men and the women. In fact, I have not established any difference between them. I treat the women employees in the Government as friends. In this way we create a sense of mutual and common responsibility, and not a sense of class.

Looking at actual life, we see that a woman is never and can never be separated from man. God said: “It is not good to let a man alone. Let us give him a companion.” We can not isolate women in a separate class so as to discriminate against them, because in every family there is the husband, the wife, the daughter, the son, the sister, and the brother. Such is our way of family life—men and women jointly cooperating with one another to promote the welfare of the group. Such shall be the way in our government.

What I want to say tonight, by way of special message to the women voters and to all women organizations is this: Do not consider yourselves as having a special mission to perform. Do not believe that you can do something that has never been done before. You have the ordinary mission of a citizen—a mission in nature the same as that of man. In your citizenship, there is no difference. The duties that men have, women also have. I am in favor, as I said, of recognizing the civil rights of women. But to attain that recognition your work is not among women; your work must be with men. When you have done that, I have no doubt that you will succeed in your endeavors.

I should have discussed with you a very important question tonight, not with the idea of asking you to take my side of the issue, but simply to give you the best evidence of my faith in your ability to exercise the functions of citizenship. But since it is already quite late and I still have another engagement, I will not even say what it is I hope, nevertheless, to have another chance of meeting not necessarily the League of Women Voters, but a gathering of women; and when I do, I will discuss that subject.

I want to extend my congratulations to the founders of the League of Women Voters who are with us here tonight and who, in twenty-one years, have accomplished more than any other association of women.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library