SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

CREATION OF CHARTERED CITIES AND SOCIAL JUSTICE

[Delivered upon the Inauguration of the City of Iloilo, Iloilo City, August 25, 1937]

Mr. Governor, Mr. Mayor, Ambassador MacMurray, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I have come to be present at the inauguration of the new city government of Iloilo.

At the last session of the National Assembly, that legislative body enacted laws creating the Cities of Iloilo, Cebu, Zamboanga, and Davao. With the exception of Davao, the initiative for the enactment of these laws came exclusively from the Assemblymen representing the various provinces to which the newly-created cities belong.

In the case of Davao, that city was created by common agreement between the executive department, on the one hand, and the Assemblyman from Davao, the Honorable Romualdo Quimpo, on the other. The executive department and Assemblyman Quimpo agreed that, there being a large foreign population in Davao, as there is in Manila and in Baguio, a city government similar to that existing in Manila or Baguio should be provided for Davao.

I am not prepared to say positively that, from the stand point of democratic principles, the creation by the National Assembly of these new cities is theoretically, at least, a progressive step. The question is open to discussion and volumes could be said and written in support of either side. I am certain, however, of the following facts:

1. That the law which provides for the appointment, instead of the election, of the mayor will free the new cities from the influence of partisan politics in the administration of their affairs and in the execution of their laws. Thus, the efficiency and impartiality of the city government, in the administration and execution of its laws and ordinances, will be better insured.

2. That the people of the city thus created have not lost control of their local government, because the city council is still elective, and retains the power to pass ordinances, impose municipal taxes, and appropriate municipal funds as before.

3. That the idea of having an appointive city mayor and even an appointive municipal board is not original with the Filipinos. When the Insular Government was still entirely controlled by an American Commission, the city governments of Manila and Baguio were constituted exclusively of appointive, as distinguished from elective, officials. This is not to say that because a certain political institution is of American origin, it is necessarily a wise creation. But it is well to state this fact as an argument in case criticism against what has been done by the National Assembly should come from either local Americans or certain Filipino quarters.

4. That the City of Washington, the capital of the United States, is governed by a board appointed by the President of the United States. As a matter of fact, the residents of that city are not even permitted to exercise the right to vote in any election, including the presidential election.

5. That in the French Republic, for instance, which some people consider as leaning too much towards the extreme Left, the prefects (provincial governors) are appointive.

6. That, under the constitution, ours is a unitarian—as contrasted from a federal—state. The duty to execute all laws is vested in the American governors-general, under legislation enacted by the former American Commission. The Chief Executive of the Philippines always has had, and has exercised, control and supervision over all the provincial and municipal officials. In making, therefore, the mayors of Iloilo, Cebu, Zamboanga and Davao appointive, instead of elective, officials, no substantial change has taken place in the ultimate control and administration of public affairs in these cities, since that ultimate control has always been placed in the hands of the American governors-general. In other words, the National Assembly simply made the form conform to the substance in the management of local governments.

7. In the United States, due to the corruption in the government of some of the great cities, there has developed a strong demand for what is called city management, and, at times, for the nomination of candidates to city offices by non-partisan leagues. This proves dates, even in America, a conviction is growing that in local governments partisan politics is absolutely unjustified and not conducive to the public good.

Let me pause here and say that this is true in the United States, it is more so in the Philippines. What, may I ask, are the local issues in the Philippines? What can be the social issues here, considering the limited scope of powers possessed by the provincial and municipal governments? Only issues based on personalities rather than on principles.

See the records of all provincial and municipal elections. Every political party seeking control of provincial and municipal governments has appeared before the electorate with the same slogan, namely, that it will build more schools, more roads, and will give a more honest and less partisan administration. With questions of national import, the provincial and municipal governments have no power whatsoever to deal; therefore, the discussion amongst provincial and municipal candidates of national issues is purely academic.

Lastly, whether the measures creating these new cities with appointive mayors are, theoretically, a step forward or backward in local autonomy, there is one outstanding and undeniable fact, namely, that the assemblymen who sponsored these measures before the National Assembly are courageous men—men who, rightly or wrongly, have done what they honestly believed to be for the good of their people, regardless of the consequences to their politics fortunes of the enactment of those measures which they knew would be branded by their political opponents as undemocratic.

These are the kind of assemblymen that we should elect and have—men capable of placing the interest of the people above their own.

In the exercise of the power which has been given me to appoint the mayors of these newly-created cities, I have carried out, not only the letter but the spirit of the law, in the very face of attempted partisan influences from every side. For Cebu, Zamboanga, and Davao, I have appointed as mayors men who have been for many years in the service of the Government, who occupied their previous positions after passing civil service examinations, and who have remained and have been promoted in the public service in accordance with civil service rules and regulations. Each and every one of these men has made a splendid record as a good executive and administrator, as an honest and patriotic public servant.

The man whom I have appointed mayor of the City Iloilo is the one exception. Doctor Campos is a renowned practising physician, an individual of excellent record in this city, not only as a doctor but as a man and a citizen. I did not choose Doctor Campos. He was recommended to me by representatives of the different elements of Iloilo, political and otherwise. He has the endorsement of Governor Consing, Assemblymen Montinola, Zulueta, Confesor, Salcedo, and Buenaflor. The business community is for him. Some labor leaders whom I consulted also approve of his appointment.

When I tendered the appointment to Doctor Campos, he begged me to be allowed to decline it, on the ground that his professional and business interests would suffer thereby. Upon my insistence, Doctor Campos accepted the post only as a public duty that he could not well evade.

I congratulate Doctor Campos and the people of Iloilo, and I express the hope that both will be thankful for this appointment; Mayor Campos, because it affords him an opportunity to serve his people, the people of a great and progressive city, and the people of Iloilo, because under Mayor Campos’ administration the city will, I am confident, develop and improve.

I want to say one word about Governor Consing. I have thought of Governor Consing for the mayorship of this city, but the question of finding his successor in the governor’s chair was a political problem of no mean proportions. Again, I feared that his appointment might be misconstrued as primarily political, and so he himself preferred the appointment of Doctor Campos.

Despite the coalition of the two national political parties, partisanship in the provinces has been very difficult, indeed has been impossible, to eliminate. Iloilo, however, has not given me so much concern or trouble as the other provinces; I know that the fight between pros and antis is going on here, but it is a gentlemen’s fight and not so noisy as to disturb my peaceful sleep at night. This happy situation is due to Governor Consing and Assemblyman Montinola on the one hand, and to Assemblymen Zulueta, Confesor, Salcedo, and Buenaflor, on the other hand. I wish to thank them all and I take leave to crave their continued cooperation in my endeavor to turn the public mind, temporarily, at least, from bitter, partisan politics to a more constructive and high-spirited administration of public affairs.

The country needs our common purpose and our combined efforts, and we must give both with enthusiasm and determination. Thus only can we insure the future happiness, well-being, and liberty of our people.

To conclude, I wish to say one word on behalf of the working class:

We must all coöperate to find the means and to use these to improve the lot of the working classes in the Philippines. Particularly should the provinces enjoying the benefits of the sugar industry immediately and substantially raise the wages of labor. No industry in the Philippines is being benefited by our trade relations with America nearly so much as the sugar industry. There have sprung in Negros, Iloilo and Pampanga, in the last few years, millionaires as we have never had before. They have palaces, automobiles, and live a life of comfort and luxury here and abroad. I am not criticizing them; it is their privilege to spend their money as they please. I am merely stating a fact, for I want to point out that we are doing everything we can, not only to prevent the collapse, but to maintain in full blast, the prosperity of the sugar industry. But the government demands that this prosperity be shared with the workingmen in the sugar fields and in the sugar centrals. Very little, if any, of the immense profits of the sugar industry, has gone into the pockets of labor.

I say in all earnestness, to the owners of sugar centrals and to the proprietors of sugar lands that unless they raise the wages of their laborers and treat them better, the Government and the country may lose interest in the defense of the sugar industry.

We cannot be the servants of a privileged class. We are the servants of the whole people and we shall not permit an injustice to be done, much less perpetuated, against any constituent part of our community. Unless the sugar industry, of its own accord, increases immediately the wages of its workingmen, I shall ask the National Assembly to enact legislation that will compel that industry to do so.

We are living in an age in which civilized society can only endure if justice is accorded equally to the rich and to the poor. Those who have can only hope to keep their possessions indefinitely, if they share part of their profits with those who work for them. This is a question of justice, not of charity. A man is more entitled to the fruits of his labor than the proprietor to the rent of his property.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library