SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

TENANCY RELATIONS BETWEEN LANDLORDS AND TENANTS

[Delivered before the landowners of Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija, on April 30, 1939]

Fellow citizens:

I have asked Mr. Avelino, the new Secretary of Labor, to come with me, so that you may know him and he may hear what you have to say today. What I am going to tell you now concerns the landowners, and this afternoon I shall speak on matters pertaining to laborers or tenants.

You may have already heard perhaps that I own land here in Nueva Ecija, which is at present being managed by Mr. Isip of Cabiao, justice of the peace of San Fernando, Pampanga. From that land I do not know of any returns yet that have gone into my pockets, in spite of the fact that the price I paid for it plus some incidental expenses, taken together, already amount to P60,000 by this time. Had I not bought that land and instead, simply loaned the money at 10 per cent interest per annum, it would possibly amount to P120,000 within a period of only ten years. By investing it in riceland, I doubt if that sum could make an earning of 10 per cent per year. I also do not know if the land is capable of turning out a good crop, although I have been told that it is rich and may possibly produce a good harvest. Somehow I have not yet derived any real profit from my land, for when we harvested the crop last year, my share was only 450 cavanes out of a total yield of 900 cavanes of palay. I sold my share at P2.50 per cavan, thereby netting a total of P1,125, which was all I realized from my capital of P60,000. My investment, therefore, did not even net me a profit of 10 per cent.

You may perhaps wish to know also why I invested my money in riceland despite the many agrarian conflicts nowadays. The main reason is that I wish to know actually, not from mere hearsay, the true causes of the present trouble between tenants and landlords. By this method. I might be able to gather sufficient experience in tenancy matters and I could later voice my opinion as to what proper means should be adopted by a landlord in his dealings with his tenants in order that amicability between them could be maintained at all times. Had I not done this, you could have reasons to question my competence to give advice to this party and that group for not having acquainted myself very well with actual happenings on the land. It is natural that, for a person to say something or give advice to his fellow men on any matter, he must first have sufficient experience in. or know much about, the subject he talks about. In pursuance of my desire. I have adopted the policy of basing my dealings with my tenants on the Rice Tenancy Law, for by so doing I may learn much concerning matters affecting actual relations between landlords and tenants.

Landowners of course ought to draw reasonable profits from their capital. But it is never praiseworthy for anyone to have his capital of only P500 amount to P25,000 in just five years and to squander it after he has suddenly become rich.

This squandering of money reminds me of a Jew and a Scotchman who were arrested and accused of drunkenness by a policeman. When brought to court, the judge asked the policeman as to what made him believe that the two were drunk. The policeman forthwith replied “Your Honor, I saw the Scotchman drawing money out of his pockets time and again which he continuously threw on the street. His companion, the Jew, kept on picking the said money thrown by the Scotchman, and giving it again and again to him. Because of these unusual acts I was convinced that the two were drunk, so I arrested and accused them of drunkenness.”

“But how were you able to determine their drunkenness?” asked the judge.

“Your Honor,” replied the policeman, “thrift is customary among the Scotch; they would not even allow a single cent to slip off their hands. On the other hand, it is a custom among Jews to accumulate in a safe any sum of money which reaches their hands; they care so much for it that they would not even allow it to be fanned by the wind. But when I arrested these two men, the Scotchman, who repeatedly filled his hand with money, kept throwing it away; meanwhile the Jew who kept picking it up, instead of keeping the money for himself, handed it back time and again to the Scotchman. If they were not drunk, absolutely neither of them would act the way he did, which was the very reverse of his habits.”

Now, my friends, I am neither a Scotchman nor a Jew; more so, I am neither drunk nor out of my wits to throw my money away. I bought that land in order that my tenants and I would benefit from it. Precisely, all of us should gain from it. I also own land in Baler from which I realize no profit; nevertheless, I duly pay the corresponding land tax. Being the son of a poor man, I know the plight of a farmer. I have been able to accumulate what little property I now possess through my own industry. I know the province of Nueva Ecija very well because every time I went to Baler, my hometown. I always passed through this place. Besides Baler was, in the old days, within the geographical boundary of Nueva Ecija; hence, I can also claim to be a native of this region. I had thought of buying riceland because man’s first necessity is rice. If a person possesses rice and fish, he can live although he may not have money. I have a fishpond in Sexmoan, Pampanga, and whenever I desire to eat fish, I simply ask my men to catch it for me. Thus my property consists solely of rice and fish. It should not, therefore, surprise anyone that, despite the present conflicts between farmers and landowners. I bought the land of Relucio. I bought it principally for my family and myself: secondly, as I have already stated before, for the purpose of learning the true causes of agrarian con diets.

If you wish to have the Tenancy Law amended, it can be done, although I am of the belief that it is, in its present form, good enough. Your trouble here in connection with the ejection of tenants has various causes. A tenant, however, should not be expelled from the land as long as he fulfills his farm job. Sometimes landowners oust their farmers or quarrel with them simply because the latter do not belong to their own political parties. On party matters, a landowner should not interfere with his tenants; instead, lie should give them freedom to become sakdalistas, socialists, or communists. Also after finishing their day’s work on the field, he should allow them to attend the meetings of the various associations with which they are respectively affiliated.

The poor should be given the opportunity to hold Government positions. Most of the rich, however, are against this, hence only a few among the poor or those possessing no property are able to occupy government positions. As a proof of this, only the well-to-do or the landowners are able to become assemblymen, except two whom I know personally: Felipe Jose and Jose Robles. Of these two only one—Felipe Jose still remains in the service of the Government. Robles won in the elections only once; he has never been reelected. You, landowners, should not hate your tenants because of their desire to become sakdalistas, socialists, or communists. It is not proper for you to discharge them from their work just for that matter alone.

The same thing is happening in the Province of Pampanga, wherein the trouble between farmers and landowners is not due to tenancy relations but to differences in politics. Governor Baluyut is a party man, one of the leaders of the Nacionalista Party. On the other hand, Mr. Pedro Abad Santos is a leader of the Socialist Party. Time and again they have fought each other in the elections; that is why one often censures the other. They have even gone to the limit of dragging the conflict between landowners and tenants into their controversy. The situation gets worse if we take note that both men have their own newspapers which they employ as weapons in promoting their own interests and those of their respective parties. The same thing is happening in several provinces where politics has become the major cause of agrarian conflicts.

The landowners should not oust their tenants for causes which are political in nature. As long as a farmer fulfills his job on the land, a landowner has no right to drive him away. But at anytime that a tenant resorts to abuse by grabbing all the harvest, burning the crop, or carting it away without the knowledge of his landlord—acts which are against the law—he should be driven away. It is only in such cases that the farmer should be ousted, and the Government would side with the landowner. But as long as a farmer commits no wrong and does not neglect his job, a landowner has no right to drive him away. Should he do so, the Government would protect the farmer. Whenever a landlord asks his tenants to do for him something not covered by their tenancy contract, or requires them to act as servants in his house, it is incumbent upon him to pay them accordingly. In their dealings with their landlord, farmers are not supposed to do any work for him other than that pertaining to the land; and whenever they are required to perform any work not embraced in their tenancy relations, they should be duly rewarded for such service.

We, Filipinos, do not know how to persevere; unlike the Chinese, we have no patience. I have a Chinese valet who is on the alert at all times for anything I may tell him to do for me. Do you know why I preferred to hire a Chinese? It is because I know that Filipinos cannot endure to serve in the manner that this Chinese does things for me. However, I still find occasion to scold him at times and sometimes he answers back to explain his side. I have related this to you so that in case your tenants protest to you for having asked them do things ther than those covered by your tenancy contract you landowners, should deliberate first and not wreak vengeance on them by driving them away from the land they work on.

If you cannot agree with your farmers or have an understanding with them regarding crop shares or tenancy contracts, you should take your differences to the proper authorities who would decide them for your mutual benefit. A landowner must give his tenant a share proportionate to the hitter’s labor. If a farmer takes away all the harvest without the knowledge of the landowner, the latter must file a complaint in court against the former, so that he may be duly punished for the crime he committed. Remember that, as President of the Philippines, I shall never tolerate anyone to commit acts against the law. Hence, you should not unjustifiedly oust your tenants. It would be better if you should make them understand that, as long as it is their desire to till the land, you would allow them to, because it will be to your benefit if they continue working your land. By so doing, the farmers would highly value the land they cultivate, and they would exert all efforts to make it produce a good crop. They would take care of the land as if it were their own. You should divide the crop proportionately among yourselves. If these be done, undoubtedly the land which these farmers cultivate will be so greatly improved as to produce good crops.

According to Dr. Ramos, president of the association of landowners, the tenants are granted loans by the landlords at 10 per cent interest per year, and payment are collected after the harvest. That is within the law. He also states that sometimes tenants refuse to pay their debts to landowners, claiming that they have to pay their other creditors first. In such a case, if I were their landowner, I would all the more encourage my tenants to get loans from other sources and tell them afterwards not to pay the said debts and allow themselves to be taken to court. The people who grant loans to farmers who are not their tenants would then learn a lesson and never again extend loans to them. By this means also, we shall see that tenants would hesitate to borrow money from other sources and simply content themselves with any amount they could borrow from the landlords under whom they work. The tenants may also be advised to borrow money from others at an interest of as high as 15 per cent per annum so they would readily be granted loans, and to refuse to pay them when the time for payment comes so that cases would be filed against them in court.

You, landlords, should not collect anymore the interest you are supposed to charge your tenants, especially if the money they borrow is to be spent for their subsistence. It is too insignificant a sum for you. If a tenant borrows a cavan of palay from you, collect only one cavan in payment thereof. If he borrows P3, collect no more than that amount in the settlement of the debt. You should not charge them any interest. Stop the practices of the so-called talinduwa and takipan, and do not collect three cavanes for every two cavanes of palay loaned to your tenants. What I wish to convey to you is that only an amount equivalent to the sum loaned to the tenant should be deducted from his share of the crop in payment of his debt, or only the exact amount of what he borrowed from you should be paid by him. If such practices are adopted, undoubtedly, you will be going together under the best of relations. We must be together under the best of terms, and stop this trouble in order that we may live in peace. What would other nations say if they learn that, just for little things, we cannot agree on matters which we can amicably settle? It is my duty to maintain peace, and I shall without fail punish anyone of you who would create trouble.

Dr. Ramos has also made mention here of what is being done in San Ildefonso, Bulacan, wherein he said that the plan of the Government is seemingly bound to fail. I wish you to know that the Government will exercise full authority with respect to its plan in San Ildefonso, Bulacan.

The leaders who, for their personal benefit, exploit the laborers will not fare long enough as the true motives in their hearts will soon be exposed. I also wish to remind you that any conflict between landlords and tenants should be immediately taken to the Department of Labor or the Court of Industrial Relations for settlement. These two branches of the Government have been organized principally for the solution of all questions arising between landowners and laborers. Hence, all eases of a like nature should be brought to the attention of the corresponding authorities in order to avoid any trouble between landlords and tenants.

One more thing: You must teach your tenants such methods as would increase the harvest, so that during the planting season they will not neglect the land they work.

A tenant works the land from which he has to obtain his subsistence for twelve months for only a period of from four to live months out of the entire year. Thus he may be idle for about eight months. In view of this, it is imperative that he look for other sources of livelihood in order that he may live, and you should help him earn something by other means.

You, landlords, should organize cooperative associations to enable you to advance loans to your tenants at low rates of interest. The Government will help you organize such cooperatives and it will loan you money at only 1 per cent interest per annum, which you may in turn grant to your tenants at 6 per cent interest per year. Secretary Roxas is at present studying all angles relative to the organization of cooperatives, and some day he will come here to explain things to you, so that you could be well prepared to organize such associations.

Some leaders induce the tenants to abandon their work. Whenever a tenant follows the advice of such leaders, he should be discharged outright because a tenant who does not want to work and desires pleasure only, ought not to be given land to work on. But one who wishes to work not only should not be driven away but should also be granted loans. We shall study the Tenancy Law with a view to inserting amendments into it in conformity with the demands of present-day tenancy practices, so that conflict will no longer arise between landlords and tenants. I thank you.

The following conversation took place soon after President Quezon concluded his speech:

Dr. Ramos.— Landowners, Sir, desire that they be authorized to charge an interest of 10 per cent per annum on loans to their tenants, which is allowed under the Tenancy Law, because what is happening is that, having obtained the money, the tenants refuse to pay—nor are they even willing to give corresponding interest—reasoning that they have to pay some other creditors first.

The President. —The interest you wish to charge them is too much; that 10 per cent is usurious. You had better not charge them any interest, especially when the money they borrow is mainly for the purchase of their subsistence during the four or five months that they work the land.

Landowners should grant loans to their tenants, so you had better organize cooperative associations so as to extend loans to your tenants at low rates of interest, and not 10 per cent. If you carry out your desire, the crop share of the tenant would not even be sufficient to pay for what they owe you. I repeat, you had better not charge them any interest.

Landowners should be principally concerned with their duty to advise their tenants to take good care of the land they are tilling in order that it will turn out a good harvest. Tenants who are lazy and who do not want to work should be discharged; it is never right for a man to live by the toils of others.

It is necessary that we teach our tenants the good ways of right living and make them interested in their means of livelihood, so that they may not suffer from poverty. I wish to repeat here what I once told my own tenants: “A landlord and a tenant are friends, and they ought to help each other in improving their means of livelihood A tenant should not borrow money at 15 per cent interest or more so as to gamble or seek pleasure with it Tenants should never possess this habit, for they can rely on nothing else to pay their debts with except their share of the crop which, at times, may not even be sufficient for their subsistence. It is necessary, therefore, that they be watched over in order that they may learn how to lead a prosperous life.

Mr. Santos.—As regards cooperatives, Sir. how shall we proceed in their organization?

The President. —Be prepared to organize a cooperative association and I will ask Secretary Roxas to come over here to explain things to you, as he is well-versed in the matter. The organization of such associations will be to the great benefit of landlords, as they will be charged only 4 per cent interest per annum on money which the Government will loan them. We are ready to loan money direct to tenants also [ cheers ], for which their prospective crop shares may be accepted as security. So you had better organize coöperatives now, because if you do not do so, the Government will not grant you loans.

The tenant should not be required anymore to share in the payment of irrigation expenses; only the landowner should pay for them. It is not right for a landowner to require his tenant to pay for irrigation water, because this inures solely to the benefit of the landlord. It is not proper to charge the tenant even half of the price paid for the purpose. [Applause and cheers.]

Dr. Ramos. —Sir, what about the various expenses for the erection and maintenance of embankments which help a great deal in improving the harvest?

The President. —Those improvements also mean an increase in gain. I wish to remind you that landlords should not make a profit of more than 10 per cent per annum on their land because the soil does not decay; instead, it turns out profits continuously. The price of the land is not decreased either, because it produces crops. I also wish to draw your attention to the fact that in 1900 a cavan of rice cost only P1.50, and the total value of the land under cultivation in Nueva Ecija at that time was around P20,000,000. At present, however, it is about P40, 000, 000, so I believe that landlords here should content themselves with a share of 10 per cent of the produce of the land.

Mr. Ramos.— Sir, can we not attach 15 per cent of the tenants’ share of the harvest in case they fail to pay their debts, as sometimes they claim that they have other obligations outside, when the truth is that they gamble with the money in cockpits ?

The President.— You should allow your tenants a little freedom in getting their share, because it rightfully belongs to them. And if you wish them not to bet in cockfights, you should work together for the closing of all cockpits.

By the way, what about the Naric, my friends? Does it do something for you here?

A Townfolk. —The Naric, Sir, does some good here, especially for us—the poor. It helps us a lot by fixing the price of palay in Nueva Ecija. For instance, this year the Naric fixed the price at P2.50 per cavan. We now wish that the Naric be requested to fix the price of palay at P3 per cavan so we—the tenants—can sell our palay at that price.

The President. —That cannot be done. The Naric has no right to raise the price of palay.

A Townfolk.— But, Sir, the Naric is run by the Government.

The President.— No; the Naric is a corporation and it is not run by the Government.

A Townfolk. —Sir, for an illustration, consider what happened to me. A rice dealer and I could not agree on the price of palay and we went to the public defender. The public defender advised us that the price of palay is P2.60 per cavan, while we insisted that it was P2.50 according to the Naric.

The President. —How did it come about?

A Townfolk.— That is what we cannot understand Sir.

The President.— Anyway, I am thankful that the Naric can continue in operation. I happened to inquire about it because assemblymen from the South are planning to put it out of business reasoning that it does not conform with interests and that it fixes the price of rice at high levels. Assemblymen from the South do not produce rice but they cultivate sugar cane instead, so they are apt to feel any slight rise in the price of rice. But when the price of sugar rises we—rice planters of Luzon—do not say anything.

My friends, I wish to bid you goodbye now. This afternoon I will speak before the tenants.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library