SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

SINO-PHILIPPINE FRIENDSHIP

[Delivered at a Dinner in His Honor at Canton, China, December 12, 1936]

The warm welcome which you have accorded us since our arrival in this great city, reaching its climax with this sumptuous banquet, has touched me deeply, and I take it, rather than as a personal tribute, as an evidence of the goodwill of the Government and people of China towards the Government and people of the Philippines. I beg to assure you that I shall cherish the memory of this visit as long as I live.

Many years ago I set foot for the first time in Canton, and while at that time I was not accorded the official reception that is given me today, I consider that visit as one of the most memorable in my life. I came then with but one purpose—to meet and pay my homage to Dr. Sun Yat Sen, whom I had admired since my youth, not only as one of the greatest patriots of all time, but also as a notable exponent of the principles and doctrines of democracy. Dr. Sun Yat Sen then sent a general to meet me at the station and escort me to his residence where I spent practically the whole day, having lunched with him. At that luncheon the well-known statesman of China, Dr. Wu Ting Fang, was present.

Gentlemen, the ties of friendship and commercial intercourse binding China and the Philippines antedate any other intercourse that we have had with the Occident. Long before Magellan touched upon one of the islands of the Visayan group of the Philippine Archipelago, Chinese merchants and farmers had already come to the Philippines and brought to our ancestors the benefits of Chinese culture. Today the largest foreign population in the Philippines is Chinese, some of the most prosperous merchants among us are Chinese, and the retail trade of our country is practically in the hands of your people. It is my pleasure to inform you that the relations between the Chinese in the Philippines and our people are characterized by a spirit of mutual helpfulness and friendship.

From the date of the establishment of the Government of the Commonwealth the people of my country, for the first time in centuries, have enjoyed the right to govern themselves on all matters of purely domestic concern. It has been the policy of my Government not only to maintain but also to improve relations with China. As I suppose you know, the Exclusion Act of the Congress of the United States has been in force in the Philippines and is still in force today. But in the last session of our National Assembly I recommend that an act be passed repealing the law which allows no Chinese immigrants to enter the Philippines. The National Assembly, due to pressure of business, was unable at that time to pass this law, but I have no doubt that it will do so at its coming regular session.

There is really no reason for the existence of a law in the Philippines allowing Europeans, Americans, and Japanese to immigrate, but at the same time denying the Chinese this privilege. We are of the Oriental race and we are in the Orient, and the exclusion of the Orientals from our country seems to be wholly unjustified. However, you will understand that while we are going to open our gates to you we cannot, for economic reasons, permit an unlimited and unqualified immigration of Chinese into the Philippines any more than we can permit that of any other people. There is a great deal of unemployment in my country and abundance of labor both in the factories and on farms, and unrestricted immigration would inevitably cause hardship, if not starvation, to our working people. In removing the prohibition against Chinese immigration, it is our sole purpose to place the Chinese in the Philippines on an equal basis with any other foreigner. In fact, if we were to grant privileges, and such privileges naturally must be based upon some reasonable ground, the Chinese, among the foreigners, would be entitled to such privileges by virtue of their long association with our people and the contribution they have made to our progress and development.

China is bound to be one of the greatest powers. Potentially she is that today. In the Orient her population and her resources make her a nation that must be reckoned with in the future. The Philippines is a new country. We are just emerging from the state of dependency into that of complete statehood, which will reach its climax in the establishment of an independent republic nine years hence, if not sooner. It is both our earnest desire and convenience that China should be our friend and collaborator, and we hope that these sentiments are shared equally by our people and your Government. Let me, therefore, drink to the health of Your Excellencies and to the perpetual friendship and coöperation of China and the Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library