SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

CONDITIONS ABROAD AND IN THE PHILIPPINES

[Delivered over the Radio on the Occasion of His Birthday An- niversary, Malacañan Palace, Manila, August 19, 1937]

Fellow-Citizens, Friends and Beloved Ones, Here and Across the Seas:

I am very happy and deeply grateful tonight, happy and grateful for these evidences of good will and high esteem which are shown me on every side. I thank you all. I thank specially my very dear friend, our former Governor-General, and the two Filipino girls who took part in this program from the other side of the globe, and all the others who with their participation in this program, have made the evening so pleasant to me. Specially do I thank the people of the Philippines, my own dear people, who are celebrating my birthday by contributing to the fund for the campaign against tuberculosis, one of the most dreadful diseases that affect our people.

I am happy and grateful to see that, after so many years in public life, the trust which the country has reposed in me appears to be undiminished.

I am happy and grateful, above all, because the Philippines today is the best country upon the face of God’s world to live in and is inhabited by the happiest people. In my recent trip abroad, I saw restlessness, everywhere a feeling of discontent prevailing amongst all classes of society. The public mind seems to be gripped with fear of what the morrow may bring. I had the impression that humanity has never been so unhappy, so disgusted with its lot. Misery and want are in evidence everywhere, side by side with plenty and wealth. War is threatening; indeed, in some countries it is actually taking place. As I crossed the oceans and saw all these things, I wondered if we were not going through one of those periods in human history when a civilization built up after millenniums of efforts and struggle is utterly destroyed to pass into oblivion.

We should be thankful to Almighty God that here the firmament is blue, free from the clouds of either a menacing war from without or of a public disorder from within. Man freely breathes the air of liberty and his heart is tm of hope, not of fear. Here we may go to bed at night and be sure that the following day the roar of guns or the tumult of sit-down strikes will not disturb our peace and the orderly processes of industry. In order to foster private initiative and at the same time to protect our less fortunate citizens from the abuses and injustices of greed, we have here found the happy medium between the theory of laissez faire and the regulation by the State of the interlay of economic forces.

It is our solemn and inescapable duty, not only to maintain the happy situation, but to improve it so that the masses may feel more and more happy and contented.

During the last year and a half of the Commonwealth, we have achieved unparalleled progress in the life of the nation. What we have accomplished within this short period of time has never been accomplished in any ten years in the past. The finances of our Government are sounder than ever. The evidence of an increasing prosperity is seen in the fact that, without manipulation, the prices of all articles and products are going up because of greater demand. We have built more schools and there are more children in the schools than ever. We have not only built more roads in the more advanced regions of the Philippines, but also, for the first time in history, widely separated sections of the island of Mindanao are now connected with the road that goes from Cagayan de Misamis through Lanao and Cotabato to Davao. The laws enacted by the National Assembly for the well-being of our workingmen and the needy are too well known and too numerous to detail.

Much as we have done in the last year and a half, we are going to do more in the next few years.

We shall extend the blessings of education to every child of school age in our country. We shall build roads that will facilitate the transportation of our products to market. We shall build more hospitals and leprosaria. We shall improve the sanitary conditions of our municipalities by providing them with pure water. We shall break up the few remaining big, landed estates by acquiring them from their owners and selling them to the tillers of the soil. We shall give impetus to the development of Mindanao. We shall establish new industries. In other words, we shall adopt and carry out a long-range program of economic development as well as of social service. It is my ambition that the Philippines become a country where Poverty is unknown, and where justice is the watchword, and democracy and freedom the motto.

My countrymen, once more let me thank you for the evidences of love and affection you have again given me since my return to these, our beautiful Islands from my trip abroad. On this my birthday, once more I implore the guidance of Divine Providence in the performance of my trust and I appeal to you your continued cooperation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library