IMPROVEMENT OF THE LIVING CONDITIONS OF LABORERS



Even if capital has a right to look for profit, it also has a corresponding duty to give labor its due.

Exaggeration can never be an instrument of peace and harmony, but in many cases it brings about disorder. What is necessary is the cooperation of labor and capital so as to continuously bring about and enjoy the comforts which life offers.

Let the spirit of cooperation and of harmony prevail, as well as a desire to be of service for the benefit of all, for the sake of the peace and welfare of the country.



My Countrymen:

I am happy to see you all rejoicing on the occasion of the inauguration of these tenement houses which were constructed at the instance of the Government so that the laborers may have a decent place to live in.

I do not agree with Secretary Torres when he said that these houses were constructed through my efforts. The credit goes to the National Assembly which appropriated the necessary funds for the construction of these houses, which money was, in turn, taken from the taxes that we pay. What the National Assembly did was to answer the call for a long-felt necessity of our poor people who really need the help of the Government so as to improve their living conditions.

The conditions under which our laboring class and the poor live, present a problem which we should not fail to heed. Our officials should study and remedy the situation, and, as for me, I consider it an honorable duty to remedy it in the shortest time possible. Almost every day I see the deplorable condition of the places where our laborers live. Oftentimes, as early as five o’clock in the morning, I walk and go to places in the city where laborers live, to enable myself to see actually There and how their houses are constructed. These visits which generally take me to Pandacan, Tondo, and other places, really touch me. I really feel in my heart the pitiful conditions under which the laborers and their families live—so entirely devoid of the comforts of life, their houses located in muddy places or built above stagnant pools which perhaps never dry up except during the hot season. This accounts for the fact that sickness and disease cannot be reduced to a minimum, but on the contrary become more dreadful and take a toll of many lives. This is the reason I am confident that this step in the improvement of the laborer’s living conditions which we now witness this afternoon will be followed by many others during the remaining three years of my term as President of the Philippines.

It will not be long now when the shore which we now see will be filled and become dry land where laborers’ houses can be built. This will be realized in a short time, the filing to begin from the lighthouse and end at Vitas. Likewise, the Government will construct a townsite adjacent to the city, sufficient to accommodate twenty-one thousand families, enabling them to build houses on 200-square meter lots, thereby allowing extra space for poultry and vegetable planting. This new townsite, which will be constructed within a short time, will have a hospital, a beautiful and clean market, wide roads, the narrowest being 15 meters, a nursery where nurses will take care of babies while their mothers work in factories and industrial houses, playgrounds where children can play without risk of being run over by motor vehicles, a big park of three hundred hectares where the residents could hold celebrations they may want and where they can relax during the hot season. Laborers, who now live in crowded places located in low and muddy regions in the city, will have the comforts which they do not enjoy at present.

Our Government is planning this because it fully believes that human beings, unlike animals, deserve a decent place to live in however poor they may be. Aside from this, the Government wants to impress upon the heart and mind of every citizen the fact that he has no better friend than the Government. As a matter of fact, the Government belongs to the people, and the people choose the officials who are to follow their mandate. There is no official in the Government who does not believe that in performing his duties it is the interest of the country that he serves above his own. That is why the claim of the opposition that the Government is the enemy of the people is entirely false. If the Government is really the enemy of the people, then I shall be the first to say that we do not need any kind of government. This is what makes the whole thing ridiculous: If the Government is the enemy of the people as claimed by the opposition, then why is it that these very people aspire for governmental positions either elective or otherwise? Do they want to be branded as enemies of the people? From this we can readily see the falsity of their claim. You can ask them if, in desiring positions in the Government, they want to be branded as enemies of the people.

This is what happens: There are people who still think there is real patriotism in telling their fellowmen of their bravery, of the things that they could do. All that is mere talk and results in nothing. There are some who say that they are against the present government, and these persons were my companions in the Philippine Assembly and later in the Senate, where I observed that most of what they said they would do were not at all realized. This is the time for deeds and not words, and real patriotism, if we are to perform our duties to the country, lies in our collective efforts to bring about the welfare of the country. In deeds alone can real patriotism be shown.

There are many things that we should do to prepare ourselves better for independence. Our natural resources which are not hidden from our eyes, such as our forests that contain abundant timber and our flowing streams that can be harnessed to our use, and the varied wealth hidden in our soils, are among the many gifts given by the Creator to our people that we should take advantage of by collective effort. But if the time that should be taken advantage of in devising means for the proper utilization of our hidden wealth which will bring life and comfort to us, is wasted in poisoning the public mind, we will reap disaster because the very wealth in our midst will be grabbed by others:

My friends from the opposition should stop their useless talk, and you, my friends, should not be easily swayed by apparently courageous remarks, because the truth is that if you challenge these self-styled patriots you will easily find out that what they say is false. That is why my most cherised desire these days, now that the election is drawing near, is for you to choose men who have accomplished something, who are still trying to accomplish something, and not those whose promises are never realized. And of you and your friends residing on Velasquez Street, I ask that you elect Perfecto. (From a listener: “You may rest assured, Mr. President”.)

You know now that the aim of the Government in striving to promote the welfare and comfort of laborers, a sample of which you see now, shall be maintained. It will be pushed on with the usual vigor because it leads to the realization of the ardent desire of the Government and my sincere aspiration, as long as I am the Chief Executive of our Government, to render help to the fullest extent to the poor and laboring classes. In this connection, I want to take this opportunity to make it known to capital that even if it has a right to look for profit, it also has a corresponding duty to give labor its due. I say this because I believe in the truth of what economic experts say that capital must be the first to respect labor. It is true that in attaining the comforts which other nations under the sun now enjoy, labor was needed and utilized. That is why if capital sinks periodically and disappears, the sincere cooperation of labor makes capital spring out again to be used once more as a tool of progress for the benefit of mankind. And because capital is a product of labor, capital should never maltreat labor.

But you laborers should never think that because you are as indispensable as this, you can ask for whatever you want. No! Exaggeration can never be an instrument of peace and harmony, but in many cases it brings about disorder. What is necessary is the cooperation of labor and capital so as to continuously bring about and enjoy the comforts which life offers.

In conclusion, I wish to instill in your hearts and minds this afternoon, that these tenement houses were constructed by the Government for the benefit of the laborers and the poor. Let the spirit of cooperation and of harmony prevail, as well as a desire to be of service for the benefit of all, for the sake of the peace and welfare of the country.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library