SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

PRESIDENCY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES

[Delivered during the inauguration ceremonies of Dr. Bienvenido M. Gonzalez as President of the University of the Philippines, held on the University campus, Manila, on October 19, 1939]

President Gonzalez, Delegates from Other Universities, Members of the Faculty and Student Body, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I shall make only a few remarks this evening. The occasion, as you all know, is the celebration of the induction into office of the new President of this University. The stage is set for him, and we are here to honor him and to listen to his message. But before proceeding with what I have to say, permit me to digress for a moment in order to voice my heartfelt thanks and convey my warm congratulations to the cadet corps of this university for their magnificent showing during the review given in my honor on the 16th. For a while, I really did not know what to do—whether to go on with the review or to dispense with it. I felt that it was almost cruelty on my part to allow those young men to parade before me in that rain, but then I asked myself: What kind of a Commander-in-Chief would I be, and what conception of the life of a soldier for which they are being trained would I give them, if I were to falter merely because of rain? So I decided to proceed with the review, and I am glad that I did it for I was more thrilled by that review than by any other I had previously witnessed. For the satisfaction of the cadets, I want to tell them that although I had a raincoat on, yet it was so thin that I was completely soaked under it.

The University is conferring today the degree of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, on the Chief Justice of our Supreme Court. No man deserves this honor more than Chief Justice Avanceña. He is highly endowed not only with a judicial mind but also with a judicial temperament. Wise, as well as patriotic, he is eminently fitted for the exalted office which he so worthily occupies.

I now come to the primary purpose of this celebration. President Gonzalez has been chosen upon no other consideration than that of merit. In responsibility and opportunity for service, the presidency of this university is second to none. I know that President Gonzalez fully realizes this fact, for shortly after his selection for this post, he was offered a position which carries a salary that is almost five times as much as his present salary, but he declined it. Incidentally, I may say that President Gonzalez’ refusal of this very tempting offer is a conclusive evidence that he possesses the moral fibre with which educational leaders are, and should be, endowed. Here is a living example which the constituency of this university may well emulate. It teaches that in importance, material wealth is secondary to the priceless value of service.

While, on the one hand, the University of the Philippines is fortunate to have at its head a scientist with proven ability for leadership in the educational field, President Gonzalez, on his part, has every reason to congratulate himself for being presented with the opportunity, which his predecessors did not have, of assuming the direction of this high institution of learning at a time when the Government has taken a broader view of its objectives and is willing to spend more money to accomplish those objectives.

The first step we have taken to make the university what it should be, is its transfer to a more appropriate site away from the noise of the city, which detracts the serene life of the scholar. It is a site which, in natural beauty, excels any other spot in the vicinity of Manila. Three days ago I went there again to view the university site, and I want to tell you that my heart throbbed with joy when I saw the place and felt how happy the students of the University would be on the new site. I am glad that the silent opposition of some professors and the vocal protests of some students of the College of Law did not deter me from carrying out my idea of moving the university away from this wholly unsuitable campus. Of course, I shall be out of office and perhaps no longer in this world by the time all the new buildings of the university are created, but I have pictured in my imagination what the future university would look like; and if I have done nothing else during my term of office than to effect this transfer. I shall still have the satisfaction of having rendered some permanent service to the country.

The Constitution of the Philippines guarantees academic freedom to the universities established by the State and as a matter of course, to private universities. But so that no one may mistake this academic freedom for license to teach antisocial and subversive doctrines, the same Constitution provides that all educational institutions shall be under the supervision of, and subject to regulation by, the State. In the case of this State University, it goes without saying that it forms a very important part of our educational system, and its objectives must be determined by governmental policies. Here leaders will be trained in statesmanship, in the sciences, in the arts, in business, in industry and agriculture, but it must be remembered that we seek not quantity but quality.

President Gonzalez, I desire to congratulate you from the bottom of my heart for your election by the Board of Regents as President of the University of the Philippines. I want you to know, and I want the university constituency to realize fully, that you have the complete confidence of the Board of Regents and of the Government as well. This means that subject only to the authority which is vested by law in the Board of Regents, you will direct and control this institution, and your decisions will stand.

Assured of the unstinted support of the Board of Regents and of the Government, you will, I am sure, make this university excel the fondest hopes of our people.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library