SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is an honor to be here today to address you on a matter of great importance to our nation – the ongoing efforts to strengthen our disaster resilience.

Bilang isang Pilipino, ramdam ko ang hirap at pagsubok na dinaranas ng ating mga kababayan tuwing may kalamidad. We have witnessed firsthand the devastating effects of typhoons, floods, earthquakes, and volcanic eruptions. These events not only cause immense suffering and loss of life, but also disrupt our economy and hinder our progress.

Kaya naman, prayoridad ng ating pamahalaan ang pagpapalakas ng ating kakayahan na harapin at malampasan ang mga sakuna. We are investing heavily in early warning systems, disaster preparedness programs, and infrastructure development. We are also working closely with local government units and communities to ensure that they are equipped with the necessary resources and knowledge to respond effectively to emergencies.

We recognize that disaster resilience is not just the responsibility of the government. It requires a collective effort from all sectors of society. Kaya hinihikayat ko ang bawat isa na makiisa sa ating mga programa at maging handa sa anumang oras. Let us all work together to build a safer and more resilient Philippines for ourselves and for future generations.

Maraming salamat po, at mabuhay tayong lahat.

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

Y. M. C. A. as Nonsectarian Institution

[Delivered on the occasion of the silver anniversary celebration of the City Young Men’s Christian Association, at the City Y. M. C. A. building in Manila, on December 1, 1939.]

Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:

It takes more courage than I have for me to attempt to make a speech tonight after the great ovation which Dr. Buencamino received. [ Laughter .] Therefore, I shall be brief in my speech. Incidentally, I want to recommend Dr. Buencamino to the President of the University of the Philippines for a chair as professor of oratory. [ Laughter .)

Dr. Buencamino’s success reminds me of an experience that I had in the United States more than twenty-five years ago. General Bandholtz, former Chief of Constabulary and well-known in the Philippines for the magnificent service he rendered to our Government and people, invited me to visit his home in Constantine, which is a little town of about twenty-five hundred inhabitants in Michigan. One afternoon he asked me to go with him and hear a well-known preacher.

After the first five minutes of this preacher’s talk. I noticed that he pulled out a ten-dollar bill from his pocket. He spoke for about ten minutes more and all the while he held the ten-dollar bill in his hand; but after another five minutes, I saw him put the bill back in his pocket and pull out a five-dollar bill this time. The preacher proceeded for another fifteen minutes, then the five-dollar bill disappeared and a one-dollar bill took its place. He kept putting in and pulling out his hand from his pocket, and by the time the preacher was through, General Bandholtz had only twenty-five cents in his hand for the collection box.

Ladies and gentlemen, there is only one thing that I want to say to you tonight. I am here to congratulate the Young-Men’s Christian Association upon the celebration of its silver anniversary. Mr. Turner attempted to prove that the Young Men’s Christian Association is nonsectarian. I do not know whether or not it makes any difference if the Young Men’s Christian Association is a sectarian institution. Certainly, I am here tonight not because it is a non-sectarian institution. I would have been here just the same if it were a Protestant institution,  for it must be admitted that whether or not the Young Men’s Christian Association is a Protestant institution, it is doing a good work, especially in its community activities, and if it is doing a good work it deserves my commendation, Roman Catholic though I may be.

If it is a Protestant institution, then, what the Young Men’s Christian Association is doing should serve as an incentive to the Roman Catholics to do the same thing or to do it better. [ Applause .] I am glad—if it is true—that the Roman Catholics think that the Young Men’s Christian Association is a sectarian or a Protestant institution, and I hope that the Roman Catholics will try to do as much as, and if possible more than, what the Young Men’s Christian Association is now doing. Let us have throughout the Philippines associations among the Protestants, Roman Catholics, and others which will do the work that the Young Men’s Christian Association is doing. That is all that I want to say tonight.

Once more, congratulations. [ Applause .]

Source : Presidential Museum and Library