SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

JAPANESE-PHILIPPINE RELATIONS

[Delivered before the Philippine Society of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, February 2, 1937]

Viscount Okabe, Gentlemen of the Philippine Society of Japan:

I thank you, Viscount Okabe, for your very kind words. We are happy to be with you today and we are grateful for your generous hospitality which we accept not only as an expression of your friendship towards us but also of the good will of your people for our people.

The avowed policy of the United States to grant the Philippines their independence is now in the process of complete realization. The Government of the Commonwealth which has placed in the hands of the Filipino people all governmental powers concerning their domestic affairs while reserving for the United States the control of our foreign relations will, in due time, automatically become the Government of the Philippine Republic. This period of transition was deemed necessary in order that our people may fully prepare themselves to assume all the responsibilities of an independent nation.

It is incumbent upon us, therefore, at this time to take such a step as in our opinion may be necessary to insure the peace and prosperity of our people and to win the respect and good will of the world at large, through a careful regard for rights not only of our own nationals but also for the rights of the foreigners who are living in our midst or doing business with us.

For some time prior to and during the first few months after my inauguration as President of the Commonwealth, newspapers here, in the United States, and in the Philippines had been publishing from time to time news items regarding the so-called Japanese problem in Davao. I am happy to say that after a personal investigation that I made, I found that there was no such thing as the so-called Davao problem and I have so informed our National Assembly when it convened in its first regular session. From that time on nothing more has been said in the newspapers about that so-called problem.

Gentlemen, I want to assure you that Japanese in the Philippines will be more than amply protected in their rights by our government and that they will always receive every courtesy and consideration from our people. A geographical fact is as inflexible as a mathematical truth. Japan and the Philippines are neighbors and it is to their mutual interest that they be friends, and friendship can only be promoted through fair dealing and justice on both sides. The Philippine Society of Japan and its sister, the Philippine-Japan Society of Manila, can be very potent factors in cementing friendly relations between your people and my people.

With due regard to my friends, Mr. Takaishi and Doctor Romulo, I am constrained to say that sometimes careless publications in the daily press, whether in good or bad faith, can do no small amount of harm. On the other hand, the press can contribute much to the cause of good will amongst nations. Let the Philippine Society of Japan and the Philippine-Japan Society agree not to support every newspaper in this country or in mine that, whether in good or bad faith, print news items without verification that may arouse ill-feelings on either side or both you will render very effective service to our respective countries. The intercourse between Japan and the Philippines antedates our association with any Occidental country, and to my knowledge this intercourse of many centuries between our peoples has never been marred in any way by the slightest misunderstanding.

Of late, there have been frequent visits to the Philippines by Japanese business men as well as members of the House of Peers and the House of Representatives. There have also been many Filipinos, both from public and private life, who have been sojourning in this beautiful country of yours. We even have started exchanging professors from our universities. This is a most wholesome tendency for as the number of Japanese that visit my country and the number of Filipinos that visit yours increase, the better will our people grow to like one another. It is but repeating a truism to say that knowledge produces understanding and understanding engenders amity.

I am confident, in fact, it is my earnest endeavor that in the future there will always be the heartiest cooperation between your people and my people in everything that means the progress and peace not only of this part of the world but also of mankind in general. We owe a debt of gratitude to the United States of America, but the re cognition of this fact is not incompatible with our desire to be in harmonious relations with Japan, nor does this mean that we should deny the Japanese nationals any participation in the development of our country within the prescribed limits of our laws and Constitution. Quite the contrary, I for one sincerely believe that we will be doing a good service to America by being the friends of Japan just as we are rendering a good service to Japan by being grateful to America. Nay, I will say even more; every lover of peace and of humanity should see to it that these three nations understand one another and coöperate with each other.

I have only one complaint against my Japanese friends, and that is, that every time I come here I have to guard myself against the demands of your generous hospitality. Gentlemen, Japan has a very cold climate, but the heart of the Japanese is warm. I want to assure you that mine is warm also. I thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library