Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On good and efficient government

[ Delivered at a Conference of Provincial and Municipal Officials at Capiz, Capiz, April 17, 1936 ]

I shall address the provincial and municipal officers and justices of the peace in this informal manner because this is the best way of getting each other’s views. I deem it my duty on these visits to remind you of our obligation to give our country an honest, efficient and impartial government. To fulfill that obligation, the cooperation of the provincial and municipal officers is required.

The municipal presidents of this province belong, I suppose, to either of the big political parties we now have in the Philippines, and as such party members it is their duty to give to their respective municipalities the kind of government that those two big parties have pledged themselves to give in the joint platform adopted at the convention which, as you all know, was held in Manila. As party members, they have a duty toward the people contracted in behalf of the parties to which they belong; but they have, besides, a more serious and solemn obligation as officials of the Government.

I want the municipal presidents in the next few years to think and act as chief executives of their municipalities rather than as chiefs of a political faction in the same. What I am saying of the municipal presidents I also say of the provincial officers.

As chief of the nation, I am endeavoring to act not as chief of my party but as chief of the Government. My conscience does not accuse me of having as yet done anything under the influence of party considerations. In all I have done I have acted as chief of the Government, without any consideration other than that of the common interest. I am not saying that because I claim to be infallible. It is quite possible that I have made mistakes, because I am human, and to err is natural in man. But I wish to show you that my mind is guided and my acts are prompted by a determination to act as a man of the Government and not as chief of a party, and to strive for the common good and not for that of a group. I must, therefore, demand of the provincial governors and municipal presidents that they act in the same manner.

To the justices of the peace I would say that they must follow the rule of conduct and be imbued with the spirit of government to which I have made reference. From now on, justices of the peace must be justices of the peace and nothing else. The time when justices of the peace could be the tools of any person is past. Any justice of the peace who does not feel that he is sufficiently strong to decide himself independent of the whole world had better get ready to quit his post right now, because he is liable to lose it in a way not creditable to himself.

My policy with reference to the justices of the peace will be to retain the old justices in the service even though they are not lawyers. There was some doubt in the minds of a few persons whether our present Constitution allows the President to retain in the service justices of the peace who are not lawyers. I had a part in the drafting of the Constitution and had something to do with the language used in it, and for that reason I am sure that it was the intention of the Constitutional Convention to retain in the service, and allow the President to retain, those old justice of the peace who are not lawyers. Speaker Roxas, who was one of those who took a most active part in the preparation of our Constitution, fully agrees with me that such was the intent and spirit on which the proviso on Justices of the peace was based.

I do not believe that any doubt on that intention exists on the part of the Secretary of Justice and the Supreme Court. A person who is not a lawyer cannot be commissioned as justice of the peace; but the present justices of the peace can be retained in their posts even though they are not lawyers.

I now say to the justices of the peace: I shall retain any justice of the peace whose record warrants his being retained in office. But any justice of the peace whose record has some blemish will not be retained.

Justices of the peace must eschew politics completely. You know, and I know, that all justices of the peace of the Philippines used to be leaders in politics and I am willing to take this fact into consideration. That is a thing of which we all were guilty. I shall not punish the justices who were political leaders with my knowledge and consent when I was President of the Senate. As it was then not my duty to enforce the law, I was glad if there was a justice of the peace willing to help my candidate.

However, I am going to tell you something that happened in my province which shows my policy at that time.

In a political contest not many years ago, there were a Nacionalista candidate and a Democrata candidate. The Democrata candidate was very strong; he was Godofredo Reyes. His Nacionalista opponent was weak and hardly polled any votes in the various municipalities during the election. The Nacionalistas made use of all the power of the Government to assist the Nacionalista candidate. One day the leaders of the Nacionalista candidate came to me with the request that I demand the removal of the justice of the peace of Tiaong. “Why?” I asked. “Because he has gone into politics. He is helping Godofredo Reyes. There are 16 municipalities and 15 justices are helping San Agustin,” they answered.

Then I told them that if I asked for the removal of the justice of the peace of Tiaong I would also ask for the removal of all the other justices of the peace mentioned. Why? Because it would have been right to be tolerant with the justices who favored our candidate and punish one who did not, solely because of his political activities.

I am not willing now to tolerate what I have tolerated in the past. That thing must not happen again. I want to tell you that if any justice of the peace meddles in politics in an election I shall immediately take action against him.

In the municipalities, the justice of the peace is the only man whom the Government has to administer justice among the poor or between the poor and the rich. The poor often cannot afford to appeal their cases to the Court of First Instance, and for that reason, the decision of the justice of the peace is final as far as they are concerned. The justice of the peace court is in many cases the only court of justice for the poor man. If he has no confidence in the justice of the peace of his municipality, he will not have any faith in the courts of justice, though the judge of the Court of First Instance of his province be a great judge. He will not have any faith because he has not the means to take his case to the Court of First Instance.

I am striving to convince the people that in the Philippines the poor man receives justice from our Government the same as the man of means. The poor will not believe that until they are convinced that the justice of the peace is not under anybody’s influence and does not take improper orders from any one, and that he is capable of administering justice to the highest and to the lowest in the social order in his municipality. I do not want our people to believe that when a public official is the friend or relative of a person or belongs to the same party, he cannot do anything against that friend, relative or fellow-partisan.

In order to inspire confidence, the justice of the peace must show that he is not interested in politics. In making appointments, I shall avoid commissioning any one as justice of the peace of the municipality in which he was born. However, if an old justice of the peace has for many years been a good justice in the municipality in which he was born, I shall not be unjust to him but shall a low him to continue in office. But in all other cases, my justice of the peace appointments will go to men not from the municipalities in which they are to perform the duties of justices of the peace, in order that their relationship or the interests they may have created in the municipality may not be an obstacle to the free and impartial performance of their duties. It is not only necessary to administer justice impartially but also to be in such a position that the people see that justice is being so administered. I, therefore, beg the justices of the peace to endeavor henceforth to give their office that dignity and prestige which it should have. The position of justice of the peace, although modest, is nevertheless one that is independent from all others in the Government.

I want to ask any justice of the peace now listening to me whether it does not raise him in his own estimation to realize that he is independent even of the President of the Philippines in deciding cases that come before him. That reali­zation exalts the office as well as the individual. The conviction that no one has a right to tell you how you must decide a case submitted to you for judgment, and that yon need not regard anyone so long as you are doing your duty, is a great thing.

Justices of the peace receive but small salaries. However, their greatest compensation—and I am saying this particularly to the lawyers who are, or are to be, justices of the peace,—is this: the thorough conviction that no one in the Philippines can compel them to do anything their conscience forbids them to do. That is the best compensation, because it reveals the dignity of the office.

As regards the other officials, I desire to say that one of their duties after they have been elected is to collect the taxes. Gentlemen, it is not proper to look for votes, promising the people that the land tax will be lowered or that it will be remitted. We must educate the people to pay their taxes. In time of peace, the only way in which they can show their patriotism is by paying their taxes to the Government. Any man who says that he is a patriot, that he loves his people and is ready to die for his country, but does not pay his taxes, is a liar and not a patriot. If he is not willing to pay his taxes to the Government, how can he be willing to die for his country?

The payment of taxes is an act of patriotism. Why? Because the taxes are used for the public benefit. When you are asked for voluntary contribution, an appeal is made to your patriotism. There is no need of asking for voluntary contributions when the legal contributions, the taxes are paid. If it is an act of patriotism to pay a voluntary contribution, how can it be anything but patriotic to pay the contributions imposed by law? It is, no doubt, an act of Patriotism. By paying taxes, the citizen helps his country. and with those taxes schools are established by which the young generation is benefited, and roads are built which benefit everybody.

What is an act of patriotism? Any act performed for the benefit of the community. There are persons who believe that taxes are a burden proper of slaves. You must know that there is a difference between taxes and tributes. Formerly, under the Spanish government, taxes were called tributo in the Philippines, and they were actually a tribute because a part of them went to Spain. They were a tribute paid to the sovereign.

What is a contribution ? What does contribuir mean? To give one’s share for a general purpose. We have to pay our contribuciones , our taxes. We must get rid of the idea that the Insular Government should pay the expense of maintaining the provinces and municipalities, even though these fail to do anything on their part. Such an idea implies a lack of public pride.

I am not one of those who believe that people in the Philippines are not paying their taxes because they cannot pay them. That is not true. Do you believe it is true? What often happens is that when the treasurer demands payment of the taxes, the people have not the money because they have spent the money they had for things that were not very necessary and for other improper purposes.

I believe in a man living within his means. There is a great difference between spending your money to live and dress according to your means, and spending it to live and dress beyond your means. Any one who spends his money eating and dressing beyond his means has no right to be independent.

The first duty of a man, after using his money for the necessities of life, for food and raiment, is to pay his taxes to the Government. But not many of us do that. Generally, we spend our money on luxuries that we have set our heart upon, but which are not warranted by our means, and there are persons who spend money beyond their means. Every fiesta is a pretext for spending the money we have. At Saint Peter’s and Saint Paul’s we kill pigs and cows and feed half the village. What need is there for this? A taxpayer spends all his money on useless things, and when the municipal treasurer comes to collect the taxes, that same taxpayer says he has not any money. He has spent it foolishly or lost it in the cockpit. On the day when he sold the products of his labor, he went to the cockpit and lost all he had earned. If, before going to the cockpit and before giving the parties which he gave (his saint’s day, his daughter’s wedding, and the wedding of his niece) he had laid aside the parties of his income necessary to pay his taxes, he would not have found himself short of money wherewith to pay his taxes.

“Our country above all,” we are wont to say, especially when we are making speeches. But how disgusted we are when they come to collect the taxes which we owe to the Government! Does that look as if our country came first with us?

A people that is not ready to support its government is not entitled to independence. It is not possible to have self-government if the citizen does not pay his taxes to the state, just as a man with any sense of shame would not ask a woman in marriage unless he had a home of his own. Only a man able to support a family should dare ask a woman to marry him. A son dependent upon his father for support has no right to establish a home of his own. Individual liberty is based on the capacity to support one’s self. A man unable to support himself is a slave, though he may not want to be one. It is foolish to speak of independence, of liberty, if one cannot maintain that independence, that liberty.

The same is true of countries. We have to support ourselves. Do you know whom we cheat when we do not pay our taxes? Ourselves, our own people. There is an idea that the people and the Government are two distinct and separate things. That is a mistake. In a self-governing country, the government is of the people, the government has been created by the people, by means of the constitution. The government is, therefore, ours; it has been created by and for us. We have created it to serve the interests of the people, our interests, and that government needs to have every citizen contribute his share to the State, in the form of taxes, to serve the interests of the people.

Finally, I recommend that we do not use the authority vested in us in a wrong way, because that authority has been conferred upon us for use in the service of the community.

That is all I have to say to the public officials.

Let us endeavor to have the best government that we can make, a government that will be an honor to us and worthy of our people. The citizen must remember that his obligations toward this Government have increased and not diminished. If it was his duty to obey the law before, it is now doubly his duty to obey it. If it was his duty to cooperate with the Government before, it is now doubly his duty to so cooperate. This is his government, he supports it with all his heart so that it may be a success Let us cooperate with each other. The officers of the provincial and municipal governments, that form Philippine Government, must show to the provinces and the municipalities that they are working for the best interests of the community. Without the cooperation of the citizens of the provinces and municipalities, the officers of the same could not do anything because that cooperation is necessary and constitutes a duty, and at the same time, a right.

If anyone among you has anything to say, I am ready to listen. If there are any complaints, they had better be submitted in writing in order that the proper investigation may be made. If you wish to say anything with reference to the Government, I am ready to hear you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library