Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Government Policy, Electoral Campaigns, and Re-election of Assemblymen for Oriental Negros

[Delivered at the public plaza in Dumaguete, Oriental Negros, November 3, 1938]

Mr. Governor, People of Dumaguete and of the Province of Oriental Negros:

This is my second visit to Dumaguete in three years. When I last came here the governor of this province was my dear friend, ex-Senator Hermenegildo Villanueva. He is now out of this province performing a duty which I have entrusted him. In his place, you have a new governor, Governor Teves, and I desire to take advantage of this, my first visit during his incumbency, to extend him my whole-hearted support and coöperation for the success of his administration. [ Applause ]

The provincial governors are the representatives of the President of the Philippines in the provinces, and it is my desire to lend each provincial governor the help that my office can give in order that his administration may be successful. My support, however, of a governor will be in proportion as he complies with his duties and serves the people well. I have stated more than once that under my administration there will be more government and less politics. By that I mean that under my administration political considerations have very little weight. The Government is one thing and political parties another. Political parties are constituted for the purpose of organizing men who have the same political ideals and of helping party office seekers secure positions. Political parties are mere instruments of the people with which to choose their officials. But when, after an election, a man is elected through the efforts of one political party, he becomes the chosen official of the people, no longer the chosen official of the party. If a political party tries to use the men who belong to it and who occupy official positions to foster its aims and promote its interests, that party is unworthy of the confidence of the people. Once a man is chosen to occupy a public office, he is no longer the servant of a party, but the servant of the whole people. Therefore, it is the duty of every provincial governor, as it is the duty of every municipal mayor, and, above all, the duty of the President of the Philippines, to regard themselves as servants of the people only, and not as servants of the party to which they belong. As such servants of the people, it is their duty to do justice, to comply with the law without favor to anyone—even to those who are closest to them for political or personal reasons. That is what I mean when I said that under my administration there will be more government and less politics. By that I mean that if a man who is a member of the Nacionalista Party is a crook, the fact the he is a member of that party will not save him from prosecution. On the other hand, if a man who is a member of the opposition party is right, his right will be protected as much as that of a member of the majority party.

I have come for two purposes—one is to officially inspect this province, the other to say a few words to you here. Two days ago I informed the governor that I was coming here and that I wanted to meet all the provincial as well as the local officials. I have just been in Cebu where I had done the same thing; I notified the governor that I was going there and wanted all the provincial and municipal mayors to meet me in Cebu. One of the mayors of Cebu, a friend and partisan of Secretary Cuenco, did not come and I suspended him from office. He had been told by the Governor that I was coming and that I wanted to meet the mayors, but he did not come. Perhaps he thought that because he belonged to the party of Secretary Cuenco I would forgive him. Secretary Cuenco is one of the members of my Cabinet. He is not only one of the members of the Cabinet but also one who has been loyal to me politically for many years. Besides that, Secretary Cuenco has been unable to save his mayor; I suspended him. The same thing happened here this afternoon. Four mayors did not come; I have suspended them. My friend, Mr. Medina has come to me and interviewed on behalf of these mayors. He tells me that they were out and did not receive the call. On the other hand, the Governor tells me that he sent word to them. Well, I want to know who is the recognized chief of this province, Mr. Medina or the Provincial Governor. [ “Teves!” shouted the public ] It is strange that the municipal mayors should notify Mr. Medina where they are and not notify their governor where they can be found. If these mayors believe that there is somebody in this province who can protect them when they do not comply with the law, they are mistaken. The immediate chief of the mayors is their governor, and a mayor who does not comply with the order of the governor when the order is legal, will be removed from office by me. [ Applause ] I suppose if an American governor-general had come to meet him Let every Filipino know that the President of the Philippines has at least as much authority as any American governor-general ever had, and that a Filipino President of the Philippines is entitled to the respect and obedience of the citizens of this country because his office came from the people themselves. Perhaps I should have thought that the absence of those mayors was due to some good cause. The mere fact that Mr. Medina knows why they are absent gives me reason to believe that their absence is due to political reason. And so I am going to remove. . . no, suspend them. The worst that can happen to our people, once given the right to choose our own officials is to be incapable of giving them due respect and consideration. If there is any man who believes that the Government we now have is a joke, he had better think it over again. This is a government duly constituted by the votes of our own people, a government that will impose its authority against everybody—and against the world if necessary. [ Applause ] I would never have accepted the position of President of the Philippines if I were not able to enforce my authority.

Gentlemen and countrymen, my only ambition is to have in our country a stable government that is just and fair, a government that is honest, a government that will protect the rights of everybody, a government before whom the lowliest man will receive the same consideration as the most powerful. [ Applause ] My only ambition is to be able to face my countrymen—those who voted for me and those who did not—and say to them that I am doing my duty by everybody, and that I am here to use the great powers of my office not in the interest of all the people including the humblest of them. [ Applause ]

The Province of Oriental Negros may well consider itself very fortunate. You always has as your representatives in the National Government men who served you with loyalty and received the support and cooperation of the authorities of the National Government.

The history of Hermenegildo Villanueva both in the upper and lower house of the Philippine Legislature is the history of a public servant devoted to the service of his people. [ Applause ] You have today two members of the National Assembly who have no superior in any province of the Philippines, either for their ability or fir their loyalty to their duty as your representatives to the National Government. It is not that Guillermo Villanueva is a member of my party; it is not that Jose Romero is a Nacionalista. Even if Guillermo Villanueva and Jose Romero were members of the opposition, still I would say of them what I say now: they have honored their province by their service in the National Legislature. [ Applause ] As far as I am personally of officially concerned, it makes no difference to me whom you elect from this province. If the members of the Assembly from Oriental Negros were elected to fight me, they could give me very little fight. [ Applause ] They can do me neither harm nor favor. They can do harm or favor to your province. But you have two members of the Assembly now who have been doing a lot of good to your province and if reelected will do you more good than ever. [ Applause ]

At my conference in the provincial government building this afternoon, I said that while I would like yo see these two members of the National Assembly reelected, there was one paramount question to me in the coming election, and that was that I wanted, above all, a clean election, an election where the will of the people is permitted to be expressed freely. I want an election where the law will be respected and complied with. The governor, the members of the provincial board, the mayors, and members of the municipal councils, are free to take part in the electoral campaign. They can support the candidates they want, whether they are official candidates of the Nacionalista Party or not. I want them to feel absolutely free to support the men that in their conscience they believe they should support. But the provincial treasurer, the district engineer, the Constabulary, the teachers, the policemen, and civil service officials in general have no right to vote for the candidate if their choice if they have the residence requirements, but they cannot do any electioneering.

Both Assemblymen Villanueva and Romero are candidates whose triumph I should like to see. But if the officials of the Government make any campaign, I will suspend and dismiss them from office. They can vote for Villanueva and Romero, and I hope they do vote for them, but they cannot make any campaign for them.

And now, just one more word. Very soon, on the fifteenth of this month, the first half of my administration will come to an end. Under my administration every activity of the government has improved. We have more schools, more roads, more boys and girls in schools than we ever had before. We have a plan whereby within the next three years there will be schools in every barrio and teachers for all the boys and girls of second age so that no boy or girl of school age will be deprived of the opportunity of primary education. We will give the people clean drinking water. I promised one of the mayors in the conference this afternoon that he would have good drinking water. We will increase the number of dispensaries, improve the hospitals, and in every respect give the people better service and better government. Gentlemen, all these measures have been possible because the National Assembly approved the laws that enforce them. I have no power under the Constitution to enact these laws; it was the National Assembly that enacted them. If the people of the Province of Oriental Negros are pleased with my administration, they should be pleased with the service rendered to them by Assemblymen Villanueva and Romero. There are those who say that the fight that Assemblyman Romero is now facing is a fight between him and former Senator Villanueva. I deny that. I did not permit a fight between Mindoy (Governor Villanueva) and Romero. They are both my friends, they are both my associates, they both belong to my party, and they both have rendered a service to this Government that the people of this province should always remember and recognize. [ Applause ] I do not pay much attention to what people say in times of election. There are always those who take pleasure in telling stories about this and that. All I want to tell you is that the victory of Romero is not the defeat of Hermenegildo Villanueva, nor is the victory of Hermenegildo Villanueva the defeat of Romero. The Victory or Romero is the victory of this province and, therefore, of Hermenegildo Villanueva who is always with you in every thing that is good for you. [ Applause ]

It is a pity to see that there should be a misunderstanding between those who work in harmony and in cooperation for the best interests of this province. As for me, once more I say: personally, I have no interest, as nobody in this province can do me good or harm. It is the interest of this province which induces me to appeal to you to support your representatives, Guillermo Villanueva and Jose Romero. [ Applause ] But if you do not want to vote for them, go ahead and do not do so. I am not going to resent the fact that the Province of Oriental Negros votes for the candidates it likes. I am not one of those who preach one thing and do another. When I say that I want the people to vote freely, I mean that they should vote freely whether they vote for my candidates or not. Freedom of the vote is what I want.

And now, I say goodbye to you; I wish you luck and I wish you success. Above all, I wish you to have a peaceful, orderly and clean election. [ Applause ]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1938). Messages of the President (Vol. 4, Prt. 1). Manila : Bureau of Printing.