SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

THE QUALITIES OF HON. JOAQUIN M. ELIZALDE AS RESIDENT COMMISSIONER OF THE PHILIPPINES TO THE UNITED STATES

[Delivered during the banquet given in honor of Resident Commissioner Joaquin M. Elizalde at Malacañan Palace, December 19, 1939.]

Gentlemen:

I am very happy to welcome my old friend Commissioner Elizalde, and I want to take advantage of this opportunity to express my great satisfaction over the manner in which he has ably performed his duties as Resident Commissioner to the United States. Commissioner Elizalde has been chosen by me without any one having suggested his name. Having known him before, I had come to the conclusion that he was eminently fitted to do the work of Resident Commissioner; and even though I knew that his appointment would mean financial sacrifice on his part, I offered him the appointment and he accepted it. During his official stay in the United States, his business interests in the Philippines needed his attention more than in any other previous year for he had just suffered the greatest of losses, the death of his father, and yet he never hesitated to answer the call of public duty. He was willing to sacrifice his own interests in the service of his own country.

Incidentally, Commissioner Elizalde has shown and is showing our people and our Government that a man may not be a native of a country, he may not be born a Filipino, and yet he can be as good a citizen, as patriotic a citizen, as any native-born. I am, therefore, very pleased to give public recognition to the great services that Commissioner Elizalde has rendered our Government and our people. I could not have made a better choice. He is respected by all those who knew him before he was appointed Resident Commissioner. People in the War Department, in the State Department, and in Congress who had occasion to meet him were very highly impressed with his character and intellectual ability. I am not going to mention specifically what he has accomplished because his work has been publicized widely in the press, and I assume that every one of you is well acquainted with it. I am merely going to say that as long as Resident Commissioner Elizalde is the representative of this Government in Washington, I can rest assured that our interests will be ably and devotedly taken care of.

Gentlemen, I ask you all to raise your glasses and drink to the health and success—continued success—of Resident Commissioner Elizalde.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library