Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines Before the House of Representatives

[Delivered on June 2, 1942]

The President of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands entered the Chamber at 12:37 p.m., and was escorted to the Speaker’s rostrum by the committee appointed by the Speaker.

The SPEAKER. Members of the House of Representatives, the coming to America of our distinguished guest today, our former colleague in the House of Representatives, is, of course, unfortunate, but as it was necessary we welcome him with open arms and with grateful hearts.

He comes to us as the representative of a valiant and a gallant race of people. When the true history of the times is written, the valor, the courage, and the fortitude of the people of the Philippine Islands will make a bright page.

I deem it a high privilege—it is certainly a great personal pleasure—to present the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands.

PRESIDENT QUEZON. Mr. Speaker, I am deeply touched by your very kind words.

Once again I find myself in this august Hall, where for 7 years I pled the cause of my people, their freedom and independence. The memory of those happy days, some of the happiest of my life, rush into my mind now, almost making me forget the sad plight in which I find myself.

I came to Washington in the winter of 1909-10.

On the very first day that I was introduced to the Speaker and given a seat in this Chamber, a stranger in a foreign land, I received a hearty welcome. And through all the years I served with you I was treated with not only courtesy but cordiality.

On the 14th of May 1910 I addressed the House of Representatives for the first time. On that occasion I described the splendid work that had already been done by the American administration in the Philippines, with particular reference to schools, sanitation, and roads.

I said on that occasion “I am glad—to be able to affirm that, under American occupation, there has been established in the Philippines a more liberal government; and the Filipinos have enjoyed more personal and political liberty than they ever did under the Spanish crown. These facts are freely acknowledged throughout the length and breadth of the islands, and my countrymen wish me most earnestly to assure the House, and, through them, the people of the United States, that they are grateful, profoundly grateful, for all the benefits that your Government has conferred upon them.

But, sirs, despite it all, the Filipinos are not as yet a happy people. You would ask me why? Then I will answer in the language of that great apostle of human freedom, Daniel Webster: “No matter how easy may be the yoke of a foreign power, no matter how lightly it sits upon the shoulder, if it is not imposed by the voice of its own opinion and of its own truth, he will not, he cannot, and he means not to be happy under its burden.”

These words I uttered in this same Hall 32 years ago. It took 7 years of constant pleading before I secured the enactment of the act known among us as the Jones law, in which the United States for the first time solemnly pledged the faith of this country to the independence of the Philippines when a stable government should have been established there. Under this act the Filipino people for the first time in their history were to have a legislature of two houses elected by themselves.

Thereupon we began building, day after day, the foundations of a government that the United States would, in due time, consider stable, so that independence might be granted.

Later, in the course of a few years, another act was passed by the Congress which fixed the year 1946 for the granting of complete independence to the Philippines. Under this Independence Act the Commonwealth of the Philippines was organized and established, with a constitution framed and adopted by the Filipino people themselves.

I was elected the first President of the Commonwealth. A fine delegation from the House of Representatives, headed by its Speaker, and an equally fine delegation from the Senate, headed by its President, came to the islands to witness the inauguration of the Commonwealth. They came there to see with their own eyes the inauguration of human liberty which had been granted by the United States.

Mr. Speaker, from that day on the Commonwealth of the Philippines enacted those laws and executed those policies necessary to prepare the Filipino people to assume their responsibilities as an independent nation in 1946. The first act passed by the legislature, to create a citizen army, was recommended by me and known as the National Defense Act. The act was in accordance with the plan submitted by General MacArthur.

I had secured from the President of the United States permission to bring him to the Philippines as my military adviser in order to organize our armed forces. The outcome is the army that has just fought side by side with your own men in the defense of your flag in the Philippines. That is the army which has shed its blood bravely, nay, willingly, so that it might show to the United States the gratitude of our people for the just and wise policy that you have adopted and followed in your dealings with us.

I am not going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, what the armies in the Philippines, Americans and Filipinos alike, have done. You Have read of all that in your press. Nor am I going to dwell at length upon the gallantry, the heroism, and the wonderful leadership of Douglas MacArthur.

You well know that in those dark and terrible days there were many other men, too, who deserve your recognition. There was, of course, General Wainwright, whose tragic responsibility it was at last to surrender Corregidor. He, too, has been a hero throughout the war, from the first day to the last. And there were other American officers and, may I say, some Filipinos also.

There was General Lim, a West Pointer, the first Filipino to graduate from that famous military academy, and there was General Capinpin, who had risen from the ranks. I might mention many other gallant Filipinos, but the names of Lim and Capinpin alone would be enough to cover with glory the military history of my country.

Mr. Speaker, you have heard of the gallant achievements of many Americans and Filipinos during the war. To me perhaps the most striking act of heroism was one that has not been publicized enough. It is the story of a Filipino mess sergeant. You would expect a general, an officer, even a soldier of the line, to be a hero. That is his duty; that is what he is there for. But a cook; the duty of a cook is to feed his men. He is not supposed to be on the firing line. He is supposed to be as far removed from the bullets as possible, so that the men for whom he provides food may be duly taken care of.

I shall read to you the citation for the award of the Medal of Honor:

AWARD OF MEDAL OF HONOR

By direction of the President, under the provisions of the act of Congress approved July 9, 1918, a Medal of Honor was awarded by the War Department in the name of Congress to Jose Calugas, sergeant, Battery B. Eighty-eighth Field Artillery, Philippine Scouts, United States Army. For conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty in action with the enemy at Culis, Bataan Province, P. I., January 16, 1942. When the battery gun position was shelled and bombed until one piece was put out of action and casualties caused the removal of the remaining cannoneers to shelter, Sergeant Calugas, mess sergeant of another battery, voluntarily and of his own accord proceeded 1,000 yards across the shell swept area to the gun position and joined the volunteer gun squad, which fired effectively on the enemy, although heavy bombing and shelling of the position continued.

He deserves the Congressional Medal,’ Mr. Speaker. I am positive that in the whole history of the war there has never been a cook who felt it his duty or even his privilege to run 1,000 yards into an almost hand-to-hand fight. To me he represents the determination of the Filipino people to do more than their duty in standing by their mother country, the United States of America.

I am not going to tell you all about the war. I will not even tell you the story of my escape from Corregidor, a beleaguered fortress surrounded by enemy warships and bombed frequently by enemy war planes and heavy artillery. Instead, I want to read to you documents which will tell you of the recent commitments of the President of the United States to the Philippines, and of my own promises to my people. Perhaps these documents will tell you better than in any other way a very important chapter of the battle of the Philippines.

I left Manila on the 24th of December last. The enemy was bombing the port area of the city at that moment, just where I had to take and did take the ship for Corregidor. We arrived at Corregidor late in the afternoon.

I may tell you, however, that I went to Corregidor only upon the insistent demand of General Mac- Arthur. This I make of record, because I wish my people to know that I did not leave Manila of my own free will. As a matter of fact, I did not want to leave Manila. I did not wish my people to think that I was going to the fortress and leaving them behind. I told General MacArthur, when he first proposed that I go with him to Corregidor, “General, I don’t want to do that. I think my duty is to be with my people. If they are going to be overrun by the enemy, I want to be overrun with them. If they are going to be prisoners and enslaved, I want to be a prisoner and enslaved with them. If they are going to be killed, I want to be killed with them.”

But General MacArthur said, “No; that is not your duty, Mr. President, as I see it. With your consent, I have declared Manila an open city and therefore the Japanese forces will enter it without a struggle. Your Government must be saved. Under international law, as you know, as long as your Government has not been overtaken by the enemy they have not conquered your country.”

Acting upon this theory, I left Manila and went to Corregidor.

On the 28th of December I received from the President of the United States the following message:

To the People of the Philippines:

News of your gallant struggle against the Japanese aggressors has elicited the profound admiration of every American. As President of the United States, I know that I speak for all of our people in this solemn occasion. The resources of the United States, of the British Empire, of the Netherlands East Indies, and the Chinese Republic have been dedicated by their people to the utter and complete defeat of the Japanese war lords. In this great struggle of the Pacific the loyal Americans of the Philippine Islands are called upon to play a crucial role. They have played, and they are playing tonight, their part with the greatest gallantry. As President, I wish to express to them my feeling of sincere admiration for the fight they are now making. The people of the United States will never forget what the people of the Philippine Islands are doing these days, and will do in the days to come. I give to the people of the Philippines my solemn pledge that their freedom will be redeemed and their independence established and protected. The entire resources in men and materials of the United States stand behind that pledge. It is not for me or for the people of this country to tell you where your duty lies. We are engaged in a great and common cause. I count on every Philippine man, woman, and child to do his duty. We will do ours.

Gentlemen of the House, I have spent the major part of my public career in legislative bodies, I know how legislators react to Executive pronouncements of this sort. They say—and perhaps, speaking from the point of view of constitutional law, they are right—”The Chief Executive has no power to commit the people and this Government to any policy.” But I know you and I know your heart. I think also that I know the American people. I feel that the pledge made by the President of the United States will be considered by every one of you as his own pledge, and will be honored by the American people as a national commitment. I am confident that the country and the Congress will back it up wholeheartedly.

Three days after I received this proclamation from President Roosevelt I published this proclamation to the Filipino soldiers at the front:

To the Filipino Soldiers at the Front:

The people of America and your own countrymen have been thrilled by the gallantry with which you have been defending our country. I am grateful for, and proud of the resistance you have offered against such tremendous odds. You have “performed deeds of heroism and valor which will live in the history of these stirring days. The service that you are rendering to your people and your country is, to say the least, the equal of that rendered by our fathers who fought and died in the battles for our liberty.

The President of the United States, speaking for the Government and people of America, in a recent proclamation addressed to the people of the Philippines, solemnly pledged that the freedom of our country will be redeemed and our independence protected. He asserted that behind that pledge stood all the resources of America in men and materials. You are, therefore, fighting with America because America is fighting for our freedom. Our salvation will depend upon the victory of American and Filipino arms.

America will not abandon us. Her help will not long be delayed. The enemy’s temporary superiority in the air, on land, and on sea cannot last much longer. We must resist further advance of the enemy until assistance arrives and I trust it will be soon. The outcome of the battle of the Philippines will depend in very large measure on your firm and unyielding resistance.

I am aware of your sufferings, your privations, your sacrifices, and the dangers to which you are exposed. All these weigh heavily upon my mind, but I am consoled by the fact that I am sharing with you your trials and sacrifices. Indeed, right now bombs are falling near me just as they must fall around you. But we cannot allow them either to daunt our spirit or weaken our determination to continue fighting to the bitter end. We must stand by our plighted word, by the loyalty that we have pledged to America, and by our devotion to freedom, democracy, and our liberty. We are fighting that the Filipino people may be the masters of their own destiny and that every Filipino not only of this generation but of the generations to come may be able to live in peace and tranquillity in the full enjoyment of liberty and freedom. Your duty—our duty—is to fight and resist until the invader is driven from our land. You must not give up a foot of ground when the battle joins. You must hold in place—and hold—and hold.

I also sent to the President of the United States this answer to his message:

HON. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT:

My heart, and I know the hearts of all Americans and Filipinos in this country, are filled with gratitude for the reassuring words of the President of the United States. My answer, our answer, to him is that every man, woman, and child in the Philippines will do his duty. No matter what sufferings and sacrifices this war may impose upon us, we shall stand by America with undaunted spirit, for we know that upon the outcome of this war depends the happiness, liberty, and security not only of this generation, but of generations yet unborn.

Mr. Speaker, I shall delay you no longer. These communications which I have just read show the effect which the message of the President had upon us, and upon the spirit with which our soldiers fought side by side with yours in defense of your flag. I shall not tell you, Mr. Speaker, I shall not tell the House of Representatives, I shall not tell the Senate of the United States, I shall not tell the Government and the people of America what they should do for us in the days to come. All I want to say is that death, ruin, and destruction have never daunted our spirit or lessened our faith in the United States.

Source : New York Public Library

Quezon, M. L. (1942). Speech of President Quezon before the House of Representatives. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines , Washington , 41(1), 4-7.