Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Effective Public Service

[ Delivered at Davao Penal Colony, Davao, April 11, 1936 ]

EFFECTIVE PUBLIC SERVICE

Mr. and Mrs. Noroña, Ladies and Gentlemen:

In all my visits of inspection, I have never felt as happy and proud as I feel today. Almost every head of government speaks of his ideal in terms of honesty, efficiency and economy in the Government service. I dare say that this ideal is very seldom attained. The Bureau of Prisons, as shown by its work in this colony, doubtless can be properly given the credit for rendering an honest, efficient and economic service to the country. I wonder if the officials of the Bureau of Prisons, especially those who are engaged in this experiment of penal colonization, fully realize the importance of the work they are doing. You are not only rendering a great service to humanity, but you are also proving to the world that a system of penology may be established whereby the convict is to be punished and at the same time improved and made a better citizen. That is what you are doing here, and you are doubtless carrying on a great undertaking. Every convict that comes to this penal colony suffers only his loss of freedom, his loss of personal liberty, but otherwise unless he himself does something for which he is to be punished, here he is allowed to live the ordinary life of an honorable man. You are demonstrating here that the worst criminal can be controlled without force, and when I saw this morning upon my arrival here that this army of over a thousand men who have defied the law and committed all kinds of crimes are managed only by a few men, I had to admit that moral force is sometimes more effective than physical force. These are the aspects of your work here that interest humanity because they are for the benefit of humanity. As far as our new Government and our people are concerned, you are doing two things—one is saving the Government a lot of money; the other is carrying on an agricultural and industrial school that will compare favorably with the best colleges in the Philippines.

I realize that employees in other branches of the Government service are receiving bigger salaries, but knowing as I do the attitude of the National Assembly, I am afraid it would be difficult to get that body to appropriate larger amounts for your salaries. If I do not succeed in getting it to improve your financial condition, I want you at least to know, that as head of the Government I fully appreciate the work you are doing here.

Colonel Santos is worth much to the Government, and yet he is paid a salary smaller than is paid by some commercial houses to their third class responsible managers. It is the same thing with all of you, as I said before. None of you is paid the salary which, considering the importance of work that you are doing, is commensurate with what you actually are giving to the Government in return for that salary. Your salary is very meager. You are about the only employees that I know who are not consumers but producers.

There is a lot of difference between you and those employees of private companies, from manager down, in that you get your salary from the Government in return for your service and something else in the form of products. By God, all of you fellows are producers, and there lies the distinction. So, if the Government cannot pay you what you deserve, let me at least give you my thanks and my congratulations. You, Mr. Noroña, and all of you, boys who are working here, are performing your tasks well and faithfully.

Finally, I want to thank and congratulate also these ladies, your wives. I am sure if they had been like those women who are interested in clothes and fond of exhibiting themselves to the public, very few of you would have remained here; instead you whould have preferred to be where you can go to theaters and other similar places of amusement. So, the fact that you are here and are evidently happy to work here show that you are fortunate in having excellent wives. I know that they are interested in the work that you are doing, in the substantial things in life, and the Government owes them as much as it owes you. With that I have said everything I want to say. I am very happy and once more I say I am proud of what I have seen this day in the Penal Colony.

From Messages of the Pres. (Rev. Ed.), Vol. 2, Part I, pp. 77-79.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library