SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

SOCIAL JUSTICE FOR THE LABORERS

[Delivered at a luncheon given in honor of the representatives of labor under the leadership of Mr. Cresenciano Torres, at Malacañan Palace, Manila, February 17, 1938]

Workmen and Fellow Countrymen:

I have invited you this time because, in the first place, I wish to see you and talk to you; in the second place, to make you understand that this very edifice is truly not the home of the President of the Philippines, but of the Government; and thirdly, to convey to you the meaning of the various matters which I said yesterday to the working men regarding the meaning of “social justice.”

First, I must inform you all that politics no longer occupies the mind of the President of the Philippines because our Constitution prohibits the reelection of the President of the Philippines. Such being the mandate of our Constitution, there is no pretext or necessity for my meddling with politics except in cases where the interest of our people requires it. It is my desire to express, by deeds, anything I wish to convey to all relative to the administration of our Government, without ever giving such deeds any political weight or color. I believe I must concentrate my efforts on what I consider will aid the progress and advancement of the Filipino people—national needs which must not be taken to mean that I should be reelected because that is prohibited by the Constitution. I believe that the time is not far distant when I shall have to descend into my gloomy grave, hence, before reaching such fateful moment, I wish to show and demonstrate to our people that I have been true to the trust reposed in me and that I have done my duty in directing our Government and taking care of its interests.

As must already be evident to all, my sole desire is to foster the welfare and tranquillity of all the workingmen, whom I should like to help at all times. I have shown, by word and by deed, that I have always cherished this desire, hence I presume they will not say that I am not helping them if I can do so under the law. There can be nothing worse or more bitter to the heart of anyone than to prohibit him from exercising his rights and to tell him that he is without prerogatives, especially if reason and justice are on his side.

However, this is not our only wish, we who dwell in this country, but we likewise desire to live and do good, so that we may live in the memory of our people. For a man there can be nothing more sublime than to be remembered, after death, for the good he has done to all. Conversely, there is nothing more bitter to contemplate than that a person, resting peacefully in his grave, should be remembered with contempt and execration for the errors and iniquities committed by him in life.

There are only two things which a person must think of and remember. That we desire to live long, though we be poor, so we might live in the memory of our compatriots and descendants; or that we be remembered, in bitterness, for the wrongs we might have committed. I suppose you all know my idea that if a man dies, he is dead; but while he is living he must think of a life beyond the grave. I have mentioned this so that you may know what I cherish in my heart and keep uppermost in mind, which is nothing else but to achieve the best I can for the common welfare. I am doing that through the exercise of extensive powers conferred upon me as President of the Philippines.

I do not attach great value to any power vested in me by virtue of my office, because I have already outworn the thrill in such power. My whole ambition, today, is to do what I can for the welfare and contentment of all. I have, for this reason, told my friends that it is my desire to use the authority vested in me as Chief Executive of the Government, for the benefit of our nation and people, and not to serve the interests of any particular person or of myself. I have made known to the friends who are constantly at my side that my fervent desire is to aid and take care of the poor, but that such assistance will be within reason, for although a person be poor, yet I cannot help him unless he be entitled to it by right. That is what I really cannot do—side with those who are in error or with those who err. You must, therefore, take care not to do anything contrary to law, so you would not have occasion for ill-feeling towards me.

During my first term as governor of the Province of Tayabas, I told the people of my province, especially the poor, that I was hoping for and desiring their valuable assistance in the establishment of a clean government and honest public service. That did not mean that I took the part of the poor as against the wealthy, or that I would aid only the poor; it simply meant that, as the poor did not have any means to pay for their needs nor were they learned enough to help themselves, I, therefore, considered it reasonable to defend them and their rights if they were aggrieved. That was similar to what I have in mind now, and of which you must know, regarding the so-called “social justice.” This means justice not for a few alone but for all, especially for the poor workingmen who are, as it usually happens, injured in their rights; it is justice for everyone, now especially, when all are aware that the field laborers and factory hands are of the belief that they must be given that to which they are entitled, in conformity with the desires of the Government to rest social security on a solid foundation for the benefit, not only of the laboring class nor of the poor but also of the capitalists.

The Government should not tolerate any improper habit or custom. Any government capable of consulting the feelings of the workingmen will be a just and stable government. Hence, the Government should lead in knowing the needs not only of the workingmen but also of the capitalists. It is the duty of all not to tolerate bad practices in our country, hence I will not tolerate them while I am at the helm of our Government. As “Florante” of the kingdom of Albania said, “Here in our country I desire reason to rule; and to have equality before the law, be a person wise or ignorant, rich or poor.”

You, the representatives of labor, who are now here with me, have the bounden duty of exerting all efforts to aid the Government, because it needs your help and cooperation. You can help the Government by exposing any improper governmental administration, and by telling what must best be done for your interest; and it is likewise your duty to tell the working classes what the Government is doing to promote their well-being. That is the real meaning of social justice for the people, whatever be their ambition or condition. For this reason, the working classes should never resort to force either to secure their objectives or to break the laws of the land; they must likewise cultivate the qualities of patience, constancy, and self-control, while the Government is striving industriously to obtain social security and financial amelioration for the working masses.

I need not set forth the probable plight or injury that would result if you were to commit unlawful acts. I am reiterating, however, that I am always ready to defend you if you are aggrieved, provided you are in the right. I do not mean by this that you should not use your power; I mean that we must temper our force with reason, and employ it only where it is lawfully proper, for you must understand that it is the duty of a government to maintain peace, order, and harmony among its citizenry. We must never allow any disorder which will give others an opportunity to laugh at or mock us, knowing we are ruled by laws we ourselves have made. Our country must never be a laughing stock of other governments.

We must bear in mind that the President of the Philippines, in representing his people, is responsible for the efficient administration of the affairs of his country; hence. I will never allow any one to impugn or break any law enacted by our assemblymen for the well-being of our people who, in the last analysis, are the governing power.

I cannot also permit it to be said that in the Philippines force can prevail to the utter disregard of the authority of the Government we have constituted and obeyed. We used the might of the Philippine Army in Pampanga, where I was compelled to send troops, to quell the disturbances caused by the deliberate burning of cane-fields. In the disorders in Iloilo, the workers did not set cane-fields on fire; instead, they merely went on a strike. Unfortunately, the local authorities there also used police force and violence in subduing a man and handcuffing him while in jail upon order of the chief of police, without the fiscal making an investigation of the matter.

On that occasion I immediately gave orders that the fiscal, who failed to make an investigation, and those who abused their authority by committing violence on the laborer, be punished. I demanded the Iloilo fiscal’s resignation; I removed the assistant fiscal, the chief of police of Janiuay, and an Iloilo detective from office. I also ordered that an inquiry be made into the violations of law committed by these men, and should their offenses deserve greater punishment that they be prosecuted according to law. The findings of the investigators convinced me that what they did to that laborer and the failure of the officials concerned to do their duty were serious, and that force should not have been used. I am, therefore, making it understood that if I learn of any violence, I will be compelled to use the forces of the Government, regardless of who may be injured, and should it be insisted, it would be far better for me to go to the Great Beyond that I might not be constrained to use the Government forces against you.

I beg of you to be a little considerate and discreet, for you must not forget that the solution of the problems confronting the working classes in this country is not an easy matter. I am fully aware of my responsibilities, and I shall not fail to do anything necessary to foster the progress of our country and promote the well-being and prestige of all, especially of the working classes; but I shall never do anything which should not be done. I shall do my best to induce the National Assembly to pass a bill that will enable many of our workmen to earn a decent livelihood—although our country has not yet reached an industrial stage of development—because I fully realize that there is nothing more distressing to a workman than to be looking for employment without finding any. We can build quite a number of factories, but our Government has not enough money available; neither do I have enough money of my own to give for the purpose. Our Government is unlike that of the United States, which is so wealthy that if there are no public works constructions, it spends untold amounts for the relief of the poor and the unemployed. We cannot do that because our Government is too poor; and if we are to continue working although our factories have no money, then it will be better to close them down. Another deplorable condition: if the laborers demand an increase in wages, employers usually reply that they will have to close down their factories, a situation that would not cause me any loss of sleep, although I would really worry about the fate of many laborers who would naturally have no means of livelihood.

There are truly rich factories which, because of their large profits, should pay their workers well, although they never do so. What then should be done in this case? The Government is in a quandary. Let us take, for instance, the cigar industry. I believe the cigar-makers do not earn enough; but I have been informed that if their wages are increased, there will be no money available for the purpose; and, as oftentimes happen, there is not even work for them! If you have been promised big wages, and the same cannot be given to you for lack of funds, what will happen to you? Therefore you, too, must think seriously of what is happening. We will be able to discover remedies for these problems; but we will not find them in one or two years. It we want to build a nipa house, for instance, it will take us one or two months to finish it; how much more time then must we need to settle so important a problem as this? There is no more difficult undertaking than this, for even if we insist on raising: the wage scale of our working classes and the capitalists do not have the money, nothing can be done about it. Nevertheless, let us wait for the ultimate solution of this matter by the Government.

I have no objection to the cigar makers going on strike if they can no longer stand prevailing conditions; but what are they going to get out of it? Though you demand higher wages, if the employers cannot meet them financially, you will not get anywhere. Bear in mind also that a capitalist invests his money with an eye to profit, and if he knows he cannot make any profit, he will not invest his money in that venture. I have been informed likewise that the capitalists, to avoid paying high wages, send their tobacco to the provinces for manufacture because the wage scale there is low; therefore, if our workmen here stage a strike, what work can I give them to enable them to make a living?

Nevertheless, I promise to give them remunerative employment provided they are willing to work. Let them go to Mindanao and work on the Government roads under construction there, and I will even increase their wages, because I have set aside P2,000,000 for such public works projects. Another problem is that there are many women cigar makers, and this is not easy to solve. The problem of our cigar makers is an illustration of the point I am trying to bring out. I have mentioned it because I am in the habit of broaching only those questions which are capable of solution and not of being simply spoken about, or of making promises which I would not be able to keep.

I have a bill, which I expect to send to the National Assembly for action, providing penalties for employers who fail to pay their men on time. I have another regarding the use of tokens. A number of employers resort to this with the object of ultimately not paying their employees.

This is not only disgraceful but also the height of shamelessness. These tokens may be cashed before pay-day at a discount which is usurious in the extreme. Owing to this state of affairs, a poor workingman has to look for money, even if he has to pay a high rate of interest, as there is no other way out of his financial plight when he is not paid on the day he ought to receive his wages. This is, of course, real usury. It has likewise come to my knowledge that the money lent to workingmen comes from the factory owners or employers. Hence, a laborer pays interest to the man who does not pay him for his work. This is an injustice which may well be called robbery. It is a problem which, although difficult to solve, must have to be solved, and therefore I ask you to repose your trust in the Government and in the real leaders of your fellow workmen.

I wish to say to you that Secretary Torres may make mistakes. He is liable to err, because to err is human. But let me tell you that it would be hard to find a Department Secretary surpassing Secretary Torres in the faithfulness with which he does his duty and in his desire to help the workingman. Neither would I be able to find another Secretary who, like him, errs on the side of the laborer but never on that of the Government. If you are inclined to believe his detractors, I wish to remind you that he is the only man who is in a position to aid you. He is a friend of mine whom I have known since he was a chairman of the committee on labor of the House of Representatives; and it was then that I realized he is head and shoulders above anyone in his solicitude for the well-being of the workingman.

I also wish to tell you that all the suggestions that Secretary Torres makes to me, although constituting difficulties for the Government, are nevertheless for the benefit of the working classes. No person can accomplish everything he thinks of, and if you are looking for that in him, we may as well abolish the Department of Labor, although I cannot consent to that. I am asking you, therefore, to aid Secretary Torres. You must support him, and if he makes a mistake and you do not approve of his work, you are free to state your viewpoints. Naturally, not everything he does is in accordance with your ideas. Sometimes my acts are not in accordance with your desires and you may say that I am not doing you any good. But you, as well as I, may be mistaken, and you are right in tolling me what you consider proper and best.

I am sincerely telling you that my heart is with you, and although my ideas at times do not coincide with yours, my heart is always inclined towards you. We must, therefore. put our hearts as well as our minds to work in order that there may be mutual understanding. And never forget that my heart is with you, that I always remember you. The various matters appertaining to the various departments of our Government can be referred to the Departments of Agriculture, Finance. Justice and others, for their opinion. Do not allow yourselves, therefore, to be carried away by anything that will delude you into the use of violence or force.

Have confidence in your Government and tell your companions not to lose patience. Haste hardly ever has good results. We need a little more time. Rest assured that before Manuel L. Quezon ceases to be President of the Commonwealth, or before he leaves Malacañan, you will have the rights that the majority of the workingmen of other countries have, and we shall then be able to say that our country is a country where dignity and justice reign and where the people are peace-loving, free, and happy.

I thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library