Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines On the Occasion of President Quezon’s Birthday

[Delivered at the City Hall, Manila, August 19, 1945]

IT HAD always been my pleasure and privilege during the life of President Quezon to take part in programs dedicated to his birthday, and now that he is no longer with us, it is a greater privilege and pleasure to dedicate a few thoughts to the departed friend.

This occasion naturally brings to mind a multitude of memories and impressions and I only regret that I cannot cover all of a past that has been a life-time and an association of more than half a century.

I knew Quezon for the first time in 1893, when both of us were students of law in the University of Santo Tomas. We lived under the same roof in the same room of that university. Among our classmates—in law and philosophy and letters—were men who in later life figured prominently in public affairs, in the judiciary, in commerce, and in other activities. Among them to mention only a few of the well known, were Felipe G. Calderon and Enrique Mendiola, Juan Sumulong and Fernando Salas, Vicente Singson Encarnacion and Vicente Madrigal, Rafael Palma and Jaime C. de Veyra, Simeon Mobo and Mariano Yengco, Vicente Albert and Gregorio Agoncillo. Also among us were the poet laureate, Cecilio Apostol, and the intellectual adviser of Andres Bonifacio—Emilio Jacinto—rightly called the brains of the Katipunan. Quezon then already showed signs of that quick thinking, that dialectic keenness, and that power of improvisation by which he was to distinguish himself in his parliamentary career and in his memorable battles in the arena of politics.

Our friendship as students in the University of Santo Tomas, far from being a transient affair, was the prelude to an association of a life-time. Interrupted by the revolution against Spain and the war against America, our comradeship was renewed when we met again, shortly after the end of hostilities, to review for the bar examinations. Then, when we were already lawyers, the parallelism between our lives was continued with his appointment as fiscal of Mindoro and mine as fiscal of Cebu and Negros Oriental.

A few years later he was elected governor of his province, Tayabas, and I governor of my province, Cebu. Once again, we found ourselves working together in that memorable convention of governors in 1906, the first of its kind to be held in Manila, in which one could already perceive the outlines of the ideology and political action of Filipino nationalism which was to inspire the labors and achievements of the Philippine Assembly. We were only a few Nacionalista governors, all of us young—the fighting Quezon of Tayabas, the circumspect Jaime C. de Veyra of Leyte, and the effusive Isauro Gabaldon of Nueva Ecija. The Federal Party, then the ruling party, dominated the convention, but in spite of this, we were able to assert the Nacionalista principles which, after suffering a temporary setback by the defeat of our arms at the hands of America, recaptured the popular imagination and gained new impetus under the libertarian crusade launched in the arena of peace and legality.

Came the Philippine Assembly in 1907, and my personal and political association with Quezon grew stronger. He was elected Floor Leader of the Assembly and I Speaker. When it became necessary to carry the fight for independence to the United States. Quezon was sent to Washington as our emissary and there held high the Filipino name. That did not break up our partnership: distance did not prevent a closer collaboration between us for the cause of our liberty, and when finally, success crowned our efforts and Commissioner Quezon brought home the Jones Law in 1916, we continued working together to push the new experiment in Filipino autonomy to its logical conclusion and save the final lap which separated us from our goal: independence.

Then the Philippine Senate was created. Believing that the leader of the Filipino participation in the Government should be at the head of this upper chamber of the legislature, Quezon offered me the Senate Presidency. However, after mature deliberation I thought otherwise and preferred to remain as Speaker of the House of Representatives. It was my opinion then (although I realized later that I was wrong as subsequent developments proved) that it was in the Speakership where the Filipino leadership in the Government ought to reside because the House was the more representative body and as such the more sensitive to the popular will. Quezon was then elected President of the Senate.

The intimacy of our long and fruitful association was not disturbed by any serious incident until in 1922 certain differences arose to split the Nacionalista Party. However, because they were not fundamental differences, affecting as they did only the methods of directing and leading the Filipino participation in the Government, they were quickly ironed out and a reconciliation within the party followed. Viewing that incident from the perspective of this day, what healed the rupture and reconciled the antagonistic elements was the absence of the human and personal factor, or what I might call the ingredient of egotism. Even in the midst of the acrimonious conflict, when the tension of animosity was at its height, Quezon and I never ceased to be friends and never did we lose the respect we owed each other. The personal element never interfered in the clash of pure ideas.

This feeling tending towards conciliation and concord was the thing that permitted me to give him my full support at the moment when he most needed it. It will be recalled that in the elections of 1922 the Nacionalistas were split over the issue of unipersonalism and collectivism. The results of the elections were such that Quezon could not organize the House of Representatives with only the votes of the Colectivistas. Many of my followers, still resentful, stoutly opposed a reconciliation with Quezon and were inclined, instead, to enter into a coalition with the Democratas who had gained considerable strength in those elections. It was evident that had we wanted to revenge on Quezon in order to destroy him, the most logical step would have been to accept the Democratas’ insistent proffer of a coalition or, to go farther, agree to fuse with them into a new party. I thought however that the more decent, the more proper, and the more patriotic thing to do was to repair the broken wings of the Nacionalista Party. Thus overcoming the temptations of reprisal, and obeying only what I thought was the dictate of the national interest, I placed myself on the side of the moderate elements of my group who were anxious to rejoin their old comrades. This immediately led to the organization of the House, with the election of a Colectivista Speaker and the consequent rehabilitation of the Nacionalista Party.

It will be remembered that from then on Quezon and I worked together again as if nothing had happened, he as my chief and I giving him fully of my support in the same way that he had supported me during the fifteen years that I was his chief and head of the Nacionalista Party. I believe that it can be said without immodesty and arrogance that, thanks to our unity, the country once more was able to continue its progressive march towards the goal of its destiny, overcoming all difficulties, the most serious being that of 1923-1927 during the administration of General Wood.

The course of my political relations with Quezon did not suffer any new interruption of importance until in 1933 when, after great efforts in the United States, the independence Mission popularly known as the OSROX (Osmeña-Roxas) Mission returned to the Philippines with the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. After this law was rejected by the Legislature at his insistence President Quezon headed a mission to the United States in quest of another law. In Washington, however, he found that the only legislation possible was something equal or similar to the one which the Legislature had just rejected. Once again the proposition whether the Filipinos were capable of subordinating personal considerations to the cause of their independence, was put to a test, a severe test. It seems superfluous to restate, since it is of contemporary history, that our patriotism stood the test. I decided then to remain in the Philippines instead of going with President Quezon as he had insistently asked me to do, in order that I could prepare the ground here to support him when the moment came. That moment came when Senator Tydings asked the opinion of the OSROX Mission regarding the Tydings-McDuffie Bill, then pending in Congress, which was practically the same as the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law for which we had worked. The radical elements of my group in Manila insisted on rejecting the new bill. This was neither unnatural nor extraordinary, considering that said elements were still resentful of Quezon and his followers. However, because I had placed myself definitely on the side of the moderate elements, the OSROX Mission, and the group that was helping us in the Philippines, decided to support President Quezon by accepting the Tydings-McDuffie Law. This conciliatory attitude made possible the subsequent acceptance of the law not only by the Legislature but by the whole country.

Once again the Nacionalista Party emerged from a crisis which might have disrupted it. Once again, Quezon and I were able to set aside differences in the interest of the nation. Once again, we were able to save unity at a moment when it was most needed for the health and welfare of our people, relegating to the background the personal complex, the human equation. And once again, we were able to renew an association and a collaboration so modestly started in our student days in the University of Santo Tomas and so happily continued through the long years. And that was how, in the height of his popularity and political prestige, Quezon as the Coalition candidate on the same ticket with me—he for President and I for Vice-President—was able to say in his speech of acceptance the following words regarding our joint labors:

“I shall not recite again the vicissitudes through which we have gone during these years, but when I look back at the efforts we have exerted to reach the goal which together we had set for ourselves, I am happy to find that at the end of our long journey we can face our people from the same platform, with our obligations fulfilled, our mutual esteem and respect increased, and I believe enjoying, besides, the continued confidence and support of our people.”

Another incident which might have caused a split between Quezon and I was when, by operation of law, he should have ceased as President on November 15, 1943, and I should have succeeded him in the leadership of the Philippine Government. The situation was very clear. I was by law automatically entitled to the Presidency on that date. Under the circumstances then, this situation might have deteriorated into a division in our government in exile, and so, in order to maintain the united front of our struggle against the common enemy, I called at the White House and in Congress to ask for a legal means whereby President Quezon could be permitted to continue discharging his powers as President during the emergency. The Congress accepted my suggestions and I had the satisfaction of seeing President Quezon’s command extended so that he and. not I should accompany the forces of liberation to the Philippines to rescue our people from the clutches of the enemy. But Providence willed otherwise, and he having passed to a better life, I had to take the helm and join the liberation forces in Tacloban on October 20, 1944. With deep sincerity and humility I said then:

“By the Grace of God, and by the honor of America, I am again with you. Happy as I am to be back on Philippine soil, I am sad that our late and beloved President Quezon is not here to witness the realization of the great cause to which he dedicated his life—the independence of the Philippines. I know, however, that you feel as I do, that he is here with us in spirit, to unite our people and to encourage us toward the achievement of the vital undertaking which lies ahead.”

It gives me singular satisfaction to recall all these incidents because they show how President Quezon and I were able to maintain a personal and political association so auspiciously begun in the days of our adolescence and ending only with his death. As you have already seen, like everything human, that association had its lights and shadows—more lights than shadows—sunbeams and clouds, but over and above all difficulties and against the fluctuations of adversity, it stood like a rock. I feel above all happy to recapitulate them today because I am convinced that all the sacrifices we have made to save the unity of the nation in the crucial moments of our history have not been in vain and that together we have contributed, at least modestly on my part, to the safe arrival of our country where it happily stands today.

The dominant note of that association was the subordination of everything personal to the supreme interest of the nation, sometimes to an extent almost incredible. In all humility, but with firm conviction and the tranquility of conscience of a man who has done his duty, I submit this fact to history: my joint acts with President Quezon permit the Philippines to offer to the world one of those examples of personal renunciation, of high collective responsibility, of impregnable solidarity so rare in the annals of the democracies.

In celebrating for the first time in the Philippines after our liberation the anniversary of the birthday of President Quezon, I wish to reiterate that my administration will follow the course set by my predecessor. It is part and parcel of that patriotic course to secure the rehabilitation of the Philippines, the recognition of its independence, and the protection of that independence against all external aggression. I firmly believe that, united under the protection of Divine Providence, we shall fully realize these objectives.

Source : University of the Philippines Main Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech delivered by Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines on the occasion of President Quezon’s birthday, August 19, 1945 at the City hall of Manila . Manila : Bureau of Printing.