Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines At the Inauguration of the Municipal Building of Candelaria, Tayabas

[ Released on October 29, 1938 ]

COCONUT INDUSTRY AND ELECTIONS

—–

The government of any country is not empowered to fix the price of its commodities.

I want the country to get used to clean elections, and the candidates to learn to abide by the desire of the people, be it for or against them.

—–

Mr. Governor, Provincemates, and Fellow Citizens:

I am here today, in order to be present at the inauguration of your municipal building. I remember that when I was governor of Tayabas, Candelaria was merely a barrio of Sariaya, and nobody took interest in its welfare except myself who was then governor. I have, therefore, every reason to be happy, for I see with my own eyes that the former barrio of Candelaria has now its own municipal building; and it seems that it has even surpassed in some respects the Municipality of Sariaya.

On this occasion, I want to talk on two vital matters: first, the coconut industry; second, the election. With regard to the coconut industry, I want to tell you that you should realize that our Government, or any government for that matter, has no strength or power to increase the price of a commodity that is sold in another nation because the buyers govern the price of the articles sold in their nation, especially if these articles meet stiff competition from other nations. It is not only we, the Filipinos, who sell coconut or copra; Java, the Straits Settlements at Singapore, and other countries also have coconut or copra to sell. These competitors determine the fluctuations in the price of copra; if there are many sellers the price goes down, but the price goes up in case there are only a few sellers.

It is not true that the fall in the price of our copra has been due to the excise tax. We have been paying this tax for two years now, but last year−in the second year of the excise tax−the price of our copra went up as it did during the World War. So it cannot be said that the excise tax is responsible for the cheap price of copra. The people should not think and hope that their Government has the strength or power to increase or decrease the price of their articles because if this is how we should think and hope, then our life would be miserable indeed. By thinking thus, we would just be doing nothing about the conditions which prevail not only here but also throughout the world.

The government of any country is not empowered to fix the price of its commodities. Why was America panic-striken when all her banks closed their doors? This action of the banks brought a drastic fall in the prices of the commodities in the United States and 15 million people found themselves jobless; but this panic was not even felt in America because the people there are far richer than those of other countries in the world. If the United States Government, rich as it is, cannot do anything when such things happen to her, what can our Government do? Truly, what happened in America has not had its counterpart in the Philippines yet. In this country of ours, did we ever have such a vast number of unemployed as America had at the time the banks were forced to close in 1933 and 1934, when the jobless people even exceeded the entire population of the Philippines? Through God’s mercy and help, such happenings have never come to us. And, should our Government ever help, it would be through other means.

Among the projects that our Government has in mind at present is the opening of a bank which will lend money to farmers and business firms at a low rate of interest. So that this project will prove a boon to landowners, it is necessary that cooperative associations, to be loom as “Sociedad Cooperativa,” be organized for the purpose of transacting all negotiations for loans with the bank. It is imperative that Tayabas should have such organizations, so that landowners who raise coconuts can sell their products directly, which procedure will undoubtedly eliminate those unnecessary deals made through indirect channels, such as the Chinese or other coconut merchants.

Even if the Government may not be able to raise the price of coconut, so long as the landowners can sell directly their products in the markets, we can still hope for a rise in the price. Copra, which is sold at P5 in Manila, is priced and bought here at P3.50 or P4 because of the expenses entailed when it exchanges hands during the transit. Let us, then, organize cooperative associations for the purpose of buying coconuts not only in Tayabas but also in the different provinces. This is what I have in mind, and, in the coming session of the National Assembly, I will recommend the establishment of an industrial or agricultural bank.

And now, a word about the coming election. You know that the two candidates of the Nacionalista Party in Tayabas are Dr. Castillo, for the first district, and Attorney Lavides, for the second district. I wish these two Nacionalista candidates to win, but greater than that desire, is my wish to have a clean election throughout the country. I want no frauds committed in the election; I also wish that those government officials who are forbidden by law to take active part in the election, should desist from meddling with anything that has to do with the election. I have already stated that, no matter how much I wish the Nacionalista candidates to win, I want them to triumph without the interference of any government official. I want the country to get used to clean elections, and the candidates to learn to abide by the desire of the people, be it for or against them.

One of the things a candidate to an elective position craves to see, is to find out whether he can endear himself to his country or not. Nothing can bring more joy to one’s heart than to find that he stands high in the esteem of his countrymen as proved by the election returns. That is why I am hoping for a clean and happy election−one that will be a credit and a joy to our country.

Though I wish the majority candidates to win, yet I am reiterating my greater wish to see a clean election with all the laws followed, especially in Tayabas, so that other provinces would not have grounds to remark that we did not have a pleasant election.

I repeat, although I would be sorry to learn that the candidates of my party were defeated, yet I would feel the sorrow more were I to I hear that these candidates won through dishonorable and fraudulent means. /Applause/ Let the province choose its own representatives; but the victory of a candidate should not be won through illegal ways.

I will not stay long with you; I regret that I cannot enjoy your company on this day of the ianuguration of your municipal building. And if I do not visit your town again, or any other town of our province for some time, I hope you will not take it to heart. Suffice it is for all of you to remember that while I may not be here frequently, you are, however, always in my heart and mind.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library