FRIENDSHIP WITH GENERAL JAMES G. HARBORD



We live our lives to fulfill the same ambition, that of doing for our respective countries the best we can, and then we depart. But there is a tie that should bind us always, and that is our friendship which will remain as it has been in life.



General Harbord, Gentlemen:

I am very happy to have with me one of my oldest American friends, when I say this, I do not refer to his age but to the number of years of our friendship.

General Harbord brings back to my mind those happy days of my youth when, with the whole future stretched before me, I was just beginning to find my way. General Harbord then, in a manner, served as my spiritual guide. Another person to whom I am deeply indebted is General Bandholtz. Both Americans exercised a very significant influence on my life. Before I met General Harbord and General Bandholtz, which was after the revolution against the United States, I did not have a very good opinion of Americans. I had enough reasons for maintaining an unfavorable opinion, because they kept me running all over the mountains of Pampanga and Bataan, and it was a very tiresome thing to be running by day and by night. After keeping me going for several months, they confined me to a quiet place for six months, giving me salmon at noon and salmon at night, and protecting me with guards at the door of the nice room where they kept me at rest.

After I had graduated from college and passed my bar examinations, I went to Tayabas, my own province. Up to then, except for the time when I saw the great sire of my friend, General Mac Arthur, and a few other American officers right in one of the rooms of this palace, I had not had any personal relations with any American. In Tayabas, however, I met General Bandholtz. Soon after I had met him, I came to the conclusion that the Americans were not as bad as I had thought them to be. He was kind and courteous, he became deeply interested in my career, and very soon we were friends. From General Bandholtz and through my friendship with him, I learned the American way of thinking and saw the gentlemanly behavior of the American soldier.

General Bandholtz, upon leaving Tayabas, was succeeded by the then Colonel Harbord of the Constabulary. When General Harbord came to the province, I was practising law and getting ready to launch my candidacy for the governorship of Tayabas. I do not know whether General Harbord remembers this. Every American in the province, with the exception of officers of the Constabulary and Lieutenant Hunter Harris of the United States Army, was against my candidacy. The Superintendent of Schools, the District Engineer, and all the school teachers of the province organized a league against my candidacy. I remember that the school principal, a young American, came to my house one night and said: “Quezon, is it true that you want to be a candidate for governor?” I said, “Yes.” “Well, I am going to oppose you,” he said. “You are too young. It will be better for you to support Mr. Carmona, and two years from now you may be a candidate for governor. I will be your opponent,” he went on, “if you run now because we are obliged to support Carmona.”

“I have not asked you to give me any advice,” I told him, “but I thank you for it, just the same. Only, I want to make it clear that I have made up my mind on one thing: I will be a candidate.”

A few days later Colonel Harbord came to see me. We were already acquainted with each other at that time, and he asked me, “Are you going to be a candidate for governor? “Yes, Colonel,” was my immediate reply. “Well,” he said, “I do not want to have anything to do with that, but I should like to know your attitude towards the United States. Are you loyal to America?” He was the Chief of Constabulary and, naturally, he was interested in having a governor that would not organize a revolution. “Colonel,” I said, “I have taken the oath of allegiance, and I am determined to make my oath good.” After that he left and without violating the Civil Service Law or other laws then in force which did not allow colonels of Constabulary to mix in elections, I noticed that an undercurrent which was favorable to me had come out from the Headquarters of Tayabas. Old Hunter Harris—he was the Quartermaster Officer of the regiment in Lucena,—and I became friends. We were both young and merry. We used to go out together. At that time the electors of the governor were not the townspeople. They were the concejales of the towns, and we had to bring them, to Lucena from Marinduque, the coast of Tayabas, and from other places. I needed water transportation. My opponents—Tolentino and Carmona—were rich. They had their ships which brought the concejales to Lucena, and my problem was how to transport my concejales . Somehow or other I succeeded in getting the Army launch to bring the concejales . So the first ones to help me when I turned politician were the officers of the United States Army, and they did it against the regulations of the Government of the Philippines (as far as General Harbord was concerned) and the Federal Government of the United States. This is a historical fact. The Army officers, indirectly in the case of General Harbord and openly in the case of Hunter Harris, made it easy for me to win my election as governor of the Province of Tayabas.

While I was Governor of Tayabas I had occasions to make closer my acquaintance with Colonel Harbord, and I want to say in all earnestness that it was through my dealings with him that I acquired some of the high principles that should guide a man in public life. Perhaps General Harbord will never know how much some of the things he had told, me then and the things I had seen him do, have guided me in succeeding years in determining my course of action whenever a difficult decision was to be made. I want to say also in his presence and in the presence of the people who are gathered here tonight that I owe him a debt of gratitude that cannot be repaid, one that cannot be measured in human terms. In my eyes, he stood as a living example of honesty, integrity, a public official who exhibited exceptional love of duty. I had been, for many years, looking forward to the day when I could again greet my old friend, General Harbord, in the Philippines. I had asked him on several occasions to come and visit me here. And when I became President, I went to see him again in his office to tell him that the highest honor he could give me was to come and be my guest in Malacañan.

Once in a while, I become mentally occupied with the question of whether the Philippines has benefited more from its association with the United States or whether it is the United States that has received greater benefits from her association with the Philippines. When I think of; General Pershing, the Commander-in-Chief of the American forces in the World War, General Harbord, the Chief of Staff, General MacArthur—when I think of all these gallant officers of the American, Army as the products of the Philippines, I feel that the United States owes a lot to the Philippines.  These people same here when they were young. They gave to our country the best years of their lives. We Filipinos draw great satisfaction, even pride, in publicly recognizing our debt of gratitude to the Government and people of the United States. But when we say this and translate the sentiment into concrete facts, when we look around and point out to the men who, in behalf of America, have rendered that service to the Filipino people, gentlemen, we cannot overlook the fact that one of those men is Colonel Harbord of the Philippine Constabulary.  He may not realize, like the good soldier that he is, how much he has done for the Filipinos. If I read aright the mind and the conscience of a soldier, he does his duty without ulterior motives, without evaluating what he is doing, but merely doing what a soldier should do as his duty. It was with that spirit, I am sure, that General Harbord performed his duty in the Philippines. He did not think of himself. As a matter of fact, he will always be to us one of those Americans who have given credit to their country and done well by the Filipino people.

I therefore welcome you, General Harbord, to the hospitable shores of this country that you love so much, in behalf of the people who are your friends forever.

There is one who is not present here tonight. May God keep her! I am sorry she has gone forever. She has won our heart as much as you have. Life is-short. There is only one thing certain in this world: that we must all go the same way she has gone. We live our lives to fulfill the same ambition, that of doing for our respective countries the best we can, and then we depart. But there is a tie that should bind us always, and that is our friendship which will remain as it has been in life.

Gentlemen, I ask you all to drink to the health of General Harbord, the gentleman, the soldier, the friend of the Filipino people. May he soon return to us.

Source: University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library