Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On effect of the excise tax on Coconut Oil on the people of Tayabas

[Delivered at the inauguration of the Quezon National Park at Atimonan, Tayabas, on July 23, 1939]

My Countrymen:

While still on the highway passing through Calawang, I made up my mind to postpone what I was to say in my after-luncheon speech today. I will, therefore, only thank you, people of Tayabas, and the provincial officials for the significance you have attached to this commemorative tablet.

When I was invited by the Provincial Board and the Assemblyman from the second district to visit Tayabas, I had the impression that only a picnic would be held. In the program, however, I read that this is the occasion for the inauguration of the National Park; so I asked myself if I were out of my senses, because I have always understood that an inauguration is the formal opening for public use of the thing inaugurated. How can these roads be given an inauguration when we have been long using and passing through them? Is that not strange? However, when I saw the condition of your highways today, I knew that you have every reason for this inauguration.

The truth is, even in those days when I frequently passed here, I had found traveling over these highways quite risky. When I last passed through them two years ago, I had thought then of removing the District Engineer of Tayabas from his post, owing to the bad narrow condition of the roads which naturally endangered people’s lives. I had thought also that the Provincial Board, which also decides upon such matters, had allowed them to remain unrepaired.

As you have always known me to be a person who never puts aside his plans, I, therefore, immediately called the Governor and informed him about the condition of these roads. I had thought then that miracles could no longer be performed on earth. But I was mistaken for your Governor and your District Engineer did miracles, else these highways would not have been completed in so short a time. Were it not that I have already the Honorable Cuenco as my Secretary of Public Works and Communications. I would perhaps elevate Engineer Diaz to that position. But the Honorable Cuenco, who is a good Secretary, administers his department well. We will, therefore, appoint Diaz later, and I shall fulfill this promise when I am no longer President. I do hope Diaz does not harbor any ill-feeling concerning my promise which is not different from the promise of a candidate who, so as to be allowed to present his candidacy, promises not to make any bid for the next election; but who, when that succeeding election comes, forgets the promise he has made.

I am pleased to tell you that the Provincial Hoard and the District Engineer have done excellent work on these roads. But, however excellent your roads are, they could not have been constructed through the help of heaven, or just because these officials wished it so, it there have not been any funds.

The Province of Tayabas, as you know, does not have sufficient funds today, because of the big fall in the price of our agricultural product—the coconut. The prevailing low price is also responsible for the fall in the revenues from taxes collected on real property. So, if this province had merely depended on its tax collections, these roads would not have been built, as well as the other national highways now under construction.

Do you know the source of the funds that we are spending in Tayabas today? They come from the excise tax on coconut oil. I know that many persons in our province blame me for the excise tax. This is the point I wish to clarify today; but as we have not had our lunch as yet, and it would be bad for us to have an indigestion, I shall speak about the excise tax after our luncheon. However, before I make my explanation, I wish my hearers to contemplate if the excise tax is prejudicial to the people of Tayabas and if it is true that its removal lies in my hands.

Why should I not oppose the imposition of the tax if it would bring economic ruin to Tayabas? Since you have not done anything wrong against me, why should I wish then to see my province suffer? Have I done something beneficial which has not brought good tidings to the people of Tayabas? On the other hand, if the excise tax is not removed, would I get any benefit? There is, therefore, no justifiable motive that could make me wish my people to undergo financial sufferings because I owe them favors as well as my position.

It is my honest opinion that, before believing in any rumors, you should first consider carefully if President Quezon has ever done anything detrimental to his province, or if President Quezon has done something helpful to other provinces but not to Tayabas.

If what I am doing now is beneficial to the majority of the people of the Philippines, why should there be countrymen who will still have ill feelings towards me? I understand that my provincemates are undergoing difficulties; if this be true, then we, the few, must know how to suffer and sacrifice for the sake of the welfare of the majority. If you recognize me as the President of the Philippines, you should bear in mind that my services are not only for you, people of Tayabas, but also for the entire nation. I am duty-bound to render services that will be of benefit to all Filipinos.

It is not true that the excise tax will ruin Tayabas while it will greatly assist the rest of the country.

Contrary to the prevailing belief. I did not originate the excise tax; instead, it has come to us as an imposition of Congress. Although in the beginning of its legislation, I had enlisted the aid of President Roosevelt in my opposition to the excise tax, nevertheless Congress approved it. Other persons said that I sent Floor Leader Paredes to America to help work for the suspension of the enforcement of the tax. Paredes, however, was not there yet when the proper Senate committee discussed this matter, which resulted in the shelving of the bill abolishing the excise tax. The rumors which you heard that a Senate committee had already removed the tax were, therefore, all untrue.

I knew also that President Roosevelt had informed the proper committees of the House of Representatives and the Senate that the tax would work difficulties to four million Filipinos. But the American legislators saw that the price of copra went up soon after the excise tax was imposed, and it convinced Congress that the excise tax not only would not lower the price of copra but also would prove beneficial to the Filipinos.

In 1933 copra sold at over P12 or P13 a picul. We already had the excise tax then. If the real reason for the fall in copra prices were the excise tax, why had the price still gone up then? The tax, therefore, is not detrimental to our coconut oil.

I asked the proper authorities for data on the quantity of copra being produced in Tayabas on which the excise tax is levied. Since I have not received the report yet, I shall explain the whole matter to you later. However I wish you to know that it is not only our copra but also our sugar which has an excise tax. As for abacá, its price has gone down much lower than that of copra. Abaca has no excise tax. Yet the profit it gave to abacá growers was greater than that derived by coconut planters from their products at the time that the excise tax was not yet imposed on any crop grown here. Why, then, should you blame me for the excise tax on coconut oil?

You must bear in mind that the American Government has the authority to collect an excise tax on any and all products exported to the United States. The truth is that in the Philippines we are charging an internal revenue tax on American products sold here. The only difference is this: the internal revenue tax exacted on American goods sold in the Philippines is retained by us, and we either keep it or spend it; but the excise tax collected by the United States on our coconut oil exportation is returned to us, and we also freely use or spend that money.

I am being blamed for the existence of the excise tax; but my critics refuse to admit that the excise tax collections are being returned to the Philippines for us to spend in the development of our country. This whole thing appears to be a riddle: if a thing is bad, it is done by me; if it is good, it is the work of another. [ Applause. ]

On the day we acquire our independence, the excise tax will still be collected by the American government from our coconut oil exports, but the collections will thenceforward be retained by Congress. If we, the Filipino people and the Filipino nation, think that we cannot survive because on whatever we would export to other countries would be levied an excise tax, we would surely meet our economic death, for which we must, even today, prepare our coffin. Only a few years are left before the grant of our independence. Do not delude yourselves with the idea that, when we are already independent, we can still expect the government of a country, to which we export our products, not to charge any excise tax or tariff duty on them.

My countrymen, if we wish to sell our products to a foreign country, we must pay a tariff duty or an excise tax, just as we exact a tariff duty and charge an internal revenue tax on all goods and products imported into the Philippines. But if you insist that we can exist here even if we are not charged an excise tax then we cannot export anything. Again, if we should insist upon making our countrymen believe that life or death in the Philippines depends on the excise tax, then we must all be wrong. As long as we sell our products to foreign countries, we will be subject to tariff duties and internal revenue taxes.

The Filipino must be taught to be self-reliant. We must know that we can realize profits if we have exportation, and we export those products which will give us profit even if a tariff duty or excise tax is levied. That is what we should ponder upon. Hence we must look for other native products which we can profitably sell abroad, even if they are levied a tariff duty or an excise tax.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library