Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On the First Anniversary of the Commonwealth of the Philippines

[ Delivered at the Malacañan Palace, Manila, November 15, 1936 ]

SOCIAL JUSTICE

Mr. High Commissioner, my Fellow-Citizens:

One year ago today, the Government of the Commonwealth was inaugurated. Through the choice of our people it was my privilege to head this new Government and to assume the responsibilities for a very difficult task. When on this same day a year ago, I took my oath of office, my heart was full of hope, but my mind of doubt, as to my ability to fulfill the duties imposed upon me by the newly born nation. Of one thing I was certain–my determination to do everything in my power to measure up to the expectations of my people. The rest I left in the hands of God. As I look back upon the year just passed, I feel that we have every right to be thankful to the Almighty for His Divine guidance and to you, my beloved countrymen, for your whole-hearted support and cooperation. It is with a deep sense of humility that I turn my eyes to Him at this moment to seek further light and protection, and to you for continued help in the remaining years of my administration. I shall not at this juncture undertake to enumerate the legislation enacted by our National Assembly in fulfillment of the pledges we have made to our people, nor the administrative measures and executive orders in conformity thereto. It is enough for me to say that in my opinion the National Assembly has made a record unequalled by any legislative body in the world in carrying out our preelection commitments. And as for the record of my administration, it is for the future, and not for us to judge. On this occasion I shall devote myself entirely to one thought, which is my most serious concern.

Ladies and gentlemen, the task of establishing a new government is, indeed, a difficult one. But the mere setting up of the governmental mechanism and making it function efficiently is after all not beyond the reach of an ordinary man endowed with real common sense, some knowledge of constitutional law and an honest purpose and a strong will. To establish a new government in our day, when a great social revolution is taking place and new ideas and ideals are gripping the imagination and emotions of the masses, demanding the recognition of rights which have been ignored and denied by governments since the dawn of civilization, only governments that have sufficient vision to see this world-wide change, and wisdom to meet it fearlessly and squarely, can survive.

We are not building a nation to last during our hours and a few succeeding generations. My task–that which you have confided in me–is not only to set up the Government of the Commonwealth that will last for ten years, but to lay the foundations for the government of an independent state that will last as long as the world lasts, and, therefore, it is my duty to foresee the future and to adopt a course that will meet the problems of the new day. The time is past when we can blissfully ignore the lot of the man and woman who toils in the soul or who works in the factories. The time is past when any government can feel secure without the full support and cooperation of the masses of the people–cooperation coming not from a sense of duty only, much less from fear, but cooperation which is the result of devotion for and loyalty to their government engendered by a sense of satisfaction and happiness which their government has insured for them. The Government of the Philippines has the rare privilege and opportunity of learning from the experience of much older nations. The problem of our age is how to harmonize property right with the right to live–and the right to live is paramount and above every other right. / Applause ./ In pagan Rome it was proclaimed that the right of a man to his property meant not only the right to use it but the right to abuse it. “ Jus utendi et abutendi .” But that was a proper concept of right before the Son of Man laid down as the supreme law of human relations: “Love thy neighbor as thyself. Do unto others what you would that others do unto you.” It is here where pagan and Christian civilization conflict. The former is the philosophy of selfishness; the latter of love and justice. No Christian people should admit, much less practice, the theory that he who has can abuse or misuse his possessions. What we have in excess of our needs and reasonable luxuries should be spent pro bono publico . The struggle that we see everywhere is between those who have and those who have not; the former trying to keep everything they have, mindless of the misery of those who have not; the latter trying to take away everything from those who have, forgetting that they have worked for it and are entitled to the fruit of their labor whether manual or mental. The task of our Government is not only to protect the right of those who have to the proper use and enjoyment of their property, but also to demand that those who have not received the fruits of their labor in its integrity should have sufficient for their needs and those of their dependents. It is time for us to sound the warning: Let no one believe that he can still continue exploiting his fellow men without in the end suffering from it. He who owns had better give a part of what he owns to the community in which he lives if he wants to conserve the rest for him. / Applause ./

It is my ambition that this new nation will be able to undertake changes in its national economy, in its industrial and agricultural organizations, looking toward the betternment of the working class without depriving capital of its rights, without endangering our social and political institutions, and all in the midst of peace and order, by cooperation between all the elements of the community and in the spirit of the Nazarene–Love thy neighbor. Democracy offers the means to solve this problem; a properly understood and directed democracy.

We are laying the foundations for a nation that will live not ten years, not a century, but as long as the world lasts, and I call upon every man and woman of my country on this first anniversary of the inauguration of the Commonwealth to cooperate with us in our efforts to bring about a situation that will insure the existence of this nation forever.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library