Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On Woman Suffrage and Philippine Independence

[Radiocast from Washington, D. C, to the Philippines, April 4, 1937]

I am very happy to have this opportunity of addressing you today. It is a long way from Washington to the Philippines and I am beginning to feel homesick, but I am here in the performance of a most important duty that I hope will bring happiness to our people. I wish to speak to you on this occasion on two subjects: woman suffrage and immediate Philippine independence.

I wish to reiterate my hope that the women of our country may at last use their right o vote. I hope all the women who possess the qualifications required by law will not only register but also vote favorably on the plebiscite upon this question. Filipino women are not as yet in full possession of all their rights, and unless they make an early decision on this question in the National Administration it will take a long time before all their rights are secured. I hope all the men of the Philippines will be willing to seek the advice and collaboration of their mothers, wives, and daughters in public affairs just as they seek them in their private business. The Filipino woman is the equal of the best in the world and there is no reason why she should not enjoy all the rights and privileges of women in more progressive countries.

Now I want to speak to you on the question of Philippine independence. You are already informed that I have recommended that the period for the granting of independence be shortened so that the Philippines may establish its republic on the 31st of December, 1938, or on the 4th of July, 1939. I understand some people have been surprised that I should make such a proposal at this time, yet any one who has followed closely my public career will have expected me to do so.

Moreover, it is well known that the majority of our people, in accepting the McDuffie-Tydings Law, did so in the hope and expectation that after it has been in operation, certain modifications will be necessary, that the Filipinos will have the right to present to the Government of the United States their point of view on this modification; and my conviction is that it is in the interest of the Philippines, and perhaps no less than in that of the United States, that the period for the granting of the independence be shortened, as I have stated before, * * * because the Philippines will be able within the ten-year period to adjust her national economy.

We accepted the Independence Law upon the assumption that none of its provisions would be amended except with the consent of the Filipino people. Under the provisions of this law the trade relations between the United States and the Philippines were to be on a certain basis, and we took for granted that this basis could be altered during the ten years of the transition period. As a matter of fact, however, soon after the Independence Law was accepted by our people, the Congress of the United States started to amend the provisions of that law regulating our trade relations with America. It would appear, therefore, that Congress feels that it has the right at any time to amend the trade relations between America and the Philippines, regardless of the provisions of the Independence Act.

Under these circumstances, to continue in this present status is simply to cause economic ruin to the Philippines. It is absolutely necessary that we be able to place our trade relations with America on a more stable basis, and there is but one way to accomplish this purpose, namely, to make a treaty between the Governments of the United States and the Philippine Republic. So long as the Philippines remains under the American flag, Congress will always feel at liberty to amend any of those laws affecting Philippines.

Once independent, if we could secure a treaty from the United States similar in terms to the provisions of the Independence Act regulating our trade relations, Congress will have to respect that treaty during the time of its existence. And so I have proposed that the Philippines be granted independence, and I hope within the shortest time possible, with the idea that a treaty may be entered into between America and the Philippines whereby the trade relations between the two countries, as provided in the Independence Act, may be agreed upon. I am hopeful that such a proposal will not meet with any serious objection on the part on the Government of the United States. Moreover, I think it will not be impossible to secure special trade relations between America and the Philippines after the third period shall have elapsed.

I heard that many of our business men in the Philippines, especially those engaged in the sugar industry, are against my proposal to shorten the period for the granting of independence. Moreover, I have been told that some of these men are against this proposition which I have presented to the Government of the United States because they believe that it will ruin them. But I want to say that this present status affords them no guarantee that during the transition period provided in the Independence Act they will be allowed to sell in the United States the amount of sugar that is allowed free of duty under the terms of that Act. Even now there is pending before Congress a law taxing the sugar coming from the Philippine Islands—a tax which is greater than the tax which has been levied heretofore and which, under the Previous Act, was to return to the Filipino farmer and sugar producer. The tax has not only been raised but also there was no provision in that bill for this tax to be returned to the Philippines.

Who can assure you, sugar barons of the Philippines, who are now protesting against what I am doing, which is for your own protection—who can assure you that next year the Congress of the Unite States will not further increase the tax on your sugar? Who can assure you that next year the Congress of the United States will not further reduce the amount of sugar that you can sell free of duty to this country? The suggestion that we should remain under the present status is tantamount to an economic suicide on your part. It is only under my proposal that you can find safety and security in your investments. But do not forget that I am prepared, if necessary, to get independence for the Philippines even if I fail to secure for our products the benefit of the market of the United States. The time has come when the Filipino people must decide whether they shall be the masters of their own destiny or not. If we are not willing to assume all the responsibilities of a free people, then let us quit talking about freedom and independence and let us sell our birthright for one million tons of sugar.

Fortunately for you, and fortunately for the whole country, the authorities in Washington are concerned about the future of our people, and they are trying to do everything they can to find a formula whereby we may be independent without very serious injury to our national economy. And I am here precisely to protect our country from all possible unwise legislation that may bring harm to our people. I want you to have faith in me, and I hope you will not embarrass me in my work here by sending protests before you know what you are protesting about. If I succeed in getting the President to recommend to Congress that the period for the granting of independence be shortened, and at the same time the President is authorized to enter into negotiations with the Republic of the Philippines whereby the trade relations between America and the Philippines will be for at least 10 years as provided in the Independence Act, nothing better could happen to our country and to our people.

I have agreed to the creation of a committee of experts that, at the same time that it is studying the different aspects of our trade relations, may also consider how the question of granting independence will affect our national economy. I have appointed to this committee, as our representatives, Secretary of Justice Yulo, Commissioner Paredes, Assemblyman Romero, the majority floor leader, Assemblyman Roxas, the minority floor leader, Mr. Elizalde, a member of the National Economic Council, Dean Conrado Benitez, of the College of Commerce of the University of the Philippines, and Mr. Benito Razon as technical adviser.

This is a very strong committee which, jointly with American and other members, will study the whole and every phase of the Philippine question. They will hold hearings in America as well as in the Philippines so that every one who has something to suggest may be heard, and after they have finished their labor—and I expect that it will be finished next autumn—a report will be submitted by them with their recommendations.

This committee is not the same as the committee contemplated under the provisions of the Independence Act. This is a committee of experts. The other committee will be a committee which, on behalf of the Government of the United States and on behalf of the Government of the Philippines, will proceed to make recommendations as to our trade relations after independence shall have been granted.

Now, my fellow citizens, my time is about up. Don’t be panicky, don’t be scared by anything that you hear or see printed in the papers as to what might happen to the Philippines. None of you are as interested as I am,—not even the man who owns the sugar factory, or the man who owns the coconut oil factory, or the tobacco factory,—not one of you is more interested than I am in securing for the Philippines economic stability and the consequent prosperity of our people. Even though I have not a cent in any of those industries, I am at least as interested as every one of you, for it is my duty to look after the welfare of our people. Now, I say good-bye to you and I hope you will sleep well after what I have told you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library