Dr. Buell, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I had to make great effort to be here on this occasion, for I had an engagement last night to dine with the Chinese Minister in Washington, and to-night I have another engagement with the Japanese Ambassador for dinner. So you see I had to take a midnight train to be here, and I have to return on the 3:33.

But I have come precisely because of what Dr. Buell has said. I don’t know whether my fellow dictators  would deign to argue with people who criticize their dictatorship, but I do know that I love to face those who criticize me, for I am sure that the only way of getting at the truth is by facing those who do not agree with you.

And so I am here because the Foreign Policy Association, of which my dear friend, Dr. Buell, is the President, has somewhat misunderstood some of the things we are doing in the Philippines, and because some other people here present have been writing articles about the Government of the Philippines not exactly in accord with the facts.

The first thing that stands out when a student reads the Philippine Constitution is that the Constitution of the Philippines gives the Chief Executive very great powers, and because of this fact some believe that these powers granted the Chief Executive are greater than the executive powers given to the President of the United States by the Constitution of America.

But apart from my diabolical plan to become in time Dictator of the Philippines, I also wish to tell you about the Constitution of the Philippines. As a matter of fact, the Constitution of the Philippines has been written at a time when experience in this country and all over the world had shown the framers of our Constitution certain fundamental weaknesses in your Constitution as well as in the parliamentary system of some of the governments of Europe.

They had seen, for instance, that for years this Government suffered from what was well known here as the pork barrel system, the log rolling, and they provided in their Constitution the only method whereby pork barrel and log rolling could not be repeated in the Philippine Islands. The pork barrel is the natural result of a system whereby the appropriation of public funds is left entirely in the hands of the legislature, where sections of the country are represented by individual members of the legislature, and naturally many of those sections exercise influence over those particular legislators, with the result that in appropriating the public funds by local consideration. Hence, the pork barrel.

So our Constitution places entirely upon the shoulders of the Chief Executive the responsibility of preparing the budget and submitting it to the legislature. The Chief Executive has been elected by the people at large, and knowing the condition of the whole country when he prepares his budget, he is not influenced by local considerations; he is bound to look after the interests of the nation as a whole.

You have already adopted that system in the State of New York whereby, by virtue of your Constitution, the responsibility for preparing your budget rests upon the shoulders of the Chief Executive.

In spite of the fact that your President submits his budget to Congress, the Congress may do as it pleases with that budget. Not with our Government, for the legislature, under our Constitution, cannot increase the budget as submitted by the Chief Executive; it can only reduce it.

Moreover, under our system the Chief Executive can veto items in an appropriation. The result of this is that if some members of the legislature, or a number of them, should get together and insert in the appropriation bill an item attempting to favor a given locality, the President may veto that item without the necessity of vetoing the whole appropriation.

This is a tremendous power indeed, but it is a power which the framers of our Constitution have given to the Chief Executive in the Philippine Islands in view of the fact that we have seen already the tremendous amount of money that has been wasted when the legislature has the unrestricted power of appropriating public funds under the influence of local interests.

Again, the framers of our Constitution have seen how some dictators have risen in Europe because of the utter failure of parliament to give the people an efficient government. The framers of our Constitution felt that in order that it may not be necessary for someone to rise above the masses and with force grasp the reins of government, as what has happened in Europe, the Constitution preferred to place in hands of the Chief Executive the powers necessary to always maintain an efficient government, so that a condition may not arise whereby chaos and disorder shall reign, with the resultant effect upon the people of being disappointed at their own government and believing that democracy is a failure.

In other words, we have, in adopting and establishing in the Philippines a democracy, learned enough from other countries to know that democracy has in itself the necessary virtues to provide the people with efficient government, if the machinery that is placed in the hands of democracy is an efficient machinery.

Under our Constitution it is provided that one of the main duties of the State is to look after the interests of the largest number. In order that the Government may accomplish this purpose, it is given specific powers to own and operate public utilities, and even to go into private business if necessary, should there be a case where private corporations in disregard of the public welfare are thinking only of their gain, of their profit, without bearing in mind the needs of the country.

So we have a Constitution that is filled with these new ideas of social justice. The philosophy of laissez faire in our Government is dead. It has been substituted by the philosophy of government intervention whenever the needs of the country require it.

Another thing we have learned is the need of requiring a two-thirds vote of the Supreme Court to declare a law unconstitutional. This is in order that one may not be sufficient to set aside the combined judgment of the Assembly and the Chief Executive.

I am going to speak now on one of the policies of the Government of the Philippines which has received more criticism than any other things we have ever done,—the question of the nation’s defense. The Filipinos are being charged with wanting to have their cake and eat it, too. Only two days ago a distinguished member of the House of Representatives delivered a speech on the floor of the House and said, “The Filipinos want independence, but they want to have the advantage of the American market for their products and the protection of the American forces.”

Now, ladies and gentlemen, this charge is unfounded. It is true that the Filipinos assert that, even if the United States were to cut entirely all kinds of connections with the Philippines within ten years or less, this country is morally bound to give the Filipinos a chance to re-adjust their national economy to the change that will come when independence shall have been granted, and no trade relations on a special preferential basis should exist between Philippines and the United States, but the Filipinos feel this way, because the present trade relations between the United States and the Philippines have been imposed upon them by an Act of Congress. The Filipinos saw at that time that to establish these free trade relations between America and the Philippines would create industries in the Philippines that would depend upon the protected American market, and when the time came for the separation of these two countries, those industries would be destroyed.

America, in spite of that protest, established those free trade relations, so that industries have been created in the Philippines under the protection of this protected market, and during the War, when America needed sugar and oil and copra, the Government of the Philippines at the instruction of the War Department, made the Filipinos plant more sugar cane, bring more copra here, so that you could have what you needed during that war.

The Filipinos, grateful as they were to the United States for the benefits that we have received from you, loyal that they were to the American Flag, so loyal that I personally came to this country to offer to President Wilson a division of Filipinos to fight for your Flag and die with your soldiers in the fields of Europe—the Filipinos gave you the sugar and the copra, that you needed then, and now the Filipinos are blamed, accused of wanting to have their cake and eat it, too, because they think that in justice to them you should give them a chance to liquidate their sugar interests which have been created under the auspices of your protected market and practically under the compulsion of your Government when you needed that sugar and that copra.

It is not true that we want to have our cake and eat it, too. When, speaking for my people, I say we are willing to accept independence, I mean we are willing to accept all the responsibilities of independence. If I didn’t believe that the Filipinos were willing to accept the responsibilities of independence, I would be ashamed to call myself a Filipino. That is why the first thing that we did was to prepare ourselves for national defense. One of the eternal assertions in this and every other country is that if the Filipinos were allowed to live by themselves, they shall be grabbed by a greedy power. Well, in the days that we live in, when neutralization treaties are laughed, the only answer that the Filipinos can give to that statement is to prepare their country to defend itself.

International treaties are good. I don’t object to them, but international treaties of neutralization that we have seen are not worth the paper on which they are written, and we cannot, with that experience, depend exclusively upon international treaties, and so we are organizing our national defense, and we are being charged by that—I am accused of trying to build up an army that will perpetuate me in power.

The maximum of the regular army that we are contemplating is 10,000 men. Ten thousand men, in a country of eighteen million that the Philippine people are, cannot subjugate those eighteen million; much less can they subjugate if you realize the fact that our national program consists in giving military training to all our youth so that every man will know how to use his rifle should the time come when he has got to defend his country.

We have adopted in the Philippines the system that has been going on in Switzerland for many years. Is there anybody here who would say that the military training of the youth in Switzerland means dictatorship in Switzerland? Is there anyone here who will dare say that there is any country more democratic than Switzerland?

We are training our youth so that if and when the Philippines should become independent, any notion that would come and attempt to grab the Islands, would at least think twice before carrying out its plans, because of the cost in lives and money in attempting to conquer the Philippines, once the country is prepared to defend itself.

But we are doing that for more reasons that one. This military training serves to unify the Filipinos into really one people. It brings young men from every place of the country together to meet with one another and realize their oneness, realize that they belong to one country for the defense of which they are trained.

It does more than that. Our military establishment for the training of our youth takes care that they are also taught the civic virtues of a citizen. The whole philosophy of the national defense program of the Philippines is to make of a Filipino soldier a better older, when he has to fight, and a better citizen in time of peace.



(Following the above speech other members of the F.P.A. spoke, after which President Quezon again spoke. The intervening address follow.)

TOASTMASTER BUELL: We are now going to have a little symposium on this question, and the first participant is a distinguished and unique personality who has spent his life in the American Army, who has served many years in the Philippines where he became head of the Philippine Constabulary, and to close his active military career as Inspector General of the United States Army. Our speaker led a regiment in the great battle of Chateau Thierry, but I think he is what the botanists call a sport, in that in my opinion he is probably more of a pacifist than Mr. Villard.

At any rate, I take great pleasure in calling upon Major General William C. Rivers.

GENERAL RIVERS: Your Excellency, President Quezon, Mr. Toastmaster, Ladies and Gentlemen:

For me it is a very great and genuine pleasure to see Manuel Quezon here as the President of the Philippine Commonwealth.

I gave the best ten years of my working life to the service of the Filipino people. When I settled my family in Mr. Quezon’s town some sixty miles South of Manila, Mr. Quezon was a young lawyer. Mrs. Quezon, now the able and charming First Lady in the Philippines, was then a young school girl, Aurora Aragon.

My duty required our residence in several provincial towns, and I had to work in all parts of the Islands. My wife and I soon grew to like the Filipinos. They are a hardworking people with ability, ambition, and much racial pride. With peace in the Orient, the Filipinos will govern themselves well.

I want to say a few words about the Far Eastern policy of the United States, the military problem from an American standpoint; also, about the alleged Japanese menace to the Philippines. But I warn you not to look for very much from me. You know the five volumes just written by the brilliant Lloyd George, mainly to show how extremely stupid all old Generals are!  Now, I am an old General, for I saw as a cadet-boy at West Point the great Civil War triumvirate, Grant, Sherman, and Sheridan. Lloyd George may be right, but why did he omit the old Admirals  and the diplomats and officers of the State and Foreign Departments of the various countries?

Old Generals may study the last war, but the diplomats study the status quo and the status quo ante, and talk of uni-lateral and bi-lateral conversations between nations. I say, let us have both kinds of talks; let everyone talk at the same time if it will make for peace in the Pacific.

America has no clear policy as to the Far East. Such as we have might be expressed somewhat as follows: “We took the Philippines to protect our trade with China; now many seem to think we must fight Japan to protect China so as to guard the Philippines,” going around and around the circle. This is what might be called a circular policy as to the Far East.

I think the republic of the Philippines can be and should be neutralized. It is to the selfish and national interests of several great powers to have the Philippines neutral. The United States should withdraw from the Philippines and from the Orient. We have no territory in Asia proper and no political interests at all in Asia. We are not going to interfere in Asiatic affairs. The future of Eastern Asia will inevitably be settled by the people who live there, by the Japanese, Chinese, and Russians.

The Filipinos alone, nor the United States alone, nor the Filipinos combined in an alliance, cannot defend the Philippines against a nearby military power which is squarely between the United States and the Philippines. No two far-off great Western nations combined, England and America, for example, can permanently dominate the Philippines region.

To speak of an American naval base at Manila is very far-fetched. All the Congress could build at Manila would be a far-off, exposed and untenable salient. The defense of such a salient would require the United States to build a new fleet as large as the Japanese fleet. Heavy, land-based airplanes could bomb such a salient, and Manila itself, from Formosa, very near to the Philippines, and from several other places. Remember that land-based airplanes are very much heavier and more powerful than airplanes that any ships carry.

Holding the Philippines will involve for the United States two dangers: A war at some time with Japan and the responsibility to put down a revolt some day of the Filipinos against the local Filipino Government at Manila.

Vast changes have taken place in the Northwest Pacific regions. Some of these are: The rise of Japan as a first-class power, the return of Russia to that region far more formidable than Czarist Russia ever was, and the doubling in the last four years of range, speed and capacity of the air bombers, with the development of the new submarines.

Russia now has in Eastern Asia more soldiers than Japan has in its peace army, lines of new concrete forts in Siberia, many airplanes, and many railway-shipped submarines. Russia threatens Japan at the North from Vladivostok, and Russia pushes from the West into Outer Mongolia toward the sea. Unless Japan holds Manchuria as a buffer and also pushes Westward in North China, Russia can soon have the Islands of Japan proper in dire peril. A strong foothold on the mainland of China is vital to the continuance of Japan as a first-class power.

I favor our recognition of Manchukuo and our recognition of Japan’s strategic movements in North China. I favor efforts on our part to secure the interest of Japan in the independence and success of the Philippine Republic. I am in favor of a world system for peace, as most people are, but it is event that such a system is not at present practicable.

I hope that our people will grant generous trade privileges to the Filipinos for a number of years. I would like to see our people generously agree to pay off the some $70,000,000 Philippine bonded debt, for money the American administrations at Manila borrowed.

I trust our “Good Neighbor” policy is not for the peoples to the South of us alone. I hope the ladies who flew to Buenos Aires will soon take at San Francisco the Hawaii Clipper to Honolulu and there meet people who come from Eastern Asia to meet the ladies—meet Chinese, Japanese and Russians who will live in Eastern Asia to talk of peace. I hope they will carry the Dove of Peace also into the Pacific.

We are now assembling in the North Pacific Ocean the greatest, and certainly the most costly, fleet of war vessels and fighting planes the world has ever seen in one place. I have been in a lot of overseas wars, and I am sure the only way to stop overseas wars is to take it in hand before the coming of the crisis. The crisis will come in the Pacific in two or three years, when the Japanese and ourselves have completed and ready for the battle lines the additional fighting ships both countries are now constructing.

We can well defend our West coast with a more moderate fleet based on the ice-free harbors of the Aleutian Islands, and can defend our normal line in the Pacific from the Aleutians to the Hawaiians and on down to Panama, a line that is more than two thousand miles from our own Western shores. I thank you very much.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: Our second participant in this symposium has fought valiantly in many popular battles. He is one of the few surviving members of the Anti-Imperialistic League, organized in 1898 to prevent the annexation of the Philippines, and he is going to live long enough to see that victory won.

I have great pleasure in introducing to you Mr. Oswald Garrison Villard.

Mr. VILLARD: Mr. Chairman, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen: It is a little bit hard to realize as one gets older that one is sometimes called upon, as today, solely because of one’s longevity.

But I must confess that I am a survivor of that army of many thousands of Americans called Anti-Imperialists who bitterly opposed the American conquest of the Islands from the day that the first shot was fired, and were determined from beginning to end that eventually the Islands should be set free.

Our leaders were men like Grover Cleveland, then ex-President; Carl Schurz, statesman and Corps Commander at Gettysburg; President Eliot, of Harvard; Charles Eliot Norton, of Harvard; Senator George F. Hoar, of Massachusetts, and many other patriots who, in the face of contumely, abuse, vilification and aspersions upon their patriotism, never ceased to battle for justice and freedom for the Filipinos.

There were three newspaper staffs at that time that went so far in their opposition to the governmental policies, those of the New York Evening Post, the Boston Herald, and Springfield Republican, that the McKinley Cabinet devoted one morning to a discussion as to whether they should not be prosecuted for treason. i know of only two other survivors of those staffs besides myself.

Now, these Anti-Imperialists had a double motive. They believed that this country could not conquer an aspiring people anywhere and then deny it freedom without gravely injuring the very soul of America itself, without irretrievably staining and dishonoring our own nation. They fought for their country as well as for yours, President Quezon, I recall this to you because, with all due deference to the effectiveness of your presentation of your case, I shall address a few words of appeal to you in protest against certain tendencies we have noted in the policies of your government, out of this background of mine, because of the great anxiety that some of us feel when we regard your country’s future.

Here again there is a double motive. The tables are turned. We seek not to interfere in the domestic concerns of your people nor to give them patronizing advice, but we believe we are vitally concerned in the future national policies of your government, because if after our long training and tutelage the Philippines now leave the paths of democracy, if legislative developments in Manila open the way to a dictatorship, military or civil, the Filipinos will by those acts have struck grave blows at our own American institutions, and at the safety of our own democracy in a crumbling world.

We who fought for your freedom at no little risk to ourselves believed that if you became a free nation you would ever hold aloft the torch of democracy, that you would show to a doubting world that even in Asiatic climes men of totally different racial ancestry and traditions could still prove that a democracy can be made to work. We want today your aid and cooperation not only to prove this beyond cavil, but to aid us in our own defense and maintenance of government by and for the people. Democracies everywhere have their backs to the wall.

It is true that times and the world have changed. Yet I cannot think of anything that could have given greater pain to men like Schurz and Cleveland and Hoar and Storey, than to have lived to read of the introduction of universal military service in the Philippines, extending down into the very schools and including boys ten years of age—here is the schedule—the exact age specified by Mussolini and Hitler for the beginning of their training of their cannon-fodder.

The Anti-Imperialists who opposed the use of American troops to conquer the Philippines would certainly refuse to believe that an American General is heading this conscription, with the rank of Field Marshal, if you please, the first American to bear that title, a title to which Washington, Grant, Lee, Sherman and Pershing never aspired. We read with dismay that this officer is to command a standing army of not what you said, 10,000—your Act reads 20,500, in addition to your constabulary of 9,000 men; that a reserve of 40,000 men is to be created right away, and that by 1946 it is planned to have 1,250,000 men who will have had some military training, under arms, and that this whole military scheme is to be coordinated with a system of adult education. And what ominous words as this is described: “To instill the virtues of national consciousness, patriotism and discipline in the general population.” They sound suspiciously like Rome and Berlin and Moscow. Was it really for this that the Anti-Imperialists made their shining self-sacrifice?

Some of us are emboldened to speak out against this whole policy because of our certainty that it is unavailing to bring security and safety to the Philippines. The answer lies in the neutralization of the Philippines, for which Carl Schurz appealed as far back as January 4, 1899, in a great address at the University of Chicago. “This.” he said, “would secure them against foreign aggression.”

Here I associate myself entirely with what General Rivers has said out of the background of his long experience. I hope, ladies and gentlemen, you realize the historic significance of this occasion. Something is happening here that perhaps never happened before: A pacifist and a Major General, devoted friends, sitting side by side and unanimous on all questions of Philippine policy.

I am well aware that men ask how it is possible to expect loyalty, as the President has suggested it, in a time when treaties are no longer sacred. My answer is that Japan has everything to gain from a neutralization of the Philippines and nothing whatever to lose.

And all of this is to be done at a perfectly tremendous cost, and that is only the beginning. Surely, President Quezon, the role of a new and struggling country would seem to be to conserve every single dollar of its resources for its inner needs until it knows that it has found the path to prosperity and economic safety and can set not trembling but steady feet upon that path. But more than that, the modern state calls for a social and economic security and well being for its workers, down to the very humblest. It hurts to hear that you are able to spend $8,000,000 for military training, and that you have not money enough for universal public education to open the children’s minds to the intellectual wealth and riches of the world.

Great resources the Philippines have beyond question, greater perhaps than many of us fully understand. Surely the future holds no greater duty for a government such as yours than to husband those resources and to use them for the benefit and advancement of all its people, for a high standard of physical and economic well being, so that men shall point hereafter to the Philippines in the future and say, “What an advance! What a great State, with all the stress of its government laid not upon teaching its citizens how to kill, but how to live, how to live peacefully, well and sanely, how to give their sons more and more of the benefits of their rich earth, and how to divide those riches equitably and justly for all its people!”

TOASTMASTER BUELL: Our third and concluding participant in this symposium is well known to us. He is Director of the Institute of International Education, a close student of the Philippines, whose recently published article on the subject appeared in the Yale Review. He was a member of the Philippine Educational Survey Commission in 1925, and is one of our most distinguished educators generally.

I have pleasure in introducing Dr. Stephen P. Duggan.

Dr. DUGGAN: Mr. President, Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen: When we took over the Philippines, the commerce between the United States and the Philippines didn’t amount to $50,000 a year, and under the auspices of that splendid Governor-General, Mr. Taft, the Philippines were brought under our tariff; free trade was brought between the United States and the Philippines. I don’t think the protests were nearly as vocal as President Quezon thought in having that done, but he was right, that millions of American dollars went into the Philippines to develop industries which would be of benefit primarily to the United States: sugar, cordage, coconut oil and coconut products generally.

As the result of that, the Philippine industries today are devoted exclusively to producing things for the American market. They have no other outlet, or practically no other outlet.

In 1934, the United States took nearly 85 per cent of all the Philippine products, worth over $94,000,000. In the same year, we sent 66 2/3 per cent of all the imports into the Philippines, worth over $55,000,000. Even in the worst depression year, our commercial relations with the worst depression year, our commercial relations with the Philippines amounted to at least $150,000,000, and the Philippines re ninth country of all the countries in the trade with the United States.

That is the condition of things today. Now, what does the Independence Act propose? It proposes that in the fifth year of the Commonwealth, which has been already introduced, 5 per cent of the monies secured under all the exports to the Philippines shall be collected into a fund by the Philippine Government, and 5 per cent additional for the next five years, so that at the end of the fifth year 25 per cent of the value of the goods sent to the United States will be collected in this fund, and the fund is to be devoted to the payment of the foreign debt, primarily. That means the debt held by the Americans.

Now, to carry out that policy at the present time simply means the doom of the Philippines. You only have to consider the results of this policy, of our policy, to understand that all these things that Mr. Villard has been speaking about, virtually, will follow anyhow from this policy.

The reason for that is, as I said in the beginning, and as President Quezon said, that the sole market. There is no other, and more over there can’t be any other. We have raised wages in the Philippines. We have introduced a standard of living in the Philippines in such a way that the cost of production of practically everything that is produced in the Philippines is higher than that of surrounding territories. Java alone can supply the whole East of Asia, the whole of Austro-Asia, with sugar cheaper than the Philippines can do it.

The result of that is, as I said, that there is no market for the Philippine products outside. Now, for this policy to be followed, therefore, it simply means unemployment for the thousands and tens of thousands of Filipinos employed in producing the goods that we have wanted in this country.

Unemployment means unrest. For the first time since we were in the Philippines, last year there was an uprising in the Philippines, that was due to the depression and to the results of the depression. But consider what might happen if this policy that we have introduced were to be followed and the depression multiplied manyfold as a result of it.

Now, as a matter of fact, Mr. Roosevelt has made a promise, in his own language: “Where imperfections and inequalities exist, I am confident that they can be corrected after proper hearing and in fairness to both people.” I sincerely hope that that will be done. There are people here at this table who belong to the Economic Council established by Mr. Quezon, representatives who are going to come in contact with the representatives of the State Department to work out a compromise policy which will do justice to the Americans and to the Filipinos.

If you knew as a result of a visit to the Philippines the pride that the Filipino people have in what has been accomplished in one generation, personally, I think changing medieval despotism into a modern democracy, you would understand how deeply they feel these projected results, the results that would naturally follow from the Independence Act. They are proud of all that has been accomplished. They are proud of their roads, of their bridges, of their health service, of their scientific service, particularly of the spiritual things that have been accomplished in the Philippines through the educational policy that has been adopted by the Filipinos.

Those things, ladies and gentlemen, were done first by cooperation between Americans and Filipinos, and after that by Filipinos themselves, and it seems to me that if a policy were adopted today by us, and allowed to be carried out, which would destroy the fine results that have resulted from this cooperation in the beginning and national work by the Filipinos themselves, it would be the most unfortunate thing that we could have happen.

In the autobiography of President McKinley, his biographer says that it was the result of divine guidance that made him agree to taking over the Philippines. I haven’t heard of any divine guidance in respect to taking up this commercial policy which would destroy, I think, the Philippine civilization.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: In the past, the Philippines have made great progress, but independence in complicated by two questions: Can they live economically without the American market; can they live an independent life without the protection of the American Flag and Navy?

Certain differences have developed here, and the consensus has been at least two against one, and I think it is only fair that we should give President Quezon a few minutes in which to reply.

PRESIDENT QUEZON: Ladies and gentlemen, I am going to be very brief. I want to add to what Dr. Duggan said, that it is not only in the interests of the Philippines to have these trade relations with America; it will also be profitable to the United States. For as we sell to you, we buy from you, and the Philippines is a growing country. The Philippines in time to come, will mean in terms of trade for the United States, if you were to get that trade, ten times as much as Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Cuba combined. For Hawaii will never have more than one million people; Puerto Rico a million and a half, and Cuba two and a half, or three million. The Philippines are today sixteen-eighteen million people, and can be and will be in forty years, fifty million. So this is not a one-sided proposition.

Now I am going to say something in answer to my beloved and respected old friend Mr. Villard. It is with some diffidence that I am going to answer him, for I quite remember those days when many years ago I used to come to the office of Mr. Villard and get encouragement and inspiration from hi in my fight for Philippine freedom.

The speech to which we have listened with admiration, delivered by this very distinguished scholar, is a speech that I would have delivered twenty years ago. Twenty years ago I delivered half a dozen speeches on the floor of the House of Representatives advocating neutralization of the Philippine Islands, and answered every question propounded to me. How did the Filipinos expect to protect themselves? I said through neutralization. But I am sorry to say that I cannot make that speech again after I have seen what happened to Belgium, Abyssinia, and Manchuria. I don’t want the fate of the Philippines to be either of those three.

It is true, as my friend, General Rivers, said that the Philippines can’t defend themselves against the aggression of Japan. I believe that the Philippines can be conquered, of course, by a first-class power, but when a conquering nation attempts to conquer a weaker one, it is not doing it for the pleasure of conquest in the days that we live; it is doing it for profit, and therefore it is going to count cost of that conquest as against the profit. If the Philippines are ready to defend themselves and the conquest of the Philippines will mean a lot on money and lives to the conquering nation, they will not attack the Philippines.

That is the only thing that the Filipinos can do now, and even if the Filipinos could be conquered I would feel proud of being a Filipino if the Filipinos fought valiantly before they were conquered, and not just submitted themselves meekly to that conquest. If the Filipinos don’t love their country well enough to fight for it, I don’t want to belong to that race.

It is all right to peak of teaching our people how to live peacefully and happily. That should be our aim and it is our aim, but we are living in a world where people are thinking of killing another; then it is our duty to be ready not to be killed so easily; and that is what I am trying to do with my people.

Mr. Villard says that we should spend the money we are spending in military training on compulsory education, so that every child in the Philippine Islands may have the benefit of instruction. I agree with him, but I want to say to him that if the Philippines are going to be enslaved, it is better for the Filipinos not to be educated, for a man who is not educated can stand that better than a man who has got education.

I am preparing these youths to fight for their country so that the education and training that we give them will be an education which they may use for their self-respect and protection.

It is not true that the Philippine Government is not getting ready to give universal education to all our youth. The first thing I did, soon after inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, was to increase our appropriation for the schools, so that today we have already established in part compulsory education. But you cannot educate the young men and young women in the streets. You have to give them buildings, and it takes time to build these buildings. We are going to do that. We are not going to abandon it. We know what we can do with our money and we are entitled to do with it what we think is best in the interests of our country.

What would be the use of developing the Philippines and developing the Filipinos, teaching them democracy, love of freedom, of peace, trying to organize themselves so the wealth of the country will be properly divided—what would be the use of doing all that if at any moment a stronger power would come, take hold of and exploit the Philippines for its benefit and not for the benefit of the Filipinos?

It is well for you have a hundred million people to be against conscription. It is well for who have such immense wealth that you can use at any time to organize a big army to fight for your country, but for a people of sixteen million, as we are, it is necessary for us to be ready—to teach every man in our country to use the rifle.

I can understand an American protest against conscription. With all due respect to you, let me tell you, I am afraid that your conception of liberty is not altogether right. A proper conception of liberty is the performance of duty to the nation. It is because you are giving too much importance to the freedom of the individual to do as he pleases as against the interests of the State that you are suffering from the evils that you are suffering from today in this country. Because of that idea of freedom, freedom to make money, as much as you want to, at the cost of your brother, America is suffering from the evils that she is suffering from now.

In our Constitution we give our people, the first duty of a citizen is to serve the State. This makes the Filipino realize that it is his duty to consider his good in connection with the good of his neighbor, and hence his freedom to do as he pleases may not go any further than to do as he pleases when what he is doing may be at the cost of his compatriot.

We are not afraid to conscript our citizens, for we consider it the duty of every citizen to be at the call of the State. When you have educated your youth with the idea that he owes himself to his country, then you can tell him when he is making too much money at the cost of the public, “Don’t do that; think of the public; give something of what you have in abundance to those who are working for you,” and he will realize what you mean, understand your language.

But when you tell him from childhood, “It is your right to make as much money as you want to; get ready to make it; you have the freedom to do as you please,” when the time comes for him to follow that doctrine and you try to curb him, you will find Supreme Courts that will tell you have no right to do it, and you will find the country that will protest against you.

Discipline, national discipline, that word that seems to hurt the ears of some people, that is what we want in the Philippine Islands—national discipline, the spirit of sacrifice of every citizen in the interests of all.



(Discussion on Philippine question continued among members of F.P.A. with President Quezon taking part. Record of the discussion follows.)

TOASTMASTER BUELL: We have times for a few questions before we go off the air, and then for a few more until closing time. I will start with asking this question directed to General Rivers. The General stated that Japan was justified in taking Manchukuo. Does the General believe that Japan should be allowed to take the Philippines when they become independent?

GENERAL RIVERS: He alleges that I said that Japan was justified in taking Manchukuo, and would Japan be justified in taking the Philippines when they become independent? No, the Philippines are not essential to the existence of the Japanese Empire. Without Manchuria as a buffer, the Japanese Empire cannot, in all probability, continue to exist as a free state. Russia, so much more powerful, so much more populous, would crush Japan, but Manchuria is a peculiarly valuable buffer. It is a great, square block. Troops cannot enter Manchuria from Russia without crossing the river from Siberia, without crossing a river in the mountain range before they deploy on the plains; troops cannot enter Manchuria on the West without crossing the river and mountain range before they deploy; troops cannot enter Manchuria from the East, Vladivostok region, without crossing the river.

PRESIDENT QUEZON: Just one question. General, did I understand you to say that the only reason Japan may not take the Philippines is because the Philippines is not essential to Japan? Do you mean to say that if it were essential Japan may take over, or have the right to take the Philippines?

GENERAL RIVERS: No.

PRESIDENT QUEZON: Well, but that is what you said.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: I have a second question directed to Dr. Duggan: Does he believe that we should make a permanent trade treaty with the Philippines similar to the one we have with Cuba, which means a preference position in the American market, or does he believe in gradually cutting off altogether?

Dr. DUGGAN: It would be very difficult to say what would be the best policy that should be adopted. All I contend for is this one thing, that having developed the peculiar relationship that exists between the Philippines and the United States today, resulting in Filipino dependence upon our market, whatever policy we are going to adopt ought to take into consideration a long-range policy.

The sugar interests in this country are primarily the cause of the Independence Act. Now, no long-range policy was adopted by our sugar interests, namely, the best sugar interests. Hawaii and the Philippines and Cuba provided all the sugar that was necessary for this country. When the best sugar policy among our farmers was put into operation, there was no need of it.

Now, what I mean is that whatever policy is going to be adopted at the present time, it should take in a long enough range so that the destruction of Filipino standards of living and the resulting destruction of Filipino civilization should not follow.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: Are these any questions from the floor?

QUESTION: Mr. Chairman, I should like to ask President Quezon if there is no alternative between militarizing the people, conscripting them for war, and accepting enslavement by a Pacific power, or some other power? Is it not possible to negotiate a neutrality treaty which will be really effective?

TOASTMASTER BUELL: I am going to ask that question to Mr. Villard, because I want President Quezon to answer another one. The question is: Does Mr. Villard believe that a neutralization agreement for the Philippines will be any more effective than was the Nine-Power Agreement for China?

Mr. VILLARD: I do believe that neutralization is possible, and I am very emphatically of the opinion that it should be attempted, because neutralization is something that has not been developed in international relations as it ought to be. It has been successful international relations as it ought to be. It has been successful conspicuously in the case of Switzerland. It ought to be worked out and tried more and more. Failure would not be wholly a disaster.

And may I, while I am on my feet, just say one thing in reply to President Quezon? The Philippine system as it has been reported in this country is not exactly the Swiss system by any means. For one thing, the Swiss Army is headed by a Colonel and not a Field Marshal. In the second place, it does not extend down into the schools, beginning at the age of ten, and so on.

But as to the actual question of dispute between the President and myself, it is this: Can the Philippines possibly produce money enough to safeguard their country by modern military and naval methods, when they have only got an annual income of $24,000,000 a year, and a coastline to defend which is only a few thousand miles shorter than our own? Many military and naval men are emphatically of the opinion that it is not possible, and therefore they urge the neutralization of the Philippines as the best way out.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: I have a question directed to President Quezon: What is the social policy of your government with regard to the problem of tenancy and share cropping?

PRESIDENT QUEZON: Before I answer that, I just want to make clear that I am not opposed to the neutralization of the Philippines; I simply say that it is not enough. The neutralization of Switzerland has been effective because Switzerland has trained its citizenship to bear arms.

Mr. VILLARD: No, no.

PRESIDENT QUEZON: Well, that is my opinion, and as to the opinion of my friend, Mr. Villard, as to whether the Philippines can defend itself, and the opinion of an Army General like General MacArthur—you will excuse me if I accept the opinion of General MacArthur rather than his. On the matter of fighting, I believe General MacArthur is better prepared to answer that.

What are we trying to do with this problem of tenancy in the Philippines is this: We are trying to purchase all the large estates and sell them back in small portions to their present occupants, so that the man who will work the land will own the land that he is working on; and it is the idea of the Government to resell these lands to these tenants under such terms and conditions that it will take many years in payment, so that perhaps all they would have to do is pay as much as they are paying now for the tenancy of the land to become owners of the land.

We assert in the Philippines that one of the great social evils is ownership of large estates by absentee landlords, and we are trying to do away with it. We want every Filipino who is working on a farm to own his farm. As a matter of fact, my own belief is that God made the land for the man who will work it, and not for the fellow who will get the profit from others who work it.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: Now there is a question over there.

QUESTION: Would President Quezon please tell us whether in trying to avoid the old cut-throat laissez faire individualism, the Philippine Constitution has been more influenced by Fascist ideals, or as in the case of Australia and New Zealand, by the more peaceful, democratic ideals of Socialism?

PRESIDENT QUEZON: I think the question is answered.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: That is to say that the new Philippine Constitution has been more inspired by the ideas of democratic socialism, such as one finds in Australia and New Zealand, than by the ideas of Fascism.

QUESTION: I gathered from Dr. Duggan’s words that the Philippines have been getting more from the United States through hospitals, schools and street cleaning, and so on, than the Philippines have given to the United States in goods; at the same time the Americans are in the Philippines because the current of profit must be flowing to the East. Now, am I to understand, then, that the current of profit is flowing both ways?

TOASTMASTER BUELL: I think the question which is addressed to Doctor Duggan is this: Who has got the most money out of the Philippines during the last twenty-five years, the Filipinos or the Americans?

Can you answer that, Doctor Duggan?

Doctor DUGGAN: It doesn’t take long to answer it. It is the Americans, without any question. As a matter of fact, you want to understand this: that all these roads and bridges and health services, and other things that I have been talking about, were supported exclusively by taxation of the Filipinos and not by anything given by the American Government. The American Government gave protection to the Filipinos so far, and that is all.

QUESTION: I would like to ask President Quezon about his policy of breaking up all the large landholdings into small farms—or somebody who represents him.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: I am sorry to say that President Quezon had to get a train before the meeting ended, in order to get back to Washington, and we appreciate his willingness to fit this meeting into his very hectic schedule. I wonder if there is one of his staff here who might answer that question. Would you repeat it again?

QUESTION: I want to know, in view of the fact that it is a scientific fact that large-scale farming os more economical than small-scale farming, wouldn’t it be more profitable for the Philippine Government to take over those large-scale farms, like the method of collective farming as used in Soviet Russia, rather than splitting them up onto small farms?

TOASTMASTER BUELL: The question asked is a very vital one, I think, namely, if it is true that large-scale farms are more efficient than small tenant, or peasant holdings, is not the wisest policy for the government to establish collective farms in the Philippines similar to those in Soviet Russia?

Dean Benitez is one of our most distinguished educators who has now come to Washington as a technical assistant.

Dean CONRADO BENITEZ: I would say, in answer to that question, that the Philippine Constitution provides for distribution of the public lands to the people so that the are of land that could be disposed of is limited, 1,024 hectares to corporations; 144 hectares to individuals by purchase, and 24 hectares to individuals by homestead. That has been the traditional policy of the Philippine Government which was incorporated in the Philippine Constitution and what President Quezon stated here a while ago with reference to the expropriation of private landed estates and their subdivision into smaller lots and resale to individuals, of course is another new provision that was adopted by the Philippine Constitution. So you can see from those provisions what the policy of our government is with regard to land distribution.

There is a feeling, which I believe is born from the experience that we had in connection with the farming lands during the Spanish regime, that it is dangerous to have big estates in the hands of a few. As a matter of fact, that is one of the reasons why the revolution against Spain was such a popular move.

Mr. JAMES S. ALLEN: I would have liked to have submitted these questions while President Quezon was still here, but I would like to submit these questions to anyone who would care to answer.

President Quezon has stated that one of the principal aims of the Constitution and of his Administration is to distribute profit, social justice. The first question, therefore, is: Is it not true that the lowest rate of taxation against corporations, I believe, anywhere in the world, exists in the Philippines?

Secondly, I would like to submit this series of questions: Is it not true that the National Assembly passed, and that His Excellency, the President of the Commonwealth, signed, bills which established compulsory labor arbitration which enforce a new decision law even more stringent than the one that existed at the time of early American occupation, that postponed the general elections scheduled for June, 1937, for a year, and gave the President the power to appoint new officers in the interim? And finally, in order, I hope, to clear up the air with regard to the military questions which we have been discussing, is it not true that the Army of the Commonwealth which is now being created under the National Defense Bureau, owes its allegiance to the President of the United States; in other words, has been created as a colonial military force of the United States in the Far East?

And lastly, is it not true that this army has been granted police powers in the Philippines and is being used in that capacity by the present Administration?

TOASTMASTER BUELL: I think all of us regret that President Quezon had to leave before these very searching questions were asked.

Mr. Allen has asked: Is it not true that one of the lowest corporation tax rates in the world exists in the Philippines; that a compulsory labor arbitration law has been enacted; that a new decision ordinance has been passed; that elections have been postponed; and that the Army is really part of the military forces of the United States? I am going to ask Doctor Benitez if he will sacrifice himself in behalf of these questions.

Doctor BENITEZ: Mr. Chairman, I will try to answer them to the best of my ability.

First, yes, that is true; that is why there is a movement to specialize in taxation, to have more taxes collected from the very successful mining corporations, gold mining corporations.

No. 2, yes, that is a part of our Constitution. That was included in the Constitution as a principle so it is perfectly proper for the legislature to enact a law carrying out the principle in the Constitution concerning compulsory arbitration.

Third is decision. Yes, that is true, because we don’t want any lawless elements to get hold of the communities, so that we want to give the Department of Justice sufficient power to go after the gangsters.

No. 4, postponement of elections—that was done when I was away last year, so I don’t know very much about that, but that is also in line with the philosophy which was adopted in the Constitution. There was quite a heated debate about local riots, whether they should be guaranteed or protected in the Constitution—but if you know the Philippines well you will agree that we do not want to encourage local riots too much, because we don’t want some of the islands to be appealing or invoking constitutional provisions in favor of some of their local rights. Remember that we are building a nation, and so far as the Constitution is concerned, it is the national legislature that is guaranteed all of the usual rights that are given to a legislative body, because historically we are not like your Federal Government here, where you started by having sovereign states; we started by having a sovereign nation. That is why all of our local governments are merely branches of the national unit, provinces or municipalities, all of which are mere creations of the legislature.

No. 5, army—well, temporarily, it is, because all of us have to take an oath of allegiance to the United States and we have to promise to defend the Constitution of the United States, but that is according to the present arrangement, only a temporary situation, to last at most nine yard from now.

TOASTMASTER BUELL: If there are no further questions, I think that we have witnessed a rather interesting experience: The President of the Commonwealth coming and debating here with us on a question, and despite the fact that he had to leave, we are indebted to Doctor Benitez and the others who waited to hear the conclusion of these remarks.

I pronounce the meeting adjourned.

…The meeting adjourned at three-twenty o’clock…

*Dr. Raymond Leslie Buell, President of the Foreign Policy Association, presiding, introduced President Manuel L. Quezon as follows:

“ Ladies and Gentlemen, Members and Guests of the Foreign Policy Association:

“ The subject of discussion this afternoon is, “The Future of the Philippines,” and it is a very great privilege to have with us as the main speaker and guest of honor the President of the Philippine Commonwealth, who will, we hope, soon be President, or sometime be President of the Philippine Republic.

“ Our speaker today is in one of the most unenviable positions. I think, of any of the statement of the world. His task is to bring into existence a new nation in a world which is very unfriendly to weak peoples unable to settle its disputes by ordinary peaceful means.

“ But the statesman we have with us today is a man of great experience and courage. He fought with the Philippine Army in our War with Spain. He was captured and released after six months, and almost entirely during the past twenty-five years he has been the outstanding political leader in the life of the Philippine people.

“ Since 1922 he has been the acknowledged head of the Philippine people, and now, since last year he has been the President of the Philippine Commonwealth, a self-governing nation subject to certainties with the United States until 1946.

“ Some people have been unkind enough to accuse our guest of being a dictator, but I want to say that he has violated the rules of protocol in coming here and discussing his country and his policies with distinguished American guests, and I doubt very much whether Mr. Hitler of Mr. Mussolini would come here and debate Fascism with Oswald Villard or with General Rivers.

“ At any rate, I have great pleasure in presenting to you President Manuel Quezon, of the Philippine Commonwealth.” [ The audience applauded

Source: Presidential Museum and Library