SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

BENEFITS DERIVED FROM THE COCONUT OIL EXCISE TAX

[Delivered at Atimonan, Tayabas, on July 23, 1939]

Countrymen:

I regret to have promised you an after-dinner speech because I feel that we need instead a rest to avoid any indigestion. But as I always comply with my promises, so I shall now speak. I am greatly pleased to see that native dances and songs have been featured in our program today. I wish that we, the Filipinos, would accustom ourselves to gatherings like this, where we can observe our traditions and old customs, and not merely indulge in things foreign. Our dances have their natural grace; our music and songs are harbingers of melody, especially so when the singers are gifted like those whom we have just heard. Allow me now to speak about the excise tax.

In my speech this morning I mentioned abacá as a product which does not pay any excise tax, yet its price is much lower than that of copra. This shows that the price of a product is not governed by the tax. We also pay an excise tax on our sugar, but this industry, as you already know, is enriching the owners of centrals and the planters, who are the landowners. If the excise tax really reduces the price of a product, then that of sugar should also be similarly reduced. But this is not so. The truth of the matter is that the tax is paid by the consumer and not by the vendor.

As an specific illustration, we can cite the case of diamonds which come from Paris and are taxed upon entering the Philippines. Who do you think pays the tax? The diamond merchant actually pays the tax with the Collector of Internal Revenue, but he will get back what he has paid over when he makes a sale of the diamonds. For instance, he purchases the diamonds in Paris for P100; and when he subsequently sells them here, he adds to the purchase price his expenses for transportation and internal revenue tax as well as his profit. Hence, it is the consumer and not the merchant who really pays the tax and other expenses incident to the importation of diamonds here.

This actually happens in the case of the excise tax. The American consumers of soap manufactured from oil extracted from our copra are the ones who pay the tax. If there are no other countries where copra could he purchased—although the truth is that oil of the same grade as ours can be obtained from other nations—they would be obliged, even if the excise tax were increased to buy our oil if it is what they specifically need in the manufacture of soap.

In the past our abacá commanded a high price; but because of the Sumatra abacá, which competes with our product, and of an overproduction of hemp in the Philippines, its price today has gone down. There are furthermore other fibers which are not as good as our abacá, yet are capable of being utilized in the manufacture of ropes; hence, when our price increases, purchasers of fibers for rope manufacture are forced to buy from other places the commodity whose quality does not equal that of our abacá. This is one of the causes why our abaca commands a low price, although it does not pay an excise tax.

As I have previously stated, the price of our exports is not fixed in the Philippines; on the contrary, foreign consumers pay us a price equal to what they pay for the same products obtainable in other places. In short, we have neither power and influence nor a system that will be effective enough to induce foreigners to buy our exports at the price we quote; such as, for instance, abaca at P30, copra at P12, and sugar at P30. The price of our products follows the trend of prices of products of the same kind in other parts of the world.

Our tobacco does not pay any excise tax in America, yet its present price is much lower than that of copra. Despite this low price, however, tobacco exporters are comparatively better off than our copra or sugar exporters. The condition of the copra exporter is not so appalling; for, although copra does not command a high price now, we still obtain a little profit out of it.

The other day I met Justice Imperial who owns both coconut and abaca plantations in Albay. He told me that he has obtained more income from his coconut than from his abacá plantation. But, for the sake of argument, even admitting that the elimination of the excise tax would bring contentment to you, what reason should I have not to extend the necessary aid—if I could give it—to you, coconut planters? You all know that there are more coconut planters than sugar planters in the Philippines. But if I could help the sugar planters, why should I not also aid the coconut planters? I am not a native of Negros; I have no sugar plantation there; and I am under no moral obligation to the people of Negros, nor do I owe them a debt of gratitude. I am a native of Tayabas. I owe you, my countrymen who live here, a debt of gratitude. Why should I not extend to you any aid? I should like to explain this situation.

I have just overheard in a conversation here that I am a candidate for reëlection. It has become a persistent rumor, but personally I feel that I am through now with politics; hence nobody has the right to suppose that I am explaining these things to you to court your favor. That is not the motive. Whatever I am doing now is not for election purposes. Nobody can claim that I still need the gratitude of my people. I am telling you this fact as I want you to understand that I am not putting one over you. According to law, my term of office expires in 1941. So what I am doing now has no reference to politics, and much less to court the people’s favor, because I shall soon be out of my position.

Some people say that Tayabas has not received any benefit from the excise tax. But note the things being done today for this province. Where does the money being expended for all these projects come from? Certainly, it does not come from my pocket nor from the coffers of the Province of Tayabas, but from funds derived from the excise tax. That is the truth. You will soon have a road from San Narciso to Pitogo, which, perhaps, will be extended as far as Bondo. For this project we shall spend the money from the excise tax.

Assemblyman Lavides has requested the construction of the road connecting Padre Burgos with Malikbo. Although the railroad is already there, the road will still be constructed. In doing this for Tayabas. where will I get the money? From the excise tax. of course. Were it not for the refunds from the excise tax, your taxes would have been increased by 100 per cent or as much as 150 per cent, before we could have wide roads where automobiles can safely pass one another.

You, people from Infanta who ride in automobiles every hour of the day, when would you have thought of owning cars if you did not have these roads which were constructed with the money from the excise tax? In the past it took you a week or more to reach Manila. But at present, thanks to the excise tax, you now journey back and forth with ease and facility.

To my townmates from Baler, who also use the automobile in their trips, I ask this: Where does the money being spent for the construction of your wide roads come? Is it not from the excise tax? It is true that in the distribution of government funds. I do not give the welfare of my province any preference, for I am a man with shame. I do not do what others are doing, because my duty is to govern all provinces and not merely one. And in aiding my province while helping the others, I first let the other provinces have their funds, and afterwards I secure money for the welfare of Tayabas. [ Applause .]

There is an island in the Philippines which we can bestow upon our children and descendants. I am referring to Mindanao. Before I became President of the Philippines, people in Mindanao had never dared to leave the limits of their towns without constabulary escorts. This was particularly true during the American military regime when travelers were escorted by companies of armed soldiers in their trips to Dansalan and other points of Mindanao. Traveling in Lanao, Cotabato, and other Moro provinces took not only days to accomplish but also the lives of men who braved the dangers that lurked on the way, particularly the peril from the Moros and the dangers from the ravages of diseases.

When I visited Mindanao after my election to the presidency, I found that there were no roads from Lanao to Cotabato and from Cotabato to Davao. But it is very different now. On my last visit I rode in an automobile from Lanao to Cotabato, and from there to Davao. From the highways I traversed, I noticed that the former woodlands are now peopled by many of our countrymen who have built their houses and cleared the forests and converted them into rice fields. Mindanao is no longer the boundless forest that was ravaged by malaria, but the land of promise where people actually reap prosperous benefit. My question now is: Where do we get the appropriations for opening Mindanao? From the excise tax, of course.

I can really say that the Filipinos are a fortunate people. If the Congress of the United States had not devised the excise tax and provided for the return of the collections to us, many years perhaps would pass before we could develop Mindanao. I have the premonition that if Mindanao is not occupied and inhabited by Filipinos, aliens would colonize and develop it for us and eventually wrest it from our hands. But I have high hopes that the islands would be peopled by a sufficient number of Filipinos, so that, in the long run, it would become a patrimony of our children and their descendants. All this would be possible with the aid we get from the coconut oil excise tax.

We do not derive any benefit from the tax imposed on our sugar production since the collection, although it is said that it will be returned to us, has not been credited to the Philippines yet. On the other hand, the excise tax on coconut oil will continue to benefit us as long as it affords us something for expenditures. That is why I should like to ask you my province-mates, to tell me, after hearing me discourse on this subject, whether it would be just on your part to blame me for the imposition of the excise tax on coconut oil.

I will clarify what really occurred in this connection. From the beginning. I opposed the plan to tax our industries which Congress had conceived. I went to America and presented my opposition to the proposal before the President of the United States. I induced him to send a message to the Congress expressing the opposition of the Philippines. But, despite our joint opposition, the Congress approved the measure.

It is not true that Vice-President Osmeña did not help oppose the imposition of this tax. Do you think that Mr. Osmeña would do something other than what he had been bidden? The position of the Vice-President of the Commonwealth is entirely different from that which he held when he and Roxas composed the Osmeña-Roxas mission that worked in favor of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill. Mr. Osmeña has a different function now; he can not do anything other than what is bidden him.

Vice-President Osmeña as my representative in the United States, had worked for the repeal of the law; but as he later informed me, he could not do away with the excise tax; hence he did not press further his opposition. For my own part, I also did not go any further in opposing the measure, because I knew then that I could not do anything worthy. I preferred to keep silent, although I could have talked more about it in order to please you and make you believe that I really opposed the excise tax.

You should know that it is not the excise tax that has reduced the price of copra, but the present over-supply of copra in the world markets, while the buyers have not comparatively increased in number. This is also true in the case of other products. For instance, you have twenty hats to sell to only live buyers; consequently, they will offer a low price, for they find the supply much greater than the demand.

During the World War, the price of sugar soared to its highest peak. Java alone sold an unprecedented total of 4,000,000 tons of sugar to the warring countries that were not sugar-producing nations. The effect of this artificial business boom is now being felt, for due to the small demand for sugar which can be easily met by the oversupply, the price has become low. Hence, Java lost almost seven-eighths of her original production of 4,000,000 tons of sugar, because at present only one-half million tons of sugar have been allocated to her. So you can imagine how many people have lost their jobs in Java, while in the Philippines, thank God! this unfortunate situation has not occurred.

Although they say that we have an excise tax that we cannot do away with, yet you should consider the benefits we derive from our highways, which would not have been built were it not for the excise-tax money. Roads, as you know, not only help in increasing the price of your products, but also add a good deal of profit to the farmer. For example, you have copra to sell at P4.00; but if a good road is not accessible over which to transport your product to the market or warehouse, a big amount has to be reduced from your selling price to cover transportation expenses. Now that you have wide roads, you will have to spend only very little to bring your products to the market. So you should consider the benefits derived from good roads.

It is likewise true that we have established the Agricultural and Industrial Bank. This bank will grant loans to farmers at low rates of interest. In the past, you had paid the Hogar Filipino as much as 17 per cent for interest, because you. Tayabenses, had depended then on that mutual and loan building association. Later on you borrowed money from our banks at 12 per cent interest. Today, you can borrow money at a rate of interest as low as 5 per cent, and pay your loan within a long period.

I will now bare my feelings before you. I am really sorry to hear the rumors circulating here, not that I fear they would prejudice me or reduce the number of my votes, because I am not a candidate. Although my reelection is rumored to have been planned, yet it will no longer be of value to me, because I do not desire to be a chief magistrate again. I have not, however, taken to heart the rumors that I have heard around here. I feel so because I cannot prevent, you from loving me. And I am no longer a candidate. Yet the realization that I am loved by my countrymen is still important to me, and I should not like such affection to wane simply because of misleading imputations. This is the very reason why I am sacrificing much in serving the country. Of course. I have also gained by, and profited from, the high position you bestowed upon me—your love. I have been made extremely happy by the knowledge that you really love me, and I have no other desire than to make a proud bestowal of such public affection on my children, during the remaining days of my life. [ Applause. ] I have not regarded anything as glorious as your affection for me.

What I really feel most and which give me heartaches are the rumors coming from the citizens of my province that I am not working for their welfare, because I am only busy doing things for my own good. I have taken these rumors very badly.

I am informing you that it is not only Tayabas but also other provinces, as Misamis Oriental, Misamis Occidental. Bohol, Leyte, and Samar, which are dependent upon their coconut products. I have just come from my third visit to Bohol. In my second visit, I reached only as far as Tagbilaran, the provincial capital. My last visit enabled me to reach several municipalities in the interior. And I can proudly inform you that, although they had not seen me personally in the past, the children who welcomed me and whom I met on the streets, shouted my name: “President Quezon! President Quezon!” They knew me by name, and they were happy to see me in person. I understand that they are familiar with my name because they were told of it by their parents, who know the good things that I have done for my country. My fatigue vanished when I saw that they were really glad to see me. The fact indicates that despite the remoteness of those municipalities, the people there appraise the good things I have done while in the service of my country. Otherwise, I should not have heard such kind words and praises from them.

I am not at all surprised to hear shouts of “Mabuhay” from my colleagues in the party; but what really touches me and makes me very happy is hearing the voice of small children greeting me and shouting my name.

What I wish of you, if you could afford to do so, is to take stock of my deeds, which, although not very great, are nevertheless manifestations of my ardent desire to serve the nation. If I see in my province the same manifestations of love as those bestowed upon me in the other provinces I visited, then my heart will be more than gratified, because for me there could be no happiness greater than the knowledge that although I am loved by the people from other provinces, nevertheless the citizens of my province love me more! [ Prolonged applause and shouts of “Long live President Quezon.” ]

Source: Presidential Museum and Library