Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines At a tea party in Honor of Coconut Planters and Municipal Mayors

[ Delivered at Malacañan Palace, Manila, February 19, 1938 ]

THE EXCISE TAX ON COCONUT OIL, NATIONAL LANGUAGE, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE

—–

There is nothing more important for any people than to be conscious of their oneness as a nation; and as a people we will not be more conscious of it until we speak a common language.

A revolution started by the Government will always be peaceful being in fact an evolution, a rapid evolution. If we wait for this change in our national economic life to come from the masses, we will have a real revolution.

Social justice means treating every man and every class justly. And to treat them justly means to give each man or each class its due—that is social justice.

Some of my very dear friends are rich, others are poor. But as a class I love the poor better than the rich. The rich does not need my love; he has everything he wants. The poor needs my help, and it is by loving him first that I shall be able to help him.

He who governs with his heart and not with his mind, is liable to do injustice and also to make mistakes. We must govern with our mind; therefore, when I proclaim social justice I mean justice, not love, not generosity, nor charity, but plain justice.

The mayors of the Philippines are the eyes and the mouthpiece of the National Government.

—–

Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:

I am going to speak to the two delegations that are here—one composed of the representatives of the coconut industry and the other of municipal mayors; I will, however, speak to the representatives of the coconut industry first.

The Chairman tells me that you have passed a resolution asking the United States to do away with the coconut oil excise tax or, failing in that, to lift the injunction prohibiting the tax from being used directly or indirectly in the interest of the coconut industry. As already known to you, I was against the imposition of this tax on coconut oil coming from the Philippines. I opposed it and the President of the United States in a special message to Congress and through conferences with leading members of Congress, also made known his opposition to the proposed tax. Congress, however did not listen to the appeals of the President and imposed the tax just the same. This, in my opinion, is an indication of the impossibility of securing the abolition of the tax because I do not know of any influence in Congress greater than the influence of the President of the United States; and I seriously doubt that Congress, after failing to follow his recommendation on this subject, will proceed to repeal the tax.

I am willing, nevertheless, to support you in your request that the tax be abolished. I have not changed my attitude in this respect although I confess that I am not as positive today as I was before that the tax has done any harm to the industry, or that if it did, the harm was not as much as I had thought it to be, I say this because after the tax had been imposed the price of copra went up one time, is which indicates that the price of copra is not necessarily affected by the excise tax, and it may therefore go up be there a tax or not. As a matter of principle, however, and regardless of the effect that it may have on the price of’ copra, I am willing to cooperate with you and to support you in your petition that the excise tax on coconut oil be abolished, because I consider the tax not only contrary to, but also a violation of, the provisions of the Tydings-McDuffie Law.

Regarding the other matter, I am not willing to give my support to a petition that would permit the return of the tax collected from the coconut oil industry to the producers of copra. I am not willing to do that much less support a petition of the sugar producers that the excise tax be given only to themselves. The tax is being spent for the welfare of the whole country, which is as it should be; a tax, after all, should not be collected only to be given back to the people who paid it, for if that were the case, then it would be better not to collect the tax at all. But if what you want is to have the ban which prohibits our Government from using, directly or indirectly, any part of the coconut oil excise tax for the benefit of the copra industry lifted, then I have no objection to it. It really looks unfair that the people who pay the tax are the ones specifically deprived of the benefits that may be derived from the use of the money collected from the tax. I suppose that the purpose of Congress in inserting this provision is to prohibit us from giving the money to the producers of copra or, specifically, to the manufacturers of coconut oil. I do not believe that the members of Congress will have any objection if we produce as much copra as we may want. Congress does not concern itself with the copra industry; its opposition is directed towards the coconut oil industry because there is a general belief in America, which I believe to be wrong, that our coconut oil is competing with certain articles produced by the farmers in the United States. I do not believe that coconut oil competes with butter, but certain American interests think so, hence they want to put a clamp on the coconut oil industry in the Philippines. As I have said, they make no objection towards copra. You can send copra to the United States free of duty, but the minute you convert copra into oil, you will find them against you. Now, by doing away with coconut oil, I do not know if there are many other uses upon which our copra industry may thrive. All I know is, harm to the copra industry will result the minute they try to reduce the usefulness of the industry; so that ultimately it is the producer of copra who suffers from this opposition to the coconut oil industry. That is the reason why I am with you in your desire to have the tax abolished, or to have a part of it used for the promotion of the coconut industry in the Philippines, such as making researches leading to the discovery of new uses for the coconut that will revitalize our copra industry.

I want to say, however, that as long as the American-made law prohibits it, I will not recommend to the National Assembly any legislative measure appropriating a part of the excise tax to aid, directly or indirectly, the coconut industry. And should the Assembly appropriate any money for that purpose I would veto the bill because I do not want the Government of the Philippines to violate the condition under which the United States has so unselfishly returned the money to us. It is a principle of public and private morality that any nation or individual, under any and all circumstances, must follow the obligation involved in a contract; and that, when one receives a thing under an obligation to do or not to do something, one must honorably comply with his part of the obligation to give full validity to the contract. The most rudimentary principles of honesty, public and private, demand that we be true in everything we do. If we receive a sum of money and we know that that money has been given to us by Congress with the prohibition that we must not spend it directly or indirectly for a certain purpose, we can only follow one of two courses: either we refuse to accept the money so as not to comply with that condition, or we take the money and comply faithfully with the condition. For this reason I am determined that as long as the Government of the Philippines continues receiving that money and I am the President of the Philippines, that money will be spent only in accordance with the clear mandates of the law. I repeat, however, that I have no objection to having that prohibition done away with, and when that happens, I can promise you that I will recommend to the National Assembly measures whereby the coconut industry may be aided with the money coming from the coconut oil excise tax.

You know that my province produces coconut principally. I do not believe that any province in the Philippines, other than Tayabas, has been more seriously affected by the imposition of the coconut oil excise tax, because the Province of Tayabas depends mainly upon the coconut industry. One of the first provinces of the Philippines, it is a province which was classified as prosperous until some time ago. Today the Province of Tayabas is poor, and its people today are undergoing economic difficulties. There was a time when we were unable to hire laborers from the Province of Tayabas to work on road constructions. We had to hire workers from other provinces. Very few Tayabenses were willing to work on road constructions because the coconut industry supported them, gave them a comfortable livelihood. Today, however, I am certain that I can find a number of Tayabenses working on the roads in Tayabas. The Mayor of Mauban told me a little while ago that he does not have enough money with which to employ the men who want to work on the roads. Thus, because my own home province has been seriously affected, you can understand how I feel about the coconut industry, And I cannot do everything to help the people who, for thirty years, have voted for me and given me every job that I wanted; the very people who now suffer economically because of the peculiar condition under which the Philippines has been receiving the oil excise tax refund.

Now, let us make a summary of my position in this respect. I am willing to support you in your attempt to do away with the tax on coconut oil. I am willing to support you in your desire that the prohibition to use any part of this money, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of the coconut industry be lifted. But I have said that as long as the law exists, I will continue complying with the law honestly and strictly. I will not make any move to go around the prohibition so that you may get benefits from that money. No, I will not do that. It would be a violation of my oath as President of the Philippines; it would constitute a breach of our good faith; it would be an evidence of the lack of honesty on the part of the Filipino people. Rest assured, therefore, that as long as I am President, I will not violate my oath nor will I do anything that will discredit my people,

I hope the whole country will be benefitted by the program of road construction that has been launched by the Government. We are building roads everywhere, constructing national highways, and I hope that by so doing all industries in the Philippines will derive some benefits, financial or otherwise, from them. And for this national project, the Government today awaits the approval of the National Assembly, which alone has the power to appropriate the funds of the national treasury.

There was a time when the Philippine coconut industry was more important, incomparably so, than the sugar industry. More provinces and more people depended on this industry than on the sugar industry, and yet you have not made yourselves perfectly organized to cope with situations that may be detrimental to the coconut industry. Consider the sugar people—they are well organized, and when they start an agitation you think the whole world is going down. They have been organized for many years. The Province of Occidental Negros gave more trouble to the Government of the Philippines than all the provinces put together. [Laughter] No, I am not criticizing them. My best friends both political and personal, come from Occidental Negros also. The Assemblymen of Occidental Negros have always given me their unstinted support; the Speaker of the House is from Negros. He is an old friend of mine who was also my colleague in the Senate. I mention these facts not to criticize them but to blame you because you prefer to remain quiet, say nothing, and do nothing. [Laughter] But if you make just one-third of the noise that the people of Negros make, I have no doubt that you will make yourselves heard day and night.

It is perfectly right for you people to be organized. You will be able to exert your influence better not only here but also in the United States. You can present your grievances in the proper way, you can present them in public, and you will be immediately heard. What do you do in your respective towns? You simply talk among yourselves and say “ nalintikan na .” Although we understand that expression here, no one in the United States will understand it, much less know what you want, if you always talk that way. And I believe I need not do anything for fellows who are willing to remain passive.

Gentlemen, let me tell you this: Organize yourselves, study your problems and acquaint the peoples of America and the Philippines with a few plain facts; firstly, that the coconut industry, as one of the main industries in the Philippines, affects more people than those of the sugar industry; secondly, that our coconut oil is not really competing with any industry in the United States in such a way as to harm it. I repeat, you have to educate the American people on that. Another thing, I would not mind the imposition of a tax on coconut oil that is being used actually to produce butter. You can accept that for it would do you no harm since only a small amount of our coconut oil is used in the American butter industry. Or you can ask that coconut oil which is unfit for food requirements be taxed when used for other purposes. If the American farmers find out that they are not being hurt by our industry, I believe that they will not insist on having the tax imposed any further. In closing, let me reiterate that it is well for you to organize, to study your own problems at home, and to educate our Government and the Government of the United States, our people and the people of the United States on the fact that you are the victims of a great injustice.

Permit me to say a few words in English to the municipal mayors. Lately, I read some articles published in the Herald , a newspaper which, although not mine, is thought of as owned by me. The articles which were written by the members of the Herald staff attacked, directly or indirectly, the plan of having a national language for the Philippines. Despite their criticisms, however, I want to say to you that we need a national language.

A professor of history, he is also a dean, likewise wrote an article making light of this plan to have a national language for the Filipinos, adding that it would take us one hundred years to develop a common language. No national language, let me tell you, has been made in twenty-four hours. [Applause] Every language in Europe that ranks as a national language has taken centuries to develop. One thousand years ago, the people of England, for instance, or of France, Spain, or Germany, did not speak the same language because every region in the same country spoke a different dialect. Was the professor right, therefore, in saying that we should not attempt to have a common language because it would take three hundred years to have it? What is one hundred years in the life of a nation? There is nothing more important for any people than to be conscious of their oneness as a nation; and as a people we will not be more conscious of it until we speak a common language. Can you imagine anything more peculiar than this convention of Filipinos with all members being unable to speak a common native language? I cannot, at this moment, speak any language which will be understood by every man and woman present. There are some of you who understand Spanish very well, others who understand English better. Very few of you, I would hazard, understand and speak both English and Spanish. Not all of you speak the same Philippine language by which you may understand each other—a fact that we may consider ridiculous, if not humiliating. And because they think they speak-English well, some of our young citizens think that what they have studied would be lost if they were to speak in a common native tongue; hence, they would not want their people to have a national language unless it be English.

It will take the Filipinos long to speak English with mastery—perhaps one thousand years, not one hundred. That is why in the United States the Americans speak a kind of English which is different from the English that is spoken in England and, therefore, it must not surprise us if in the Philippines we speak an English of our own. That is the reason why we should have a common language. Our critics forget one tremendous difference between America and the Philippines—the founders of the American Republic were Englishmen. They spoke the real English then; of course, for some reason they did not keep up speaking the English that Englishmen spoke in England. The Americans have maintained, in a general way, the proper pronunciation of English words. Nobody can tell me that an Englishman is not well understood when he speaks because his accents are different from ours. Everybody here, however, understands the English as it is spoken by our bright men who have mastered English. But how many Filipinos can devote their life to the study of English as long as these fellows did? What is the maximum period that a Filipino boy or girl devotes to the study of English? Not more than six years, during which they also have to study other subjects. And who are teaching them English—the English that they are learning in the schools today? Are they the Filipino masters of English? No, they are the poor teachers who know very little English, who have come to pronounce English badly. And the English of their students, I suppose, will even be worse.

We are not going to keep that kind of English—the English that nobody will understand. Of course there will be exceptions—there will even be a large number of people who will speak English well. Perhaps all the members of the National Assembly will speak English, perhaps all the municipal mayors will speak it, too, and so will the governors, councilors, or all the employees of the Government. But they do not constitute our people. They will understand one another but not one of them will understand the people of the whole country nor can they be understood by the people of their own country. [Applause]

The statement that it will take a Filipino to learn Tagalog, or an Ilocano or a Visaya to learn Tagalog, as long as it will take him to learn English is silly, silly. In the old days, every man from the province who came to Manila to study learned Tagalog after one year. But not today, because those young fellows speak English all the time among themselves.

As you know, I have met His Majesty, the Emperor of Japan. The Emperor of Japan speaks English, but in my conference with him he never spoke to me in English; he spoke in this language. I spoke in English and it was translated to him, although he understood what I was saying. With him it was a national pride not to talk to me except in his own national language. Certainly, I would be in favor of making Spanish, or English, or any other language, our national language, if we could learn it as easily as we could learn one of the native dialects. The important thing is not to have this language or that language, but to have one language. It is easier for the Filipinos to have one language by using one of our languages or by adopting either English or Spanish. In fact, it would be easier for the Filipinos to learn Spanish than English and make it the common language, because Spanish is read and pronounced like Tagalog, like Visaya or like Ilocano. English is not so and, when you get these poor teachers who have not mastered English, each one pronounces each word differently and the poor barrio students all over the Philippines will be speaking the language as they heard it spoken by their teachers. It will not be so in Spanish because the pronunciation, the accent, is the same for every word.

I am in favor, however, of continuing the teaching of English. I want to keep men like Pacis, Lopez, and Mangahas—they are English scholars. As a matter of fact, we should continue teaching English in the schools. English is an important language to know. It is the universal language of commerce today. But do not attempt the impossible, do not attempt to make it the national language of the Philippines because it will never be. I do not care how long it will take us to have a national language. I do not care even if we should have to wait for one hundred years; English, however, will never be our national tongue. It can only be if we bring over 100,000 American teachers to teach in the elementary schools. But where is the money to bring 100,000 American teachers over? If you try to bring them here, I am sure the first fellows who will protest will be Pacis and Lopez. [Laughter and applause]

Of course, I do not expect all mayors to understand my Tagalog and I do not want anybody to fight aggressively for the Tagalog Language because it is not good to create an issue on the question of choosing a national tongue. But there ought not be any opposition toward creating a national language. You may ask, why should I care so much about that? I am already old, and very soon I shall be gone. I have been elected without the help of a single national language. For political purposes, I do not care what is spoken in the Philippines. But I have seen how terrible it is to continue under this situation. It is also humiliating. Everytime I go to the Visayan provinces to deliver speeches there, I always find an interpreter to be necessary. You may say perhaps that the remedy is to require every candidate for President to speak all the languages and dialects in the Philippines. While I have no objection to that, still it will not answer the question, because while that puts the President in contact with the people, yet it does not place all the citizens in contact with one another. The important thing is to have our people be directly in contact with themselves through a single language. It will take time, of course, before we could have a language of our own; but it would be all right even if it takes one hundred years to do it; and in having it, we should not be ashamed of the fact that we added some English or Spanish words to it. It is all right. Every language has been formed after many years, and every language has been formed by borrowing from other languages. Why should we find any objection to that?

What I am going to relate is a true story. I was sick in Baguio once, many years ago. I had a nurse; and, by the way, the nurses are supposed to be educated or used to be. [Laughter] They are now required to finish high school; in those days they were only required to pass the intermediate grades. One day, while I was resting in bed, the nurse came to me and said, “Mr. President, the press.” I said, “Tell the press to go to hell!” I was sick, I did not want to see anybody. The nurse went out and I heard her say, “The President says you go to hell.” [Laughter] Did you know, who the fellow was? I found out later that he was a priest. [Laughter] He was the Rector of Sto. Tomas University. [Laughter] It was a mistake due to bad pronunciation of an acquired language.

To the mayors I want to tell this: the Government is now trying to make what might be termed a social revolution. I call it social revolution because we are attempting to change some established practices in our economic life. It is better that this social revolution be started by the Government, because a revolution started by the Government will always be peaceful being in fact an evolution, a rapid evolution. If we wait for this change in our national economic life to come from the masses, we will have a real revolution.

The mayors are the officials of the Government whose main duty is to understand and then carry out our present policy of social justice. To understand it better, social justice does not mean favoring the poor whether he is right or wrong and prosecuting the rich be he also right or wrong. Social justice means treating every man and every class justly. And to treat them justly means to give each man or each class its due—that is social justice. The other day, I told the representatives of labor something which I want to repeat to you because I never say one thing to one group and another thing to a different group. I take it that you are the representative of landowners, men who have the means. Gentlemen, my heart is with the poor, entirely with the poor. You can never divide your heart unless you are polygamous [Laughter]; even in polygamy, however, love is shown in varying degrees and you give your whole love to one for whom you have the most affection. Well, my heart is with the poor. It is not with the rich. I have friends, of course, among the rich. Ramon Soriano is rich and he is also my best friend. That is a different matter, however, for I am speaking of the social classes now. Some of my very dear friends are rich, others are poor. But as a class I love the poor better than the rich. The rich does not need my love [Laughter and applause]; he has everything he wants. The poor needs my help, and it is by loving him first that I shall be able to help him.

When it comes to giving justice I do not allow my heart to sway me into it. I do it with my mind because it is only the mind that can impartially measure the merits of each side. He who governs with his heart and not with his mind, is liable to do injustice and also to make mistakes. We must govern with our mind; therefore, when I proclaim social justice I mean justice, not love, not generosity, nor charity, but plain justice. I am not asking the rich to give charity to the poor. I am asking them to do justice to the poor, while I want the poor to recognize the rights of the rich. Today, however, we must do a lot for the poor because everybody knows that the poor people in the Philippines are not treated rightly. That is why I frequently speak about it, especially because some of our officials are always ready to serve a rich man when they meet him, while a poor fellow is not even given their attention.

Town mayors, I want you to treat the poor as you would treat the rich. When you go to the barrios, show the men of the barrios that as head of the town you are interested in their welfare and willing to help them. Make them understand, however, that there are things which the Government cannot do for lack of the necessary means.

( The President then continued in Tagalog, telling them that for the purpose of gaining votes they should not make promises which the Government or the candidates themselves cannot fulfill.)

The mayors of the Philippines are the eyes and the mouthpiece of the National Government. You are my eyes to see if abuses are committed, and you must go after those who commit abuses. You are my mouthpiece to tell the people that we are anxious to help them, to improve their lot, while at the same time we want them to comply with their duties as citizens. You must tell them frankly and clearly that this Government wants to be just, wants to be helpful, wants to do the best it can in the interest of our people. But remind them also of their duties as citizens. To do this you must go to the barrios, talk to the people and make your councilors and barrio lieutenants visit their districts.

We are lucky that we have several millions which we can use to further the cause of social justice. I wish I could give the money to my province which has a coconut industry and also to the other coconut-producing provinces. But I cannot do it. Nevertheless, you must realize that in this attempt of ours to change the economic life of our people, it is your duty to carry that message to the barrios. It is your duty to tell your friends, your relatives, most of whom I suppose are the well-to-do in each town, to treat the poor justly. Let us bring about this objective, which is so dear to my heart, of improving the living conditions of our people through the cooperation of those who have the means with those who have not,

I thank you.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library