

Art is at its best in a background of simplicity.

I come from a poor family and I like modesty and, really, the lure of power or of fame is nothing compared to the lure of friendship.

A life led without achievement is worthless, and only that life is livable that is dedicated to the achievement of a noble aim.

No Filipino can feel less than the deepest gratitude to the American people, and every American should be proud of the achievement of America in the Philippines.



Your Honor, Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen:

Not even in my native tongue can I adequately express my emotions today. I am happy that this affair is as simple as it is. I prefer this to an elaborate affair, for here I am with art and art is at its best in a background of simplicity. I am with the stars who live art, and I can ask for nothing more. We who must deal with the realities of a workaday world know that reality is not always pleasant. And today I am in the land of Make-Believe and it is indeed an oasis in the desert of a public man’s life.

Really, Mr. Toastmaster, I prefer this informal luncheon, where I am surrounded by the stars of Moviedom, to a big banquet, with all the big “shots” of California, as you wanted to make it. I come from a poor family and I like modesty and, really, the lure of power or of fame is nothing compared to the lure of friendship, and that friendship I know I have among you who are here today.

You and I may be working in different spheres of human life, yet you and I are working toward the same goal. A life led without achievement is worthless, and only that life is liable that is dedicated to the achievement of a noble aim. We want to die leaving something behind us so that those who may come after may think of us kindly. That life which ends with death only is a life of frustration and futility, and that is not the life of the artist nor of the public man.

I thank you, Your Honor, for your kind words and for your goodwill and friendship for my people. I thank your city and your country also. Your country has done a great work in the Philippines and we are grateful for it. No Filipino can feel less than the deepest gratitude to the American people, and every American should be proud of the achievement of America in the Philippines.

We have linked with California since time immemorial. We were once governed by Spain through Mexico, and the royal edicts were transmitted through the viceroy in Acapulco. Soon we shall be independent. After ten years of the Commonwealth, the Philippine Republic will be established. That does not mean the end of our relationship. These two nations will be linked together by a closer and more enduring friendship: When the American flag is hauled down from the Philippines to give way to the Filipino flag, that same instant the Stars and Stripes will be more truly enshrined in the Filipino Heart.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library