Speech of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon President of the Philippines On government policies and relation between the National Government and the provinces

[Delivered at the Malacañan Palace, Manila, February 14, 1938]

Mr. Secretary, Gentlemen:

This is not going to be a formal speech. I have not prepared any speech, but this is going to be a heart-to-heart talk with you. In the first place, I want to welcome the newly-elected as well as the reelected governors and the mayors of their respective cities who have been appointed by me, and to reiterate the sentiments which I had expressed in my telegram which you received, Mr. Secretary. (The Secretary of the Interior: “I received it, Mr. President.”)

There are a few questions that I want to touch upon this morning. The first refers to the relation of the provinces with the National Government. Under the Constitution and under the existing laws, we have a government in the Philippines which places the ultimate responsibility for the execution of the laws upon the Chief Executive of the nation, and in order that the Chief Executive may discharge this duty of supervision and control over all executive departments of the Government, provincial and municipal governments, and all city governments. In the performance of my duties as head of the National Government, the department secretaries are vested with powers and responsibilities to manage the different departments of the Government subject to my supervision and control.

As the head of the National Government, my duties with reference to the provinces and municipalities are performed through the Department of the Interior, the provincial and municipal governments; particularly, by the provincial governors, the city mayors and the municipal mayors. It is very important, therefore, that the provincial governors, the city mayors, and the municipal mayors should be informed of the general policies of this Administration as would affect their respective provinces and municipalities.

The first duty of the Government is, of course, the maintenance of public peace and order. The actual function of maintaining peace and public order fell formerly upon the Constabulary, and now upon the State Police which has been organized recently. Provinces and municipalities, which are created by a set of laws, are not affected by the law creating the State Police. In this respect I am going to say that the provincial governors in their respective provinces, the municipal mayors in their municipalities, the city mayors in their respective cities, are duty-bound to maintain peace and order. From the time the National Assembly enacted the law creating the State Police, there has arisen a situation which I think demands further consideration. I have not had the time to study closely the organization of the State Police nor have I been able to give close consideration to the rules and regulations that have been issued with my approval by the Department of the Interior, with reference to the State Police. But I feel that some kind of revision ought to be made of either the rules and regulations or the law creating the State Police itself. You have a very fine opportunity to discuss this question during your convention. It is one matter which I want you to consider and discuss carefully. Devote most of your attention to this question for it directly affects the provinces and municipalities.

I desire a frank and honest discussion of the relationship of the provincial governors with the police force in their respective provinces, and of the city mayors and the municipal mayors with the police force in their respective cities and municipalities. I want you to discuss this question as if l had not recommended the enactment of that law to the National Assembly. Don’t feel that just because the law has been enacted upon my recommendation, you can not express your opinion against it. If you are against the law, don’t feel that I am against you; nor should you feel that, because the Secretary of the Interior has issued the rules and regulations which have been approved by me, you may not discuss those rules and regulations without incurring the displeasure of the President.

Gentlemen, there is nothing in this question that involves confidence on your part, or on the part of either the President or the Secretary of the Interior. There is an idea which is quite general among us: that if you express an opinion contrary to those of your superiors, you go against them. The idea is nonsensical. I want you to feel free in expressing your opinions. Now, don’t be afraid to express them; but don’t criticize me. It is not right to lambast me. And as President of the Nation I might suspend you. Now is the time for the provincial governors to express their opinions but not the opportunity to stand up and attack the President. / Laughter / If you attack me, I will suspend you. You can express your opinion freely on the policies of the Government, either national or provincial, affecting your respective provinces. You can say you are not in accord with our policies. But I don’t attribute our mistakes to bad faith. We all make mistakes. It is not humiliating to own our mistakes and it is a great help to the administration if you should call my attention to those mistakes. It is one thing to express your opinion freely, whether or not you agree with me or with the Secretary of the Interior; it is another thing to start saying that we are dictators or something else. I welcome the first; but I won’t tolerate the second, which is demagoguery.

You have duties to your constituents and to your province to perform. I want you to remember this, too—that while you have the right to discuss public questions and to express your opinion freely, it is your duty to abide by a decision that has been made by a lawful authority and, particularly, by the President on matters which are within his province to decide. You can ask me or you may tell me that you do not agree with my acts. You can say, “Mr. President, I think you are mistaken.” But do so in good faith.

When a decision has been made on it, a question should be considered settled. For if I decide a question, I have the legal authorities behind me. And if a governor does not execute my decision, I will remove him. Under the Constitution, the final responsibility rests upon me; therefore, I ought to be the final authority. But never feel afraid nor be embarrassed to write the Secretary of the Interior or me whenever you think we are doing something that is not right. Don’t have any hesitation about writing; write. You have a fine opportunity to express your opinion that some change be made in the law creating the State Police; or that some of the rules and regulations issued in accordance therewith ought to be repealed or amended.

There are two things I want you to bear in mind. First, I am not willing to permit the appointment of a policeman if he does not have the necessary and proper qualifications. Policemen are forbidden from playing politics. Once a policeman enters the Government service, he can be certain that he will retain his position as long as he complies with his duties. You may discuss the question of police appointments. I have not made up my mind about the matter. I have settled my mind, however, on the question of who shall finally determine whether a policeman is to be separated or not. I do not want the municipal government to exercise this final authority. It must be exercised by the National Government because it is a right guaranteed under the Civil Service. I must have a very satisfactory evidence before any removal should be made in the police force; and that evidence must be coursed through the Secretary of the Interior who is the official charged with the supervision of provincial governments. There will be cases, in fact, there is going to be one right now, where I will act directly by either suspending or removing a police officer from the service without waiting for the opinion of either the governor or the municipal mayor or of even the Secretary of the Interior. If I receive a complaint against an act committed by a chief of police or even by a policeman, I shall order an investigation; when I am satisfied that the crime committed warrants drastic action, I shall not waste my time going through the red tape of sending the papers to the Secretary of the Interior or to the governor of a province. I am not a hypocrite. I will not wait for the recommendation of either the Secretary of the Interior or the provincial governor before acting on it.

I shall now refer to the case of the chief of police of Janiuay. I have dictated a letter ordering his removal from office. I am also ordering the removal of that fellow, Adelantar, one of the secret service men of Iloilo. Outside of these cases where I personally take direct action, I won’t do any interfering at all. I want you to know I have the right to take direct action in spite of the regular procedure followed by the Administration. When the President feels he should take personal action, he does so because he possesses that right. It is also his responsibility.

In the case of that fellow in Iloilo, the manner in which the offenses have been committed and the occasions which gave rise to the offenses committed, impose upon me the duty of taking immediate action. It took place in connection with the strike. The strike was reported in the papers. The strike may or may not have had serious consequences, but this is the time for me to clearly demonstrate what I consider to be the duty of the Government to exercise its powers on matters of strikes. That is the reason why I took direct action on those two cases. I have taken direct action in the case of the fiscal of Iloilo. I have ordered his resignation. I have also dismissed the acting fiscal from office.

The report of the acting fiscal denied the use of handcuffs. The fiscal knew the report was false. I ought to have removed him instead of merely asking him to resign because he was an accomplice to the falsehood. I have ordered his resignation. I was a little lenient when I permitted him to resign; I should have dismissed him.

I have been in politics all my life. No man can know the exigencies of politics better than I do; and no man can sympathize better with these exigencies under pressure of politics than I. But there are certain things that I will never tolerate (because they can not be tolerated under any circumstances) — and one of them is abuse of power. When any official of the Government abuses the power vested in him, I shall deal with him rigidly. I may close my eyes on little favors that are made here and there when they do not constitute an illegal act. But every time an abuse of power is committed by anybody, and I do not care who he may be, I am going to deal with him drastically.

Any and every abuse of power committed by every official of the Government, no matter whether he is the lowest policeman or the lowest teniente del barrio, is always regarded by our people, especially by the masses, as an evidence that the entire Government is abusive. They will say the whole Government is corrupt and is abusing its power by maltreating the people when they find out that I do not take definite and drastic action when a misconduct is committed somewhere. I will not tolerate that. So, please remember, if you have some political favors to recognize you may dispense them provided they are not against the law. I will have nothing against you if you or your subordinates will not abuse your authority; but if any of your subordinates abuses his authority, do not pay any attention on whether under the rules and regulations it is the Secretary of the Interior or the President who has to act. When you cannot act directly even in the case of engineers, superintendents of schools, and Constabulary commanders who are under your jurisdiction any time they do something that should not be tolerated, bring it to my attention through the Secretary of the Interior who is your chief; or, when I am visiting the provinces, tell me promptly and I will handle those fellows. One thing I want every governor to particularly bear in mind: I am for a fair and just government — a government that respects the law and makes everybody respect and comply with it. It is on this assumption that I am going to give you, gentlemen, through the Department of the Interior, or through my office directly, the support and cooperation you need in your administration. As long as you carry this injunction to the letter you can rest assured that we are going to support you.

Now as to the police. Related to this matter is the case of the Chief of Police of Janiuay, of which I have already spoken. The question of social justice is very much advertised. Let us have a very clear understanding of its meaning. Social justice does not mean favoring the poor or favoring labor against anybody regardless of whether he is right or not. Social justice does not mean dispossessing the rich of his lawful property and distributing that property among the unemployed. Social justice, in other words, does not mean communism. Social justice means exactly that — social justice. Society is composed of different elements. If you divide it, if you consider it from the standpoint of those who invest money and those who work either with their brains or with their hands, you divide it into capital and labor. If you consider society from the standpoint of what constitutes it, you divide it into men and women. If you consider it from the point of view of their different interests in life, it may be divided into the wise and the ignorant and into the intelligent and the uneducated, and so on. But social justice involves all; it means justice for every constituent element in the community. Hence, when a question is before us, we must not consider whether that question involves this class of society or that class, or whether it involves this individual or that individual; for every question submitted to us we should consider not only the much advertised side of justice, regardless of who would be affected by our decision, but also the side of true justice.

Of course, today, when you speak of social justice, you emphasize the need of giving better treatment to labor. Why? Because in the present state of our society in the Philippines, labor is not receiving its due. That is why I am interested in securing legislation that will improve the living conditions of laborers; that is why I am making speeches advising the people to remember that the right to property has its limitations–the limitations imposed by the welfare of the community where one lives. Property is secondary to the right to live. Whenever there is conflict between the right to property and the right to live, the latter should prevail.

In the case of strikes, provincial governors should study the existing relations between particular industries and labor in their respective provinces. As a general proposition it is better to have all disagreements between labor and capital settled amicably or peacefully by submitting them to the Court of Industrial Relations. Our laws, however, do not cover certain cases of dispute. There is no prohibition as far as I know against strikes, and the Government must be impartial once laborers declare a strike against an industry or, rather, against a factory or an establishment which is not one of those affecting public interest. The governors must be on the alert in case of necessity so that the armed forces of the Government may intervene to maintain peace and order. But we should not start mobilizing either the Army or the police forces simply because there is a strike somewhere, especially when the strike affects a particular industry that does not partake of the nature of a public service. If the Government–whether national, provincial, or municipal–immediately mobilizes its forces and sends them to the central, if it is a central, or to a sugar factory, that gives the impression of using force in favor of the owners of the central or sugar factory. There is one reason for doing this. The leader of the strikers should be notified at once that they must not use violence because they will be held accountable by the Government, which may use force, if they violate the law.

But never interfere, never use the police force. Do not ask the Constabulary to go immediately where a strike has taken place for either side will say that you are favoring one of them. Do not do that. You have no more right to do that than you have to send an armed force to a meeting, which has been authorized by the competent authority, and surround the meeting with a large number of Constabulary soldiers or policemen. You may send some policemen to the meeting to hear what they are saying or to see if they are making trouble or making seditious speeches or to see what they are doing in case of some danger of personal attack. But never use the forces of the Government. However, be ready the minute violence arises.

Now, in the case of strikes against public utilities, you must try to get the leaders to submit the case to the Court of Industrial Relations. Tell them that if the strike is going to cause harm to the community or to the public, the Government will intervene to project the public’s interest. In these cases the interest of the public is paramount; until the question at issue is settled and it is properly determined who is right or who is wrong, the interest of the public must be protected.

Another question is the public works. I have recommended to the National Assembly the adoption of a fixed policy as regards the question of roads. Some roads are to be declared national roads; others are to be declared local roads. The phrase “local roads” refers to provincial roads as well as to municipal roads. The national roads will be constructed and maintained by the National Government. The National Government may, as far as its finances may permit, help the provinces in the construction of all provincial, municipal, or barrio roads; but it will not help the provinces in the maintenance of these roads. You cannot count upon the Government for more appropriations than what you are receiving now for the maintenance of these roads. I think there is a portion of the gasoline tax that goes to the provinces. You can count upon this fund, but beyond it you have to find the means to maintain these roads. I am considering a recommendation to the National Assembly which would authorize the provincial governments and the municipalities to create taxes and do away with certain limitations on the powers granted to the provincial and municipal governments in this respect. It is absurd to expect the provinces and the municipalities to support and maintain certain services and yet not give them the right to impose taxes.

With reference to schools, I shall urge the National Assembly to enact a law which would make the National Government adopt a fixed policy, that of building and supporting primary schools exclusively. The intermediate schools may be supported by the municipalities and the secondary schools, if academic, should be supported by the students or their families. The provincial government may provide for a limited number of scholarships, so that if among the poor people who attend the primary and intermediate schools, there should appear a poor talented student he would be enabled to pursue an academic education.

But the high schools ought to be supported, as a general proposition, by parents who want their children to become doctors, lawyers, and so on. The secondary schools giving vocational instruction ought to be supported by the provinces which are now supporting academic high schools. We have not as yet been able to consider how far the National Government can help the provinces in this respect. We will study this matter. But I want you, gentlemen, to understand that the question of vocational education is the reason why I am going to recommend that the Assembly pass a law which would define the educational policy of the Government. Under the Constitution it is our duty to give every child of school age at least a primary education. It has been found that the municipalities can do this, although we have adopted a half-hazard way of helping them. We are going to make the National Assembly responsible for all these primary schools in view of the fact that this year we do not have as yet sufficient buildings. We are not going to make primary instruction compulsory this year. But we are going to have schools for all children who seek admission. And every child who seeks admission into the schools this year is to be compelled to continue his studies until he finishes the primary grades, and unless his parents undertake to accept the responsibility of sending him to school, we will not admit him. In two years we expect to complete construction of all schools necessary to admit all children of school age. Later we will have universal compulsory instruction.

This year the National Assembly appropriated P5,000,000 for schools. In 1939 I expect the National Assembly to appropriate more than P13,000,000 for the construction of schools; if that is not enough, in 1940 we will appropriate all the money necessary to have schools everywhere.

I am in favor of school buildings made of concrete. Two years ago I was not. I wanted school buildings made of wood because it was necessary to have as many schools as possible, and to me the question of permanency of the building was secondary to the question of admitting as many children as we could possibly admit. But now it is different. We have the money to build these schools. The money we are receiving does not come from the taxes collected here but from the taxes of the Philippine Government collected in the United States. These tax refunds are, not .going to last forever. As soon as we become independent they will cease to come; America, however, will continue to collect these taxes, but the taxes they collect will go into the Treasury of the United States. If we only build them of wood, these schools ten years, fifteen years from now, will all be destroyed and the Government of the Philippines by that time will not, I think, be able to build again similar schools. So, while we have the money let us build permanent buildings so that in the future the future the responsibility of the Government will only be to maintain those schools and not to build new ones. My idea, therefore, is to have concrete buildings.

Well, now what else? I have nothing more to say that I can think of. I want to close, however, by saying this: let us have perfect cooperation between the provincial governments and the National Government, for only in that way can you and I be certain of success. You must keep careful watch so that abuses will not be committed in your respective provinces; when they are committed they should be corrected. The tenientes del barrio should visit their respective barrios and so should the municipal mayors. If you, gentlemen, can do it you should also visit the barrios. That is one way by which you can find out what is happening to the people in the barrios. I am not asking too much of you when I ask you to visit each barrio. I had been a governor myself. When I was governor there were no automobiles in the Philippines yet, and in the Province of Tayabas there was only one road on which I could travel by carromata. In order to visit the barrios of my province I had to go on horseback. I visited every barrio in the Province of Tayabas.

Now, gentlemen, you can make your trips by car and the worst trips by horse. So, I have the right to expect you to visit your barrios. It is to the barrio where the Government must go first. It is to the people in the barrios that you, gentlemen, must talk; tell the people that the purpose of this Government is to do justice by them. It is to those people that you must give information as to what the Government is doing.

I want to tell you right now, in the presence of the Secretary of the Interior, that I do not care a bit about his National Information Board. If the provincial governors, the municipal mayors, and the municipal councilors would take time to inform the people of what the Government is doing and what we want to do for them, we could close the National Information Board. But you are the ones who must do it.

Fortunately, I do not think there is any governor who belongs to the opposition party. And as Chief of the Government, and as titular head of the party although I am not its President, I have the right to ask you to do this. But if there is anybody not belonging to the majority party, I will make him do it anyway; if he refuses, I will get rid of him. This is a duty of all officials. Go to the barrios, go to the municipalities. Tell them of the Government’s activities but do not promise them heaven. Do not lead them to believe that they can continue having a fine government with schools and roads without paying taxes. The old style of making speeches promising all kinds of public improvements and promising all kinds of nonpayment of taxes, must be stopped. I do not want the provinces to ask for the condonation of land taxes, and I do not want the Assembly to approve legislation which will condone land taxes. If you think it is necessary to revise your assessment, do so with fairness and justice. But never tell the people they will no longer pay taxes.

If the Assembly should pass such laws, I would veto them. It is necessary to make every citizen feel he is part of the Government, and the best way to make him feel it is by making him contribute something, no matter how small. We are not going to interfere with the exercise of your powers as long as you act within the law and attend to the business of your province. I had been a provincial governor. I was also a councilor once, and I know how a provincial governor feels when he is treated without due consideration by the authorities in Manila. We will give you the support you deserve in the exercise of your rights and prerogatives as provincial governors until such time as you may abuse these rights and prerogatives, in which case it is our duty to intervene. And please do not ask me for things you know I can’t do. Save me from the embarrassment of having to tell you no. Ask me only for things which you know I can do.

The other day, while I was visiting one of the municipalities of my province, one of the officials asked me to secure an appropriation with which to build their municipal building. I asked him, “ Naloloko ka ba, chico ?” (Are you getting foolish, my friend?) I will veto any appropriation for municipal buildings. Let me tell you what I am willing to do. They can use the money for schools, for barrio roads, for good town streets. They can spend the money for water, not gas. I am going to have the law so amended that the National Government can appropriate more for the construction of markets. You can use the money for many things helpful to the municipality, but never for municipal buildings. A municipality having no municipal building ought to disappear as a municipality. This is my answer to that request. Certainly, if the people of the municipality do not have enough civic spirit to build their own municipal building, they must be content to live in a barrio. Do not let them ask for this appropriation for I will veto it. The people of that municipality ought to be ashamed for having asked it. They asked me a thing I could not give.

I think that is enough. I am very happy to have met you.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library