SPEECH

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR AND NATIONAL DEFENSE

[Delivered at the Banquet of the Military Order of the Carabao, at the Willard Hotel, Washington, D. C, February 27, 1937.]

Gentlemen, honored guests (I was going to say but I will say) Carabaos: Tonight I am back in the old days of my youth [ applause ]; the reminiscences of the past come pouring into my mind and I can hardly express my feelings. I remember the days when my great ambition was to kill an American soldier, and my constant fear was to be killed by an American soldier. It is very hard for me to say now which of the two emotions was the stronger. I only remember that the second emotion kept me running through the mountains, and in thus running I had very little opportunity of satisfying the first one.

I have accepted the investigation to address you not only because I deemed it a great honor to be your guest on an occasion such as this, but also because I wanted to take advantage of this opportunity to know you and for you to know me.

Now, gentlemen, I am addressing soldiers, as I understand, and I suppose you will appreciate a talk from a soldier. I am not going to camouflage tonight. I know that many of those who took part in the war—it was not war, it was just a little game—have felt that I was the worst enemy of the Americans. Many of them have spoken of me in language that is hardly proper to print, but to my satisfaction I can say that those who have thus spoken of me were men who had not the occasion to meet me, or if they had, they had only a glimpse of me. It is my pride and my satisfaction that among the best friends I have in this world I count men who have fought me during the war and who were members, some of them today high officers and generals, of the United States.

So I am just vain enough to believe that those who have not met me before will be my friends after they hear me. But let me tell you, gentlemen, that what I am going to say is true, and because I believe that you do not know that it is true I am prepared to educate you on a subject which you ought to know better than anyone, and I dare say you are the ones who least know about it. You know that the greatest war ever fought by the United States Army was the war in the Philippines—the Spanish-American War, and perhaps it is the one war which hardly will find a page and space in the history of the United States Army because there were no glorious fights, for as I said before that was no war. You met, in the war against Spain, an army who had old, hardly useful, weapons; and when you met the poor Philippine Army, the Filipinos—what did they have? They only had one thing,—the courage to face you and to die a few minutes after they had faced you.

Of such a war as that, nothing can be said, and yet if you could see the effects of that war in terms of human liberty that was the greatest war ever fought in any corner of the earth.

I do not wish to belittle what has been done by the United States Army in the World War. That was a war which covered with glory the American soldier; it was a war which gave this country an opportunity to show her determination, a war that gave you men a chance to prove that American patriotism is equal, if not superior, to that of any citizen of any country. But gentlemen, you fought that war to end war. Can you tell me how much of that objective has been accomplished? How much? Of the noble ideas then proclaimed as the objective of that war, a war for democracy, for people to govern themselves, a war that was to free humanity from the awful effect of another war—how much of that has been accomplished?

Well, I am not going to answer that question because every one of you can answer it. I can only say, as you all know, that there is greater fear today that we may face a worse war, and as for democracy there is hardly any country now where democracy exists. That war brought dictatorships, exercised either by individuals or groups. It almost destroyed the basis of civilization which we know and which had taken thousands and thousands of years to reach the point which existed prior to 1914. That is one picture of a war which cost you so much in lives and in treasure.

Now, look at the other picture, the picture of the Spanish-American War. You had much less to arouse the Amer­ican people with to fight that war. It could, I take it, be Placed in one basket. There were not so many promises made; you simply said that you fought that war, not for your own aggrandizement, not because of the desire on your part to add to your territory, not because you wanted to conquer subject peoples—you said you fought that war m the interest of human freedom and liberty. And now those of you who took part in that war and Who are still alive, those who are now gone but who from Heaven can see what is going on on this earth, and all of you know that that was what you said was the objective and the result of that war has demonstrated it to be the objective.

You fought to free Cuba, to free the Filipinos, to save the world. The Declaration of Independence gave birth to this nation. I know that many of those who fought in that war, after finding out that America was really going to give up the Philippines, felt that they had fought in vain, that they had wasted their youth going through the jungles of the Philippine Islands as you have seen in that picture tonight. Some contracted malaria. Some did not realize that there are things in life that are of more immense value than any earthly possessions.

Rome conquered almost the whole world, but Rome did not keep the countries which it had conquered. Rome, in fact, disappeared herself. What survived? The institutions of Rome. We are still under the influence of Roman culture and civilization—the moral values. They still re main in the hearts of men. Those are what will remain of what you have done in the Philippines. Twenty, thirty, forty or a hundred centuries from now the Americans will be remembered in the Philippines not as her conquerors, but for their work in the culture, the ideals, and the well-being of the people.

Here is what I am going to tell you—what a few of you know: you know the soldier; his duty is to obey commands—to do what he has been told to do and taught to do. The credit is taken not by him for what he has accomplished, but by those who have given the instructions or the orders to him to do what he had done, and consequently when yon read articles or books written about Americans in the Philippines very little is said about what the soldier did.

I am going to tell you what the American soldier did in the Philippines. I already told you the American soldier made my life miserable, but that is beside the point, although as a matter of fact he made me spend nights without sleep and made me hide in the forest days and nights without food. That is no joke; it is true. After that war he kept me in jail for six months, and after six months in jail I went to another jail, a hospital, for two years. But let us lay that aside.

This is what the American soldier did. While he was shooting Filipinos with his right hand, with the left hand he was teaching the boys the English language and giving them primary instruction. What army has ever done that? While he was complying with his duty to establish law and order, he was at the same time teaching the citizens of tomorrow—What? He was teaching them what would make them good citizens, taking away from himself the fruit of his victory if the fruit of his victory was conquest, for while he was teaching the children he must have known that intelligent educated men would not long remain a conquered people. That is what the American soldier did in the Philippines.

The system of education in the Philippine Islands is what was established during General MacArthur’s time [ applause ] ; not this MacArthur here—his father.

You will be suprised, but while the army was still in full command, while still fighting, there were issued orders giving the Filipinos the right of habeas corpus , a right which the Filipinos never had in three centuries of Spanish rule. So there, it was the United States Army in the Philippines that gave the Filipinos the right of habeas corpus , a right which we later on used to protect the rights of Filipinos against acts of the military authorities.

The code of criminal procedure in the Philippines today is much more liberal and advanced than what we ever had under the Spanish inquisition. One of the best institutions that we have in the Philippines is the Constabulary established by army officers, like General Rivers, General Bandholtz, and General Harbord.

I will tell you more. After I was freed from my prison, my jailers, and my malaria, the whole thing left not a very good taste in my mouth, as you may well understand and I had in my heart a real hatred for Americans I did not want to learn English; when some one asked me if I spoke English I said “No!” and that I did not want to learn it. Up to that time I had not met any of the United States Army officer or soldiers. I then met General Bandholtz in charge of the Constabulary which was in Tayabas, and I began to change my opinion of army officers. He was a perfect gentlemean, very considerate, and he insisted that I learn English, and he became my first teacher. That was the beginning of my present sentiments towards Americans and America, my having met General Bandholtz.

Later on, General Harbord took the place of General Bandholtz, but by the time I had become very popular with the American soldiers. And I was a candidate for Governor of Tayabas, and I am going to say what I am going to say because I am no longer in the army, or I might get court-martialed. As I said, I was candidate for Governor and I will tell you what the army officers did. At that time we got our electors through means of communication, and the officer in charge of Quartermaster gave me all the help that the army could for me to get electors—that is a fact. So even when I entered politics, the army officers helped me win, and I did win.

Upon inauguration of the Commonwealth, we found ourselves confronted with a new responsibility. Under the Independence Act passed by Congress, it was provided that after a certain definite period of time the Filipinos would be independent, which meant that the Filipinos had to take care of themselves and defend their own country. When I faced this new responsibility, I immediately turned to an army officer of the United States Army to seek his advice and help us to organize our national defense.

That army officer is General Douglas MacArthur [long applause], then Chief of Staff of the United States Army.

And, gentlemen, we have frankly adopted a system of compulsory universal military training in the Philippines. I have read criticisms launched against this policy adopted by the Philippine Government, and I have read it printed that this was a conspiracy on the part of the War Department to increase the American Army with 400,000 Filipinos in order to attack Japan, and incidentally in order that Manuel Quezon may have at his disposal an army to perpetuate his dictatorship in the Philippines.

So, there you are. We are organizing a national defense in the Philippine Islands to attack Japan, to permit the American Army to attack Japan, and to give Manuel Quezon a force to proclaim himself dictator of his people and remain a power forever.

The only trouble about this statement is that the plan of national defense as contemplated in out program will not materialize until America has left the Philippines; therefore, I don’t see how the United States Army can use the Filipino to attack Japan. You will not be there when we finish; when we have 400,000 the American flag will have been withdrawn from the Philippines. The other difficulty is that I will be out of office because my term of office is six years, and under the Constitution I cannot seek reelection. The Constitution of the Philippines cannot be amended without the approval of the President, and under the Constitution if anybody uses armed forces, America has the power to intervene, so therefore it would be very hard for me to perpetuate myself in my dictatorship.

We are not organizing a big regular army; we are organizing a very small army only, an army of 10,000 men, that is all. But we are organizing an army of all the citizens of the Philippines. In other words, we are teaching every boy who reaches the age of 20 the efficient and intelligent use of modern weapons, and, gentlemen, we should. We have had a tremendous lesson in the past that we have taken advantage of.

When America entered the Philippine Islands, the Filipinos attempted to resist America, and what did we do? We proved to you that we knew how to die, and we also proved to you that we did not know how to fight, or how to defend ourselves. After America has left the Philippines, no other country will come to the Islands only to kill the Filipinos. They are taking the risk of being also killed by the Filipinos. We know how to die for we know it is the duty of every citizen to die in defense of his country, but, gentlemen, the country whose citizens are all dead is no country, and therefore it is our firm determination now to teach the Filipinos to know how to fight and not only fight but die.

But there is something more to this national defense system we are establishing in the Philippines. We are teaching the virtues of citizenship to every Filipino from the age of 10 in the school. We tell him he has a country to which he owes everything he is, and we tell him of his duties because we teach him his rights. In a democracy the solidity of institutions depends upon the knowledge of every citizen of his duties and his willingness to comply with them; and that is what we are trying to do in our country—educating these youngsters to the idea that life is not all pleasure, that life means duties; and when a man has learned his duties and knows how to comply with them he will know how to demand his rights. [ Applause ]

We are doing more than that. We are teaching those young men who are in camps not only military science, but we are also giving them vocational instruction, teaching them to be better farmers, better mechanics, and preparing them for the everyday work of life. We are experimenting something in the Philippines that no other country has ever done before. We are trying to make our soldiers self-supporting. The boys we are training are made to plan vegetables, fruits, figs, and so forth in the camps. Why? Because we are not only interested in having citizens that will be competent soldiers, but also, and perhaps more so, in having soldiers that are competent citizens. [ Applause ]

That is the National Defense program that we have at hand which has been so much criticized, and for which we are being accused of militarizing this country. Now this talk of militarizing is pure bunk and all this fine work, I am glad to say again, is something more that you can add to the wonderful record of the American soldier in the Philippines, for it is being done with the advice of General Douglas MacArthur of the United States. [ Applause ]

So, I want to say to the soldiers of the days of the empire, that you ought to be the first ones to feel proud that your presence in the Philippine Islands does not mean the repetition of what every conqueror in the past has done. To do that, you did not have to be Americans; you could have been any one of half a dozen nations, the names of which I have on my lips but which I am not going to let out. [ Laughter ] To do what you have done, only America can do it, only America has done it, and only America is doing it.

Let me tell the soldiers of the days of the empire, that that is something you can be proud of, and have the right to be proud of, and if you want to talk dollars and cents I can prove to you that in dollars and cents you are not losing anything by adopting that policy. Suppose you are today in the Philippines; does that mean any one of you own the Philippines? No. If you wanted a home, you would have to buy it. Because you won the war does not mean that you can have a home for nothing. Perhaps we will let you have a little cheaper. [ Laughter ] You would have to buy it, whether your flag is there or not. And if you want to sell us neckties, whether there is an American flag or not, we have to pay for them.

There is something in our trade that is of practical benefit. We can trade after the Philippines is independent and if you want preferential trade with us we will be glad to give it to you, and we will ask for the same thing from you.

Nobody can close that chapter of America in the Philippine Islands. Nobody can do it. The day when the American flag goes down to give place to the Filipino flag, American history in the Philippines will not have been terminated; it will only be the beginning of a history more sublime; it will be the beginning of a relationship between America and the Philippines strengthened by a tie more lasting than that which is merely political—the tie of friendship and gratitude.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library