SPEECH

Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. It is an honor to be here today to address you, the dedicated men and women of the Department of Agriculture.

Bilang inyong Pangulo, naniniwala ako sa potensyal ng ating agrikultura. We have a rich land, a hardworking populace, and a growing demand for food – both locally and globally. Ngunit, kailangan nating harapin ang mga hamon na kinakaharap natin. Climate change, pests and diseases, and market volatility are just some of the obstacles we must overcome.

That is why we are launching today the “Bagong Pilipinas Agri-Infrastructure Program.” This program is designed to modernize our agricultural infrastructure, from irrigation systems to post-harvest facilities. Layunin nitong mapataas ang produksyon, mapababa ang presyo ng bilihin, at mapabuti ang kabuhayan ng ating mga magsasaka at mangingisda. We will invest in farm-to-market roads, cold storage facilities, and processing plants.

We will also provide our farmers and fisherfolk with the necessary training and financial assistance. Kailangan natin silang bigyan ng kakayahan na gamitin ang mga makabagong teknolohiya at makipagkumpitensya sa pandaigdigang merkado. We will streamline the process of accessing loans and grants, and we will provide them with access to quality seeds, fertilizers, and other inputs.

This is not just a program of the Department of Agriculture. Ito ay isang programa para sa buong Pilipinas. It requires the cooperation of all sectors of society – government, private sector, and civil society. Sama-sama nating itaguyod ang isang masagana at modernong agrikultura para sa ating mga kababayan.

Maraming salamat po at mabuhay ang Pilipinas!

OF

HIS EXCELLENCY MANUEL L. QUEZON PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ON

GOVERNMENT AID TO COCONUT AND HEMP INDUSTRIES, THE COCONUT OIL EXCISE TAX, AND PAYMENT OF LAND AND INCOME TAXES

[Delivered before the joint convention of coconut and abacá producers at the Philippine Chamber of Commerce Building, Manila, February 22, 1939]

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen of the Convention:

I am not so sure that you will have valid reasons for congratulating yourselves on the fact that I have sought this opportunity for addressing you. Anything I have to say which you may like to listen to, has been set forth in the written message I sent you. I did not mean to say to either Assemblyman Kalaw or Assemblyman Sabido, who insisted so much on my addressing you, that I was coming to speak on things you want to hear. Whether you like it or not I am going to talk with you frankly.

I shall begin by thanking the Chairman of the Convention for the expressions of goodwill with which he introduced me to you. I wish especially to point that part of his address wherein he said that the Convention reposes its entire confidence in the President of the Philippines, because I am under the impression, if the papers quoted him correctly, that he has introduced me as one of the Horsemen of the Apocalypse. You all know what that means. It seems that he has blamed me. I have not read the whole address. What I know of it has reached me through the papers. But if he has been correctly quoted by the papers, it seems that in the address delivered by the Assemblyman from Batangas—whose interest in coconut planters does not seem to be warranted because his district is not a coconut-producing district and, consequently, he represents only his own direct and personal interests, he being a coconut planter—he has made me largely responsible for the precarious condition of both the coconut and hemp industries.

As regards the excise tax. I promised, it being my solemn duty to prevent it. that no legislation would ever be enacted by the National Assembly which could be construed as a direct or indirect aid to the coconut industry. The Act of Congress which provides for the reimbursement to the Philippine Government of money paid to the United States as coconut oil taxes, stipulates as a condition that such money be not invested directly or indirectly by the Philip pine Government in aid of the coconut industry. As President of the Philippines and as the man who. under all the theoretical and practical provisions of Constitutional Law assumes primarily the obligations contracted by the Government, it was and it still is my duty, on receiving such refunds from the United States, to bear in mind the condition provided for by law under which the Philippines may dispose of the same. Had I allowed the money to be disbursed contrary to law, not only would our country have suffered all the harm which would result therefrom, with all that it means to our Government, but worse still—as I think that morals are more important than material values— it would have shown that our Government does not know how to fulfill its obligations or make good its promises. While I am at the head of this Government as President of the Philippines, I will not permit the good will and honor of our country to be discredited. This is the reason why, in spite of myself and in order to keep an obligation contracted by the Government, I have been willing to sacrifice my personal preferences for the sake of the common welfare.

We are living in an age in which the future of civilization is in jeopardy, in which the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse—not those mentioned by the Assemblyman from Batangas but those referred to in the prophecy—may be let loose at any moment. We find ourselves in a situation wherein the achievements of human progress and culture might be destroyed during the next ten years. The future of the human race is in jeopardy because of the scant respect of governments for their solemn obligations. I am ever alert over what is transpiring not only in our country but also around us, and I will not permit the Philippines to be on the list of countries which do not know how to honor their obligations. We are laying the foundations for future Philippine nationhood, and one of the most important of these is the ability of our government to keep its obligations. We are not in the same situation as those governments which can afford to disregard their obligations because they have sufficient strength to back up their acts. All the protection we can count upon is respect for the law of those with whom we wish to deal. We must stand ready to show that we know how to respect the rights of others, if we wish others to respect ours.

This is the reason why—although the needs of a province to which I owe everything in my political career are involved—I refused, much to my regret, to allow Assemblyman Lavides to carry out his ideas of securing funds from the national government to aid the copra industry. As far as my own personal interests are concerned, and fortunately for the coconut oil industry, I own only 3,000 coconut trees. If I owned more I would not have the courage to sponsor the interests of the copra industry. The 3,000 trees referred to, which I bought for P20,000 and which I am willing to sell for P5,000—though nobody wants to pay this price—yield an income of only P150 a year. This is all the personal interest that I have in the copra industry.

You should bear in mind, gentlemen, that Tayabas used to be one of the most prosperous provinces in the Philippines; even the poorest there could afford to pay P10 for a pair of shoes. For years it was impossible to induce the people there to work on provincial road projects; it was necessary to recruit labor from Batangas for this purpose. Even the poorest in Tayabas could afford to send their children to school in Manila, if they only took the pains to bring down a few nuts from their trees. This province, however, is now in abject poverty. My fellow men from Tayabas thought I disregarded their needs and interests altogether and that I have done nothing to relieve their distress. This is seemingly so because, over their needs and my own personal aches, I have to keep up the good name and prestige of our Government.

The copra industry does not need any counsel to plead its cause before the bar of the Philippine Government. Every voter in Tayabas, the province which has consistently voted for me during the last twenty-five or thirty years. and to which I owe everything that I am today, is like an attorney whose voice not only reaches my ears but also moves me deeply, because if it had not been for him I would not be President now. However, it has been impossible for this Government to aid the copra industry.

I have personally worked against that tax. I have, in this connection, personally interviewed the President of the United States and the Congressional leaders. We succeeded in enlisting President Roosevelt’s support. President Roosevelt, as you know, transmitted to Congress a message against said tax. It was up to Congress to decide the matter.

The Government has done everything possible for the copra industry and for all the other industries as well. After the tax had been imposed, we were faced with this question: Should we take advantage of it or not? Had I been away from the United States at the time, it would have been extremely difficult to get the money. In the first place, American taxpayers complained about it. The case was taken to court and it reached the Supreme Court of the United States. On my arrival in New York, a delegation that was waiting for me there proposed a compromise; namely, inducing the Philippines to accept a percentage of the funds upon which they would withdraw the case. I told them that if we are entitled to receive the money, we would demand every centavo of it. Otherwise we would not ask for it at all. After the Supreme Court had decided the case, the United States Treasurer decided not to turn the collections over to the Philippine Government. Had I not been in Washington then, it would have been very hard for our Government to get the money. As a matter of fact, the money could not be disbursed while the case was pending, and after so many millions of pesos were collected, the Federal Treasury resented turning the sums over to the Philippine Government. The total amount which had accumulated was eighty million pesos. They proposed to keep the money there till Congress should meet, have a report submitted to said body, and later perhaps ask Congress to legislate on the manner of spending the money.

I know that, with the influence in Congress of those who succeeded in securing the enactment of the tax, they realize only too well what they were up to. They tried to regulate the sums to be disbursed out of the eighty million pesos—that is, to have it paid out little by little. We had not then come to the point of being able to make out a definite program regarding the use of that fund. I had to take the matter up with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of War, and the Secretary of the Treasury. It was only after I had signed a written promise to the effect that no portion of the money would be disbursed to aid the copra industry, that I was able to have the money turned over to me. You see that not only the Philippine Government but I personally had to enter into a solemn promise under the law.

I cannot allow the smallest portion of the P80,000,000 to be disbursed for the benefit of the copra industry. We have spent it, however, for the good of all. Without it, we never could have built all the needed road projects in Samar, Leyte, Tayabas, Mindoro, and other provinces.

Now allow me to ask the following question: Is there any one here who dares assert that he would rather see enacted a bill which, in my judgment, might be construed by the United States Government as a violation of the law? Gentlemen, it is not Assemblyman Kalaw’s opinion on the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, but mine which should be followed. I am responsible. My conscience alone, not that of others, is responsible for whatever I do. This is the reason which impelled me to tell the people of Tayabas, who had come to me to complain about the lack of aid to their industry, to blame no one but me. I am the guilty party; not Lavides. The people of Tayabas have enough common sense to know that I am not an apocalyptic gentleman.

The Philippine Government stands ready to aid the two following industries: the copra and the hemp. The other day I said in the presence of Speaker Yulo and Secretary Alunan that, if necessary, I would have no objection in allowing Negros and the sugar industry to go to the dogs. You all know that both Speaker Yulo and Secretary Alunan have heavy investments in the sugar industry. All I have is 3,000 coconut trees; I have no sugar-cane plantations; neither do I have any share in sugar centrals. I have no need of the votes of either Negros or Pampanga. Even without their votes. I would have been elected President just the same. The votes cast by the sugar-producing provinces are few, as compared with those cast by the hemp and coconut-producing provinces. Without their votes, the outcome of the election would have been but slightly changed. It is plain that, from a political and personal point of view, I can have no more interest in sugar than in hemp and copra. From the standpoint of the nation. it is evident that the hemp and coconut industries are more important than the sugar industry.

The Government is not unmindful of these two industries, though there are those who assert that the sugar barons hold the Government in the hollow of their hand. No one. however, can control this Government. The Government is interested in both the hemp and coconut industries, but so far the most effective way of aiding you has not been found. You are to blame in the first place. You blame us for aiding the sugar industry. But the sugar growers knew how to organize, while you do not. Assemblyman Kalaw has quoted me as being opposed to blocs . I have not changed my mind on this score, and when I say that you ought to organize, I have in mind an organization like this. I mean this organization, and not the one in the Assembly. [ Laughter .] This association should have been formed earlier. You should do more than merely hold conventions. Nothing is accomplished in these conventions except speeches, promises, no more. These conventions only mean expenses on your part. Such disbursements mean a greater burden on the industry, because you have to get them out of the hemp and copra industries.

You must organize yourselves in your own provinces in the same way as the sugar growers have done. The sugar growers have planters’ associations, central-owners’ associations, and so forth. You ought to have similar organizations. We have been unable to do anything for you because you are not organized and you have not presented the problems confronting you. You should know your own needs, since you are engaged in the industry. In order to force your assemblymen, you do not have to organize. These assemblymen are interested in the needs of their respective districts. They are not going to forget you. But. the first thing you ask from them is the condonation of your land taxes. Do you take this petition seriously? Can there be anything more terrible than this?

Do you mean by this that the salvation of the industry lies in the nonpayment of the required taxes? Gentlemen, land taxes are the most equitable of all taxes. I trust you will not make such a petition again. It implies a terrible psychology. Do you take this matter seriously? When business fails, you don’t pay taxes. This implies an awful psychology. It seems as if the impression proposed to be created is that your worst misfortune is to be obliged to pay taxes. Let me make a bet with you. I am going to pay your taxes, and in exchange you will pay my expenses for luxuries, sports, functions, and others.

Of course, land taxes do not amount to anything. They are very insignificant. But if they are allowed to accumulate for two or three years, even the interest thereon becomes a heavy burden. They can no longer be paid then. For instance, if one has to pay taxes of not more than P400 a year, the sum involved is really small. But why have you been unable to pay your taxes in prosperous years? In my home province even the poorest was able to buy a ten-peso pair of shoes during those years of prosperity. The trouble is that land taxes are the last thing you think of paying.

You should bear in mind that no country can live without land taxes. In spite of this, however, all you think of is how to avoid paying them. A typhoon comes; let land taxes go to the dogs! Prices go down; let land taxes go to the devil! We cannot have stability in our government finances without land taxes. It is plain that for owners of large estates, like my friend Don Ramon Soriano, the taxes are indeed a serious affair. However. aside from the income accruing from copra, he receives money from other sources. One who owns big areas of coconut lands has other sources of income.

All proposals for the condonation of delinquent taxes and nonpayment of the same have to be approved by the Assembly. They have to be approved; otherwise these assemblymen will not get any votes. Such proposals are most popular with the people.

Delinquent land taxes and taxes due may be condoned on condition that present taxes are paid within a certain specified period. [ Applause .] I reject this applause because it makes me blush. I am not proud of it. This is a sign of weakness. [ Laughter .]

I should like that we all begin a new life seriously as regards these taxes; that we begin to pay our land taxes, as our primary responsibility towards the Government. If you do not ponder on this matter seriously you had better not think of my reëlection as Chief Executive, because if I continue to be President I shall not entertain another petition for the condonation of delinquent taxes. It will be better for you if I be not elected President again!

Let us reeducate the Filipino; for we cannot live thus. It is not the land tax which is a burden to our industries. A change is necessary in the distribution of our products because there are too many middlemen who reduce the cost of production. Last year, for instance, we produced 100,000 tons of copra more than we did in 1937; this is the reason why prices are lower. Copra production has increased enormously and therefore prices have to come down. Land taxes are not to blame for this situation. It is foolish to blame it on taxes because the price of copra rose up after the first year of the payment by us of taxes.

Do not fight your assemblyman; fight me over this question of taxes.

In my opinion, the most important provision of the Joint Preparatory Committee Report is the one which deals on the excise tax. If this portion of the Report be approved, the money will be spent for your good; that is, the hemp and coconut planters. I will then help the hemp and coconut planters get as much funds as possible for their respective provinces. More for the coconut than for the hemp planters. I am in favor of helping the coconut planters more because they pay the taxes. The coconut-producing provinces paid that money and therefore they should have a greater share in the allocation.

Americans are not like the Filipinos. Whenever they are interested in anything, they are on the alert. Their representatives—not their Representatives in Congress but those who represent interests responsible for preventing the reimbursement to the Philippine Government of the said tax—are still watching the acts of the Philippine Government. They are trying to see if the Philippine Government will violate the conditions anent the reimbursement.

The hemp planters succeeded in having a measure passed in the last session of the National Assembly which I approved. I now reiterate my statement made at the time I signed the Act, that the same would not guarantee the rise in the price of hemp. We cannot possibly control the price of hemp. To be able to control it, we would be compelled to have a huge capital available, which we do not have. You, hemp and coconut planters’, forget that the Government has lost a great deal of money in helping you out. The Philippine National Bank lost millions of pesos when it attempted to maintain hemp prices at a high level. The same thing may be said of coconut oil. At least the Government has indirectly spent much money.

I am still ready to carry out the idea of the abacá corporation. Assemblyman Sabido, who has a great faith in that Act, asked for its enactment. I told him that if it should be necessary to make connections in the various markets or to submit intelligible proposals, we would send him to London and other foreign ports. You may rest assured that the Government will do something for the hemp and coconut industries. But I am not to be the savior of these two industries. My Secretary of Finance, Mr. Roxas, is. [ Applause .] Secretary Roxas and his assistants are making a conscientious study of our country’s economic problems, especially those connected with the coconut and hemp industries.

We are deeply interested in extending aid to you, but you must not expect us to do the impossible. You must forget all about tax-delinquency condonations. You all know that the Tayabas students gave a party at the Manila Hotel one night and I suppose each one of them spent P25 and upwards. Not even their parents can afford to spend so much money for a dance or a party. This is the reason why I asked you how you can convince me that you are unable to pay your land taxes, when you can afford to spend so much for a party. In order to be able to be present at this convention, many of you have had to spend more than enough to enable you to pay your taxes. The Government will help you, but you must try to convince us that you are ready to help yourselves.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library