MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 30

CONSTITUTING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE HOSTING
OF THE 2025 FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DE VOLLEYBALL (FIVB)
VOLLEYBALL MEN’S WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP, DIRECTING ALL
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES, AND
ENCOURAGING LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS AND THE PRIVATE
SECTOR, TO RENDER SUPPORT THERETO

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article Il of the Constitution declares it a policy of the State
to give priority to education, science and technology, arts, culture, and sports to foster
patriotism and nationalism, accelerate social progress, and promote total human
liberation and development;

WHEREAS, Section 19, Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the State shall
promote physical education and encourage sports programs, league competitions, and
amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self-discipline,
teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, through the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) and
the Philippine National Volleyball Federation, Inc., is set to host the 2025 FIVB Volleyball
Men’s World Championship;

WHEREAS, the hosting of the 2025 FIVB Volleyball Men’s World Championship
aims to promote volleyball in the country, encourage sports participation among Filipinos,
uplift the country’s prestige in the global sporting community, and boost tourism and
economy through sports; and

WHEREAS, the successful hosting of the 2025 FIVB Volleyball Men’s World
Championship requires the involvement and support of all concerned government
agencies, including government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), state
universities and colleges (SUCs), local government units (LGUs), and the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force. There is hereby constituted
an Inter-Agency Task Force (“Task Force”) for the preparation, organization, and hosting
of the 2025 FIVB Volleyball Men’s World Championship in the Philippines. The Task
Force shall be composed of the heads of the following:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Chairperson
Vice-Chairperson
Members

The PSC shall serve as the Secretariat of the Task Force, and shall provide

PSC

Department of Tourism

Department of Budget and Management
Department of Education

Department of Trade and Industry

Department of Finance

Department of Foreign Affairs

Department of Health

Department of Information and Communications Technology
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Department of Public Works and Highways
Department of Transportation

Commission on Higher Education

Metropolitan Manila Development Authority
National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
Bureau of Immigration

Bureau of Customs

Presidential Communications Office

administrative and technical support to the Task Force.

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and members of the Task Force may
designate their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or its

equivalent, who are fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The .Task Force may invite other concerned government agencies, non-
government organizations, civil society groups, the academe, and other stakeholders as
observers and/or resource persons to aid in the performance of the functions of the Task

Force, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The Task Force shail perform the foliowing

duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Formulate and implement plans, activities and programs, including the procurement of
materials and equipment, necessary for the successful hosting of the 2025 FIVB

Volleyball Men’s World Championship;

b. Ensure coordination among concerned government agencies and the private sector
regarding plans, programs, and activities for the hosting of the 2025 FIVB Volleyball

Men’s World Championship;

c. As may be necessary, constitute an Executive Committee to provide oversight and
overall direction to the Task Force towards the successful preparation, organization,

and hosting of the 2025 FIVB Volleyball Men’s World Championship;

d. Accept donations, contributions, grants, bequests or gifts from domestic or foreign
sources, for purposes relevant to its mandates and functions, subject to relevant laws,

rules, and regulations;

e. Coordinate and collaborate with other departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and
instrumentalities of the government, including GOCCs, such as, among others, the
Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation, Philippine Charity Sweepstakes
Office, and Philippine Postal Corporation, as well as the private sector, for the
preparation, organization and hosting of the 2025 FIVB Volleyball Men’s World
Championship; and

f. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the Executive
Secretary.

Section 3. Agency Coordination. Consistent with their respective mandates, all
departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government,
including GOCCs and SUCs, are hereby directed, and LGUs and the private sector are
encouraged, to extend full support and assistance to the preparation, organization and
hosting of the 2025 FIVB Volleyball Men’s World Championship.

Section 4. Funding. The funding requirement for the implementation of this Order
shall be charged against the existing appropriations of the respective agencies, subject
to applicable laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Repeal. All other issuances, administrative rules and regulations, or
parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or amended
accordingly.

Section 6. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other sections not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and
effect.

Section 7. Effectivity. This, Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 10th dayof February _ in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President:

Office of the President

 

LENTING-NAVA
CTOR Py

 

    

re Leo
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PBBMO07432