MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 13

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF GRATUITY PAY TO CONTRACT OF
SERVICE AND JOB ORDER WORKERS IN GOVERNMENT FOR FISCAL.
YEAR 2023

WHEREAS, various government agencies are engaging the services of individual
workers under contract of service (COS) and job order (JO) schemes to support the
implementation of their respective programs, activities, and projects (P/A/Ps), especially the
priority items under the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028 and the President's 8-point
Socioeconomic Agenda;

WHEREAS, under the Commission on Audit (COA)-Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) Joint Circular (JC) No. 2 (s. 2022), government agencies may engage
the services of new COS and JO workers through individual contracts, and renew the
individual contracts of their existing COS and JO workers until 31 December 2024;

WHEREAS, while COS and JO workers in the government are paid salaries or wages
equivalent to those received by personnel occupying comparable positions in government
and a premium of up to 20% of such salary or wage, they do not enjoy the benefits accorded
to. regular government employees such. as Mid-Year and Year-End Bonuses,
Performance-Based Bonus, and Personnel Economic Relief Allowance;

WHEREAS, granting a year-end Gratuity Pay to COS and JO workers is a
well-deserved recognition of their hard work and valuable participation in the implementation
of various P/A/Ps of the government, and pivotal role in the delivery of government services
amidst the present socio-economic challenges;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 3 (s. 2022) authorized the grant of Gratuity
Pay to COS and JO workers in government for Fiscal Year (FY) 2022; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the Philippines,
by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Grant of Gratuity Pay in National Government Agencies and
Instrumentalities. All workers whose services are engaged through COS and JO, who
‘ have rendered a total or an aggregate of at least four (4) months of actual satisfactory

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

performance of service, as stipulated in their respective contracts, as of 15 December 2023,
and whose contracts are still effective as of the same date, may be granted a one-time
Gratuity Pay not exceeding Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00) each.

Those who have rendered less than four (4) months of actual satisfactory
performance of service, as stipulated in their respective contracts, as of 15 December 2023,
and whose contracts are still effective as of same date, may also be granted the one-time
Gratuity Pay, on a pro rata basis, as follows:

 

 

Length of Service Amount of Gratuity Pay
3 months but less than 4 months Not exceeding 4,000.00
2 months but less than 3 months Not exceeding 3,000.00
Less than 2 months Not exceeding 2,000.00

 

 

 

 

For this purpose, actual service shall refer to services rendered on-site. However,
subject to the discretion of the Agency Head and the availability of funds, services rendered
by COS and JO workers under any alternative work arrangements prescribed under Section
6.1 COA-DBM JC No. 1 (s. 2022) may also be considered as actual service.

Section 2. Coverage. This Order shall cover workers whose services are directly
engaged through COS and JO by national government agencies (NGAs), state universities
and colleges (SUCs), government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) and local

Section 3. Funding Sources. The funding source for the implementation of this
Order shall be governed by the following:

a. For NGAs and SUCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
available Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) allotment for the same
P/A/P where the compensation of workers engaged through COS and JO are sourced,
subject to approval of the Agency Head.

In case of deficiency, agencies may modify the allotment issued within a P/A/P, subject:
to approval of the Agency Head or the DBM, as the case may be, pursuant to the rules:
on the modification in allotments under Section 80 of the General Provisions of Republic
Act (RA) No. 11936 or the “General Appropriations Act for FY 2023,” and existing laws,
rules and regulations, and other issuances, or submit a request to augment actual
deficiencies from savings in other P/A/Ps, subject to approval of the President, in
accordance with rules on use of savings and augmentation under Sections 77, 78, and
79 of the General Provisions of RA No. 11936, and existing laws and issuances; and

b. For GOCCs and LWDs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets.

Section 4. Use of Savings. Requests for the use of savings under Section 3(a)
hereof shall be submitted by NGAs and SUCs to the DBM not later than five (5) working
days from the effectivity of this Order, for endorsement to the Office of the President. All
such requests shall be supported by the following documents:

a. Report on the number and names of workers directly engaged through COS and JO
schemes who are qualified for Gratuity Pay, as certified by the heacl of the human
resource management unit and endorsed by the Department Secretary or Agency Head
concerned; and


b. Certification from the budget officer that the required amount from the existing MOOE
allotment is free from any obligation and may be declared as savings, pursuant to
Sections 77 and 79 of the General Provisions of RA No. 11936, to cover the funding
requirements for the grant of Gratuity Pay, likewise endorsed by the Department
Secretary or Agency Head concerned.

The DBM shall release the corresponding Special Allotment Release Order and
Notice of Cash Allocation, as needed, upon approval of the President.

Section 5. Grant of Gratuity Pay in Local Government Units (LGUs). LGUs are
encouraged to adopt in their respective offices the grant of Gratuity Pay to workers whose
services are engaged through COS and JO, utilizing appropriate and available funding
sources from their respective local government funds.

The corresponding supplemental budget (SB) for the purpose shall be enacted by
the local sanggunian concerned chargeable against the available FY 2023 appropriations
or surplus. In case the LGU fails to enact an SB within FY 2023, the LGU concerned may
enact an SB for FY 2024, provided that the: (i) SB shall be charged against the LGU’s
reverted and unused prior year’s surplus, subject to compliance with the provisions of RA
No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code of 1991,” and pertinent laws, rules and
regulations; (ii) prior year’s surplus is backed by cash; and (iii) annual budget for FY 2024
is already approved.

Section 6. Payment Date. The payment of Gratuity Pay to qualified COS and JO
workers in government for FY 2023 shall be made not earlier than 15 December 2023.

Section 7. Supplemental Guidelines. As may be necessary, the DBM shall issue
supplemental guidelines for the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 8. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts
thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby revoked, amended, or modified
accordingly.

Section 9. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Section 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th dayof December , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

By the President:

i
Aude ht yt dans
(CAS ‘P. BERSAMIN
xécutive. Secretary