MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 35

CONSTITUTING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE FOR THE HOSTING
OF THE FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE DE FOOTBALL
ASSOCIATION (FIFA) FUTSAL WOMEN’S WORLD CUP 2025, AND
DIRECTING ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
INSTRUMENTALITIES, AND ENCOURAGING LOCAL GOVERNMENT
UNITS AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR, TO RENDER SUPPORT THERETO

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article Il of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to give priority to education, science and technology, arts, culture, and sports to
foster patriotism and nationalism, accelerate social progress, and promote total human
liberation and development;

WHEREAS, Section 19, Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the State
shall promote physical education and encourage sports programs, league competitions,
and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self-
discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert
citizenry;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, through the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC)
and the Philippine Football Federation, is set to host the FIFA Futsal Women’s World
Cup (FFWWC) 2025;

WHEREAS, the hosting of the FFWWC 2025 aims to advance the development
of futsal in the country, inspire greater sports engagement among Filipinos, elevate the
Philippines’ standing in the international sports arena, and generate economic and
tourism opportunities through a globally recognized event; and

WHEREAS, the successful hosting of the FFWWC 2025 requires the involvement
and support of all concerned government agencies, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), state universities and colleges (SUCs), local
government units (LGUs), and the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Section 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force. There is hereby constituted
an Inter-Agency Task Force (“Task Force”) for the preparation, organization, and
hosting of the FFWWC 2025 in the Philippines. The Task Force shall be composed of
the heads of the following:

Chairperson : PSC
Vice-Chairperson : Department of the Interior and Local Government
Members : Department of Tourism

Department of Foreign Affairs

Department of Finance

Department of Budget and Management
Department of Health

Department of Information and Communications Technology
Department of Public Works and Highways
Department of Transportation

Philippine National Police

Bureau of Immigration

Metropolitan Manila Development Authority
National Intelligence Coordinating Agency
National Bureau of Investigation

Intellectual Property Office of the Philippines
Presidential Communications Office

The PSC shall serve as the Secretariat of the Task Force, and shall provide
administrative and technical support to the Task Force.

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and members of the Task Force may
designate their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or
its equivalent, who shall be fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The Task Force may invite other concerned government agencies, as well as
LGUs, non-government organizations, civil society groups, the academe, and other
stakeholders as observers and/or resource persons to aid in the performance of the
functions of the Task Force, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The Task Force shall perform the following
duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Formulate and implement plans, activities and programs, including the procurement
of materials and equipment, necessary for the successful hosting of the FFWWC

b. Ensure coordination of all plans, programs and activities related to the hosting of the
FFWWC 2025;

c. As may be necessary, constitute an Executive Committee to provide oversight and
overall direction to the Task Force towards the successful preparation, organization,
and hosting of the FFWWC 2025;

d. Accept donations, contributions, grants, bequests or gifts from domestic or foreign
sources, for purposes relevant to its mandates and functions, subject to relevant

laws, rules and regulations;

e. Coordinate and collaborate with other departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and
instrumentalities of the government, including GOCCs, such as, among others, the
Manila International Airport Authority, Philippine Amusement and Gaming
Corporation, Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office, Philippine Postal Corporation,
and the Cultural Center of the Philippines, for the preparation, organization, and
hosting of the FFWWC 2025; and

f. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Agency Coordination. Consistent with their respective mandates,
all departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government,
including GOCCs and SUC, are hereby directed, and LGUs and the private sector are
hereby encouraged, to extend full support and assistance to the preparation,
organization, and hosting of the FFWWC 2025.

Section 4. Funding. The amounts necessary for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against any available funding of the agencies concerned,
subject to existing budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 5. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other sections not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and
effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All other issuances, administrative rules and regulations, or
parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or amended
accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 30th day of July , in
the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President: