MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 24

ENSURING OPTIMAL USE OF GOVERNMENT LANDS TO SUPPORT
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND CREATING AN
INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING COUNCIL FOR THE
CONSOLIDATION OF A MASTER LIST OF ALL GOVERNMENT
LANDS

WHEREAS, Section 14, Chapter 4, Title I, Book III of Executive Order (EO) No.
292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987” vests in the President the power to reserve
for public use any of the lands of the public domain and patrimonial lands, the use of
which is not otherwise directed by law;

WHEREAS, Section 24 of Republic Act (RA) No. 11201 or the “Department of
Human Settlements and Urban Development (DHSUD) Act” directs the DHSUD,
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), and Department of
Agrarian Reform (DAR), among others, to jointly identify government lands suitable
for housing and rural development;

WHEREAS, Section 8 of RA No. 7279 or the “Urban Development and Housing
Act of 1992” mandates all local government units (LGU) to identify lands for socialized
housing and resettlement areas;

WHEREAS, under Section 2 of Executive Order (EO) No. 75 (s. 2019), all
departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of the government shall identify
their lands devoted to or suitable for agriculture and no longer actually, directly and
exclusively used or necessary for the purpose for which they have been reserved or
acquired, and thereafter submit a list thereof to the DAR;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of EO No. 34 (s. 2023) directs the DHSUD to identify
available public lands and recommend to the President, through the DENR, the
issuance of Proclamations declaring said public lands as alienable and disposable,
and reserving the same for housing and human settlement purposes;

WHEREAS, one (1) of the key strategies identified in the Philippine

Development Plan 2023-2028 to establish livable communities is the creation of a
database containing a complete inventory of idle government lands;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, to ensure the efficient and effective allocation and utilization of land
resources for the country’s national development goals, it is necessary to consolidate
a comprehensive list of all government lands; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Government Lands. For the purposes of this Order, government
lands shall refer to all lands over which the National Government and/or any of its
agencies, departments, instrumentalities, bureaus, and offices have an ownership
claim or interest, such as, but not limited to: (a) idle or abandoned lands or those that
are no longer used for the purpose for which they have been reserved or acquired: (b)
lands that are already titled or have yet to be titled under the name of the National
Government and/or any of its agencies, departments, instrumentalities, bureaus, and
offices; and (c) such other lands that may be prescribed by the Coordinating Council
under Section 2 hereof to be included in the agency submissions.

Section 2. Creation of an Inter-Agency Coordinating Council. There is
hereby created an Inter-Agency Coordinating Council tasked to create a Master List
of all government lands (“Coordinating Council’).

The Coordinating Council shall be composed of the heads of the following
government agencies:

Co-Chairpersons : DENR and DHSUD
Vice-Chairperson : DAR
Members : Office of the Executive Secretary;

Department of the Interior and Local Government;

Department of Agriculture;

Office of the Solicitor General;

Department of Justice;

Land Registration Authority;

Commission on Higher Education; and

Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT).

The DENR - Land Management Bureau (LMB) shall serve as the Secretariat of
the Coordinating Council, and shall provide administrative and technical support to the
Coordinating Council. The Secretariat shall likewise serve as the repository of all
documents and information relative to the Master List.

The Co-Chairpersons, Vice-Chairperson, and Members of the Coordinating
Council may designate their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant
Secretary or its equivalent, who are fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

Section 3. Duties and Functions. Subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations, the Coordinating Council shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Prepare and transmit to the President a digital Master List of all government lands
within 180 days from the effectivity of the Implementing Guidelines under Section
6 hereof. The Master List may include the following details: (i) location of land; (ii)
total area; (iii) property classification; (iv) current actual use; and (v) such other
available relevant information and documents, as may be deemed necessary and
required by the Coordinating Council. The Coordinating Council shall update the
Master List as may be necessary;

b. Ensure the timely submission of land inventories by government offices pursuant
to Section 4 hereof. In this regard, the Coordinating Council shall coordinate and
consult with such other concerned agencies, including the National Economic and
Development Authority, Metro Manila Development Authority, National Mapping
and Resource Information Authority, Commission on Audit, and existing
government bodies with functions related to land identification and inventory;

c. Ensure the integrity of the data in the Master List, as well as its completeness and
accuracy;

d. Convene and reorganize technical working groups, as may be necessary, to
ensure the efficient and effective implementation of this Order;

e. In coordination with the DICT, study, formulate, and implement a mechanism for
the digitalization of the Master List; and

f. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 4. Mandatory Submission of Inventory. Within 60 days from the
effectivity of the Implementing Guidelines of this Order, all national government
agencies and _ instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled
corporations (GOCCs) and existing government bodies with functions related to land
identification and inventory, are hereby directed to prepare and submit to the
Coordinating Council, through the Secretariat, a complete inventory of all their lands
or inventories in their possession, as may be applicable, subject to existing laws, rules
and regulations. Further, all national government agencies and instrumentalities shall
extend full support and cooperation to the Coordinating Council in the preparation of
the Master List.

The Coordinating Council, through the DHSUD and DENR - LMB, shall
coordinate with LGUs for the submission of their land inventories in accordance with
RA No. 7279.

Failure to comply with the above directives may be a ground for administrative
and disciplinary sanctions against any erring public officer or employee as provided
under existing laws or regulations.

Section 5. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against the existing and available appropriations of the
member-agencies of the Coordinating Council, subject to pertinent budgeting,
accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding
requirements for the purpose shall be included in the budget proposals of the member-
agencies of the Coordinating Council, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 6. Implementing Guidelines. Within 15 days from the effectivity of
this Order, the Coordinating Council shall formulate the guidelines necessary to
effectively implement this Order, which shall include, among others, the format of the
Master List, and the process and mechanism for reporting and submission of the
respective inventories of government offices and existing government bodies with
functions related to land identification and inventory.

Section 7. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 30th day of April , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

 

ATTA. MZ, ESPINO
Y €-o- vay ACT DIRECTOR IV

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

HY AULA UE VOY +
PBBM004499