MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 7

CONSTITUTING THE PHILIPPINE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE
EXPO 2025 OSAKA

WHEREAS, the Philippines has committed to participate in the World Expo 2025,
to be held in Osaka, Kansai, Japan for the period of 13 April to 13 October 2025, to
promote the Philippines in the international community as a tourism destination, and as
one of the rising investment locations in the Asia Pacific Region;

WHEREAS, the Expo 2025 Osaka is an event that brings together people from
‘around the world to address issues facing humankind on a global scale, and presents
breakthrough technologies, products, innovations and ideas to improve quality of life;

WHEREAS, with the theme, “Designing Future Society for Our Lives,” the Expo
2025 Osaka intends to approach complex issues through facilitating the participation of

as many people as possible and bringing their ideas together to design a more inclusive
and sustainable future for humankind;

WHEREAS, the participation in the Expo 2025 Osaka will also strengthen the
bilateral relationship of the Philippines with Japan;

WHEREAS, there is a need to facilitate preparations for the Philippines’

participation in the Expo 2025 Osaka through inter-agency coordination and
collaboration; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution provides that the President
shall have control over all the executive departments, bureaus and offices, and ensure
that laws are faithfully executed;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the

Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of the Philippine Organizing Committee. The Philippine
Organizing Committee (POC) for the participation of the Philippines in the Expo 2025
Osaka is hereby constituted, and shall be composed of the following:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Chairperson and

Commissioner-General : Secretary, Department of Tourism
Vice-Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry
Members : Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs
Secretary, Department of Budget and Management
(DBM)

Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment

Secretary, Department of Finance

Secretary, Department of Science and Technology

Secretary, Department of Information and
Communications Technology

Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural

Resources

Secretary, Department of Health

Secretary, National Economic and Development

Authority

The POC members may designate their respective alternates to represent them

in the committee. The alternates must have a rank not lower than an Assistant Secretary
or its equivalent and must be fully authorized to decide on behalf of their respective
principals. The designation of the alternates or representatives shall be in writing and
must be submitted to the POC Secretariat.

The POC Secretariat shall undertake and oversee the overall preparations and

day-to-day operations of the POC relative to the Philippines’ participation in the Expo
2025 Osaka. The POC Secretariat shall be complemented by personnel of the DOT, with
assistance from the member-agencies of the Committee.

Section 2. Authority and Functions of the POC. In pursuit of its objectives and

subject to existing laws, the POC shall have the following authority and functions:

a.

Formulate plans, programs and activities, as well as organize and manage
requirements for the Philippines’ participation in the Expo 2025 Osaka;

Act as a coordinating body between the private sector and the government to
ensure that all programs and activities relative to the Expo 2025 Osaka are
enforced;

Recommend or issue guidelines as may be necessary to achieve the objectives
of this Order;

Employ and utilize architectural designs that feature the ingenuity and resilience
of the Filipino people;

Ensure the protection of government properties to be used in the Expo 2025
Osaka;

f. Accept and receive sponsorships, donations and other gratuitous transfers of
funds or properties relevant to the activities of the Expo 2025 Osaka, subject to
pertinent budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

g. Through the Chairperson and Commissioner-General, or her designated
representative, enter into contracts and agreements deemed necessary for the
attainment of the objectives of this Order;

h. Undertake marketing campaigns and promotional activities, consistent with the
Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028, with the end in view of generating
business, trade and investments, showcase Philippine heritage, culture and

tourism destinations, as well as the ingenuity and resilience of the Filipino people;
and

i. Perform any and all acts and functions as may be deemed appropriate and
necessary to ensure the proper functioning of the POC.

Section 3. Chairperson and Commissioner-General. The Chairperson and
Commissioner-General shall act as the Philippine focal person of the Expo 2025 Osaka,
attend all activities that may be required by the organizers, and perform such other
functions as may be necessary for the successful participation of the Philippines in the
Expo 2025 Osaka.

Section 4. Meetings of the POC. The Chairperson and Commissioner-General,
or her duly appointed representative, shall convene the meetings of the POC regularly
and as often as may be necessary to ensure proper coordination relative to the
Philippines’ participation in the Expo 2025 Osaka.

Section 5. Agency Support. Consistent with their respective mandates, all
departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities of the government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and government financial institutions, are
hereby directed to render full assistance and cooperation to the POC to effectively carry
out the objectives of this Order.

Section 6. Funding. The funds necessary for the initial year of implementation of
this Order may be sourced from available appropriations of the concerned agencies,
subject to applicable budgeting, accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations.
Thereafter, the funding requirements for the purpose shall be included in the budget

proposals of the aforementioned agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation
process.

Section 7. Administrative Guidelines. The POC shall issue the necessary

administrative guidelines and implementing rules within the authority granted under this
Order.

Section 8. Reports. The POC, through the Chairperson and
Commissioner-General, shall submit to the Office of the President and the DBM quarterly
reports of its accomplishments, not later than thirty (30) days after the end of every
quarter, and a final report within sixty (60) days after the closing of the Expo 2025 Osaka.
Such reports shall include the expenses, income generated, accomplishments, economic
impact, and recommendations for future policy development and actions.

Section 9. Cessation. The POC shall be rendered functus officio sixty (60) days
after the submission of its final report as provided in Section 8 hereof, unless otherwise
ordered by the President.

Section 10. Repeal. All issuances or parts thereof that are inconsistent with or
contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 11. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid, illegal
or unconstitutional, the other portions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 12. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 19th day of April , inthe Year
of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.
A B\Cans
‘

 

By the President:

ASP “BERSAM
K e-Secretary

    
   

   
 

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY
ye tor nb bey
ee eles

  
  

 
 
 
    

     

LI
aici :
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PBBM001890