MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 08

CREATING AN __ INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE
COMMEMORATION OF THE 1257 ANNIVERSARY OF PHILIPPINE
INDEPENDENCE AND NATIONHOOD

WHEREAS, the country will commemorate the 125th Anniversary of Philippine
Independence and Nationhood from 2023 to 2026, with the theme “Kalayaan,
Kinabukasan, Kasaysayan,” to give focus on the freedom that our forebearers
struggled for towards the future that they dreamed for the country and the history that
we seek to remember and honor them with:

WHEREAS, Section 15, Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the State
shall conserve, promote and popularize the nation’s cultural and historical heritage
and resources, as well as its artistic creations:

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 10086 or the “Strengthening Peoples'
Nationalism Through Philippine History Act,” provides that it shall be the policy of the
State to provide the means to strengthen people's nationalism, love of country, respect
for its heroes and pride for the people's accomplishments by reinforcing the
importance of Philippine national and local history in daily life with the end in view of
raising social consciousness; reinvigorating government support for historical
research; and sustaining and enhancing programs for the protection, preservation and
conservation of historical relics and memorabilia, monuments, sites and other
historical resources; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution provides that the President
shall have control over all the executive departments, bureaus, and offices and ensure
that the laws are faithfully executed;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Inter-Agency Committee. In order to facilitate the planning and
execution of programs and projects for the commemoration of the 125th Anniversary
of Philippine Independence and Nationhood, an Inter-Agency Committee is hereby
constituted, to be composed of representatives from the following:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Chairperson : National Historical Commission of the Philippines

(NHCP)
Vice-Chairperson : Department of the Interior and Local Government
Members : Department of Tourism

Department of Education

Department of National Defense

Department of Information and Communications
Technology

Department of Budget and Management

Department of Trade and Industry

Department of Labor and Employment

Department of Transportation

Metropolitan Manila Development Authority

The NHCP shall serve as Secretariat to the Inter-Agency Committee, and shall
provide the necessary administrative, operational and technical support. The
Secretariat shall be constituted upon the issuance of this Order and shall continue to
exist until March 2026.

Section 2. Agency Support. All departments, agencies, bureaus, offices,
national government agencies, and government-owned or -controlled corporations are
hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance, and cooperation to the Inter-Agency
Committee in the implementation of this Administrative Order. Local government units,
civil society groups and the private sector are encouraged to cooperate and participate
in the commemoration of this milestone event.

Section 3. Funding. Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order
shall be sourced from the available appropriations of the NHCP, and the participating
government agencies and instrumentalities, subject to existing budgeting, accounting,
and auditing laws, rules and regulations.

The amounts necessary for the subsequent years shall be included in the budget
proposal of the NHCP, and other concerned agencies, subject to the usual budget
preparation process.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 28th day of April , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

  
   

       

cr re WMD MN |

ATTY. CONCEPCION (HO-ENAD
ou

-1o4 DIRECTOR \ Mls
SOT aman a eco Oe r