MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 32

CREATING THE NATIONAL TASK FORCE KANLAON

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 10121 or the “Philippine Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Act of 2010” declares it a policy of the State to adopt a
disaster risk reduction and management approach that is holistic, comprehensive,
integrated, and proactive in lessening the socioeconomic and environmental impacts
of disasters, and promote the involvement and participation of all sectors and
stakeholders at all levels;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9154 or the “Mt. Kanlaon National Park Act of 2001”
declares it a policy of the State to ensure the protection and conservation of Mt.
Kanlaon, including communities therein and their culture and way of life;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9154 established Mt. Kanlaon, located in the Cities of
Bago, La Carlota, and San Carlos and in the Municipalities of La Castellana and
Murcia in Negros Occidental, and in the City of Canlaon and Municipality of
Vallehermoso, both in the Province of Negros Oriental, as a protected area under the
category of a national park;

WHEREAS, on 09 December 2024, the Department of Science and
Technology (DOST) - Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology raised the
Alert Level of Mt. Kanlaon to Alert Level 3 (Magmatic Unrest) based on the reports of
the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) that
explosive eruptions occurred at the summit vent of Mt. Kanlaon;

WHEREAS, according to NDRRMC, Mt. Kanlaon’s seismic activities has
affected around 12,360 families or 48,528 individuals, and has caused 129 Million
worth of damages and losses to agriculture;

WHEREAS, based on recent monitoring and analysis by NDRRMC and the
Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration, Mt.
Kanlaon continues to exhibit significant volcanic activities which pose serious threat to
lives, livelihoods, infrastructure, and overall safety of communities within the Negros
Island Region;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure a coordinated government action and
response to reduce the impact of Mt. Kanlaon’s volcanic activities and expedite the
recovery and redevelopment of affected communities;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation and Composition of the National Task Force Kanlaon.
The National Task Force Kanlaon (“Task Force”) is hereby created. The Task Force
shall be composed of the heads of the following agencies:

Chairperson : Department of National Defense (DND)

Members :  DOST
Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development
Department of Public Works and Highways
Department of Social Welfare and Development
Department of Labor and Employment
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Department of Health

The Office of Civil Defense (OCD) shall serve as Secretariat of the
Task Force, and shall be tasked to provide the necessary technical, administrative and
operational support to the Task Force.

The Chairperson and members of the Task Force may designate their
respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or its equivalent,
who are fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The Task Force shall have the primary duty
of overseeing and coordinating all government programs, activities and projects to
reduce the impact of Mt. Kanlaon’s volcanic activities and further accelerate the
recovery, redevelopment and resilience-building of affected communilies.

For this purpose, the Task Force shall perform the following duties and
functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Oversee the implementation and monitoring of all government programs, activities
and projects for the resettlement, recovery, rehabilitation and redevelopment of
communities affected by Mt. Kanlaon’s volcanic activities. This may include,
among others, the Kanlaon Recovery and Development Plan, conduct of a
comprehensive risk assessment on areas within the Mt. Kanlaon 14-kilometer
danger zone, continuous provision of relief and other forms of assistance to the

displaced population, and the establishment of sustainable resettlement areas
with adequate housing, infrastructure and livelihood opportunities.

b. Operationalize and coordinate effective and timely execution of disaster risk
reduction and management efforts in communities affected by Mt. Kanlaon’s
volcanic activities. For this purpose, the Task Force shall ensure that all
government programs, activities and projects for the resettlement, recovery,
rehabilitation and redevelopment of communities affected by Mt. Kanlaon’s
volcanic activities are anchored on policies and frameworks approved by the
NDRRMC;

c. Study and implement measures and ways forward to further assist affected
communities within the Negros Island Region, as well as to rebuild and strengthen
the resilience of critical infrastructure;

d. In cooperation with the NDRRMC, Regional Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Councils, and Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Offices, ensure that the programs, activities and projects of various government
agencies at the national, regional and local levels, are consistent with the Kanlaon
Recovery and Redevelopment Plan under Section 3 hereof;

e. Invite, collaborate and establish institutional partnerships with concerned
government agencies and the private sector, including non-government
organizations and other stakeholders to ensure the effective performance of its
duties and functions; and

f. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Kanlaon Recovery and Development Plan. Pursuant to its
mandate under RA No. 10121 to serve as the overall policy-making body on disaster
risk reduction and management, the NDRRMC, in coordination with the National
Economic and Development Authority and other concerned government agencies and
stakeholders, is hereby directed to formulate the Kanlaon Recovery and Development
Plan, which shall serve as the strategic framework for the recovery and development
of communities affected by Mt. Kanlaon’s volcanic activities.

The Kanlaon Recovery Development Plan shall contain short-term and
long-term strategies and concrete action plans with emphasis on the following areas
of concern: (a) housing and resettlement; (b) infrastructure; (c) social welfare;
(d) livelihood and business development; and (e) governance. For this purpose, the
NDRRMC is hereby authorized to form technical working groups responsible for
coming up with detailed strategies, action plans, and timelines for the abovementioned
areas of concern.

Section 4. Convergence. All concerned government agencies are hereby
directed, and all local government units within the Negros Island Region and the

private sector are hereby encouraged, to render full support to and cooperation with
the Task Force and NDRRMC to ensure the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 5. Reporting. The Task Force, through the OCD, is hereby directed to
prepare and submit to the Office of the President, through the Office of the Executive
Secretary, annual reports on the implementation of this Order.

Section 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against the existing appropriations of the member-agencies of
the Task Force and such other available funding sources as may be identified by the
Department of Budget and Management, including the National Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Fund, subject to relevant budgeting, accounting, and
auditing rules and regulations. Thereafter, the subsequent funding requirements for
the purpose shall be included in the budget proposals of concerned agencies, subject
to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 7. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order is held invalid or
unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and
effect.

Section 8. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24th day of April , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President

WM
mI
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILI

PBEMOO8512 4