MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 29

CREATING A TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP FOR THE
ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL FORENSICS INSTITUTE

WHEREAS, the effective administration of justice is essential to upholding the
Rule of Law and safeguarding the fundamental rights of individuals as enshrined in
our Constitution and domestic laws, as well as in international human rights covenants;

WHEREAS, the Minnesota Protocol on the Investigation of Potentially Unlawful
Deaths (“Minnesota Protocol’) aims to set a common standard of performance among
States, such as the Philippines, in the investigation of potentially unlawful deaths or
suspected enforced disappearances, and provides a set of principles and guidelines
for States, institutions and individuals involved in the investigation;

WHEREAS, under Section 4(i) of Republic Act (RA) No. 10867 or the “National
Bureau of Investigation (NBI) Reorganization and Modernization Act,” the NBI shall
establish and maintain an integrated, comprehensive, and state-of-the-art network of
equipment and facilities to be used by the NBI for its criminal investigation, detection,
and evidence gathering, and provide the corresponding training therefor;

WHEREAS, Section 66 of RA No. 6975 or the “Department of the Interior and
Local Government (DILG) Act of 1990,” as amended, established the Philippine Public
Safety College (PPSC) as the premier educational institution for the training, human
resource development and continuing education of all personnel of the Philippine
National Police and Fire and Jail Bureaus;

WHEREAS, in 1993, the DILG activated the National Forensic Science Training
Institute (formerly National Criminalistics Research and Training Institute) to
strengthen and enhance the capability of investigation units of the government towards
ensuring a more effective and credible delivery of criminal investigation justice;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) No. 29 (s. 2002), as amended,
established the: (a) Presidential Human Rights Committee (PHRC) as the primary
advisory body to the President in effectively addressing all human rights concerns and
issues in the country; and (b) PHRC Secretariat (PHRCS) to provide administrative
and technical support to PHRC;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, under Section 2(b) of AO No. 22 (s. 2024), the PHRC, through the
Special Committee on Human Rights Coordination, has been further tasked to
complement and rationalize the efforts of concerned government agencies,
instrumentalities, and bodies to ensure a holistic approach in the implementation of
thrusts, programs, and policies on the areas of investigation and accountability, and
data-gathering on alleged human rights violations by law enforcement agencies;

WHEREAS, one of the Philippine Government's commitment during the 75"
Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Geneva, Switzerland in
December 2023 is the establishment of a National Forensics Institute (NFI) to
strengthen the country’s justice system and expertise in the field of forensics;

WHEREAS, the establishment of an NFI, which shall be backed by
state-of-the-art research and laboratory services, is consistent with the government's
efforts to strengthen domestic accountability mechanisms through comprehensive
justice reforms, with the end in view of providing rigorous academic, specialization and
capacity-building programs in the field of forensics; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Technical Working Group for the Establishment of NFI. A
Technical Working Group (TWG) is hereby created to facilitate the conduct of a
comprehensive study and submit recommendations relative to the immediate
establishment of the NFI, taking into consideration the need to rationalize and
streamline the functions of relevant government agencies, and strengthen the capacity
of the Philippines in the field of forensics. The TWG shall be composed of the heads
of the following agencies:

Chairperson : Office of the Executive Secretary
Co-Chairperson : Department of Justice (DOJ)
Members : DILG;
Department of Foreign Affairs;
Department of Health;

Department of Budget and Management;
Commission on Higher Education;
PHRCS; and

University of the Philippines Manila.

The DOJ shall serve as the Secretariat of the TWG, and shall provide
administrative and technical support to the TWG.

The Chairperson, Co-Chairperson, and members of the TWG may designate
their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or its
equivalent, who are fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The TWG may invite other concerned government agencies, as well as
non-government organizations, civil society groups, the academe, and other
stakeholders as observers and/or resource persons and, as may be deemed
necessary, engage the services of experts and/or consultants who possess
recognized expertise and qualifications in their fields to aid in the performance of the
functions of the TWG, subject to existing laws, rules, and regulations.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The TWG shall study and devise an efficient
and collaborative mechanism to elevate the standards of forensics in the Philippines.
For this purpose, the TWG shall perform the following duties and functions, subject to
existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Within six (6) months from the issuance of this Order, prepare concrete short term,
midterm, and long-term action points, as well as map out possible sources of
financial and technical support, in relation to the establishment of NFI, and exercise
oversight and management towards the realization thereof;

b. Review the functions of government agencies with mandates related to forensics,
and facilitate sharing of expertise and good practices among these agencies;

c. Review pending bills related to the status and advancement of forensics in the
country to identify those that should be prioritized;

d. Study and recommend policies and/or programs that aim to further enhance
transfer of knowledge and training of experts in the field of forensics;

e. Coordinate with local and international bodies involved in the field of forensics to
boost knowledge, enhance collaboration, and adopt best practices;

f. Accept donations, contributions, grants, bequests or gifts from domestic or foreign
sources, for purposes relevant to its mandates and functions, subject to existing
laws, rules and regulations; and

g. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Reportorial Requirement. The TWG is hereby directed to submit
to the President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary, a quarterly report
detailing, among others, the TWG’s accomplishments, and status of the action points
for the establishment of the NFI.

Section 4. Funding. The initial funding requirements necessary for the
implementation of this Order shall be charged against available appropriations of the
member-agencies of the TWG, subject to the pertinent budgeting, accounting, and
auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary

for the continued implementation of this Order shall be included in the budget
proposals of the member-agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 5. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof, that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of January , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President:

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

‘ thurtn/
Btn. ELY V. TOLENTINO-NAVA
rf DI2Z2S ACTING DIRECTOR IV

 

   

PHILIP!

PBBM007276

REP