MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 20

FURTHER STREAMLINING ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND
POLICIES, AND REMOVING NON-TARIFF BARRIERS ON THE
IMPORTATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 7581 or the “Price Act,” as
amended, declares it a policy of the State to develop, adopt and promulgate measures
to stabilize prices of basic necessities and prime commodities;

WHEREAS, Section 4 of RA No. 8178 or the “Agricultural Tariffication Act of
1996,” as amended, removed the quantitative restrictions on the importation of
agricultural products in the country and allowed certain products to be imported
beyond the Minimum Access Volume (MAY), subject to applicable laws, rules and
regulations;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of RA No. 9485 or the “Anti-Red Tape Act of 2007,” as
amended by RA No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government
Service Delivery Act of 2018,” declares it a policy of the State to take appropriate
measures to promote transparency in each agency with regard to the manner of
transacting with the public, which shall encompass initiating and maintaining a
program for the adoption of simplified procedures that will reduce red tape and
expedite business and non-business related transactions in government;

WHEREAS, Section 3 of Executive Order No. 28 (s. 2023) established the
Inter-Agency Committee on Inflation and Market Outlook (IAC-IMO) as an advisory
body to the Economic Development Group on measures that would keep inflation,
particularly food and energy, within the government's inflation targets;

WHEREAS, Adninistrative Order (AO) No. 13 (s. 2018) directed the
Department of Agriculture (DA), Sugar Regulatory Administration (SRA), and National
Food Authority, in coordination with the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), to
undertake immediate measures to remove administrative constraints and other
non-tariff barriers on the importation of agricultural products;

WHEREAS, non-tariff barriers are policy measures, other than customs tariff,

that restrict trade, including but not limited to quotas, import licensing systems,
regulations, and red tape;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, while there are existing measures to streamline administrative
procedures and policies on the importation of agricultural products and remove
non-tariff barriers, it has been observed that administrative constraints and non-tariff
barriers, that unduly add to the costs of importation and limit supplies, continue to
persist, thereby increasing domestic prices of agricultural commodities;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to further streamline administrative procedures to
foster transparency and predictability of policies on the importation of agricultural
products in order to help ensure food security, maintain sufficient supply of agricultural
goods in the domestic market, and improve local production; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution vests in the
President the power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices,
and the mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Further Streamlining Administrative Procedures and Removing
Non-Tariff Barriers. The DA, in coordination with the DTI and/or Department of
Finance (DOF), is hereby directed to undertake measures to further streamline
administrative procedures and policies on the importation of agricultural products, and
remove non-tariff barriers. For this purpose, the aforementioned government agencies
shall, among others:

a. Streamline procedures and requirements in the licensing of importers, minimize
processing time of applications for importation, and exempt licensed traders from
submission of registration requirements, subject to existing law, rules and
regulations;

b. Subject to consultation with the National Economic and Development Authority
Committee on Tariff and Related Matters, facilitate importation of certain agricultural
products beyond the authorized MAV and reduce or remove administrative fees
relative thereto, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;

c. Streamline procedures and requirements for the issuance of Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Import Clearance (SPSIC); and

d. Take concrete steps to improve logistics, transport, distribution and storage of
imported agricultural products.

Section 2. Processing and Issuance of SPSIC for Agricultural Products.
The DA and its bureaus, attached agencies and instrumentalities, shall process and
release SPSIC applications, and formally notify applicants of their action and the basis
thereof within the period prescribed in their Citizen's Charter. All SPSIC applications
not acted upon within the prescribed period shall be deemed approved pursuant to
Section 10 of RA No. 9485, as amended, provided, that all documentary requirements
have been submitted and all required fees have been paid, as indicated in their
Citizen’s Charter.

Section 3. Guidelines for Importation of Sugar Products. Within thirty (30)
days from the effectivity of this Order, the SRA shall streamline and standardize
existing guidelines for importation of sugar in the country, taking into consideration the
need to reduce uncertainty in the sugar import regime and allow more traders to
participate in the sugar import program. The Guidelines shall provide for, among
others, rules and regulations on the classification or automatic classification of
imported sugar, as well as direct importation of sugar by SRA-registered industrial
users, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 4. Guidelines for Importation of Fishery Products. Within thirty (30)
days from the effectivity of this Order, the DA shall review and revise existing rules
and regulations on the importation of frozen fish and fishery/aquatic products for wet
markets during closed and off-fishing seasons or during calamities, particularly the
provisions that impose quantitative restrictions on fish imports, limit competition and
participation in international trade, and restrict the species allowed for importation, in
accordance with Section 61(c) of RA No. 8550 or the “Philippine Fisheries Code of
1998,” as amended.

Section 5. Expedite Unloading of Agricultural Imports. Subject to Section
419 of RA No. 10863 or the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act,” and other
applicable laws, rules and regulations, the Bureau of Customs (BOC) shall prioritize
the unloading and release of imported agricultural products.

Section 6. Reconstitution of the Surveillance Team. The DA, DTI, BOC,
Philippine Competition Commission, Department of the Interior and Local
Government, Department of Justice, National Bureau of Investigation, and Philippine
National Police shall form a Surveillance Team tasked to ensure the effective and
efficient implementation of this Order. For this purpose, the Surveillance Team shall,
among others:

a. Monitor importation and distribution of imported agricultural products to ensure
efficient and complete distribution thereof to warehouses and retail outlets;

b. Prevent illegal acts of price manipulation and other forms of unfair or
anti-competitive commercial practices;

c. Take appropriate remedial measures to address unlawful acts, subject to existing
laws, rules and regulations; and

d. Formulate specific guidelines for the implementation of this Section, which shall
include, among others, a mechanism to facilitate information sharing and enhance
transparency and accountability of concerned government agencies.

The DA shall lead the Surveillance Team. The heads of the member-agencies
of the Surveillance Team shall designate their respective representatives who shall be
fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf. The designated representatives shall
have ranks not lower than an Assistant Secretary or its equivalent.

Section 7. Reportorial Requirement. The DA, DTI, DOF, SRA, and BOC are
hereby directed to jointly submit to the President, through the Office of the Executive

Secretary and IAC-IMO, a quarterly report on the status of the implementation of this
Order.

Section 8. Implementing Guidelines. Within thirty (30) days from the
effectivity of this Order, the DA, DTI, DOF, SRA, and BOC shall formulate the
guidelines necessary for the effective implementation of this Order, which shall
include, among others, the rules and regulations for extension and/or suspension of
processing of SPSIC applications under Section 2 hereof.

Section 9. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 10. Repeal. AO 13 is hereby repealed. All orders, rules and
regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 11. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 18th day of April , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

     
    

 
 
  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

     

ATTY. li. ESPINO
IS y-7y-2y ACTING DIRECTOR IV

MO

BBM 004442