MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 27

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SERVICE RECOGNITION INCENTIVE TO
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

WHEREAS, Section (4)(h) of Congressional Joint Resolution (JR) No. 4 (s. 2009)
authorizes the grant of: (i) incentives to reward an employee’s loyalty to government service
and contributions to the agency’s continuing viable existence; (ii) incentives as reward for
exceeding agency financial and operational performance targets to motivate employee
efforts toward higher productivity; and (iii) other existing benefits to be categorized by the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) as incentives;

WHEREAS, Section 17(iv) of Congressional JR No. 4 authorizes the President, upon
the recommendation of DBM, to update the Compensation and Position Classification
System for civilian personnel, Base Pay Schedule for military and uniformed personnel, and
policies on and levels of allowances, benefits, and incentives applicable to all government
personnel;

WHEREAS, Section 5 of Presidential Decree No. 1597 provides that allowances,
honoraria and other fringe benefits which may be granted to government employees,
whether payable by their respective offices or by other agencies of government, shall be
subject to the approval of the President upon recommendation of DBM;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) Nos. 19 (s. 2019), 37 (s. 2020), 45 (s. 2021),
1 (s. 2022), and 12 (s. 2023) authorized the one-time grant of Service Recognition Incentive
to government employees for Fiscal Years (FYs) 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023,
respectively, in recognition of the hard work and commitment of government personnel to
public service; and

WHEREAS, the Administration recognizes all government employees for their
collective and invaluable contributions to the government’s continuing efforts in pursuing the
objectives, commitments, targets and deliverables under the Philippine Development Plan
2023-2028 and the President’s 8-Point Socioeconomic Agenda;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the Philippines,
by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Service Recognition Incentive for Employees in the Executive
Department. This Order authorizes the grant of a one-time Service Recognition Incentive
(SRI) at a uniform rate not exceeding ®20,000.00 for each of the following personnel in the
Executive branch:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

a. Civilian personnel in national government agencies (NGAs), including those in state

universities and colleges (SUCs) and government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs), occupying regular, contractual or casual positions; and

. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department of

National Defense, and uniformed personnel of the Philippine National Police, Bureau of
Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology under the Department of
the Interior and Local Government, the Bureau of Corrections under the Department of
Justice, the Philippine Coast Guard under the Department of Transportation, and the
National Mapping and Resource Information Authority under the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources.

Section 2. Conditions on the Grant of the SRI. The grant of SRI shall be subject

to the following conditions:

The civilian personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions;
The personnel are still in government service as of 30 November 2024;

The personnel have rendered at least a total of an aggregate of four (4) months of
satisfactory service as of 30 November 2024, inclusive of services rendered under any
of the alternative work arrangements prescribed by the Civil Service Commission;

Those who have rendered less than a total or an aggregate of four (4) months of
satisfactory service as of 30 November 2024 shall be entitled to a pro-rated SRI, as
follows:

LENGTH OF SERVICE PERCENTAGE OF INCENTIVE

 

 

 

ie months but less than 4 months
Less than 1 month 10%

 

 

 

 

and;

The employees have not received any additional year-end benefit in FY 2024 over and
above the benefit authorized under Republic Act (RA) No. 6686, as amended by RA No.

Section 3. Exclusion from the Grant of SRI. Those engaged without

employer-employee relationship, and whose compensation are funded from non-Personnel
Services (PS) appropriations/budgets are excluded from the grant of SRI, such as:

a.

Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific activities or
services with expected outputs;

Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework basis;
Student workers and apprentices; and

Individuals and groups of people whose services are engaged through job orders,
contracts of service or others similarly situated.

Section 4. Funding Source of the SRI for Employees in the Executive
Department. The funding source for the grant of SRI to employees in the Executive branch
shall be governed by the following:

a. For NGAs, including SUCs, and military and uniformed personnel, the amount required
shall be charged against the available released PS allotments of the respective agencies
under RA No. 11975 or the “General Appropriations Act (GAA) for FY 2024.”

In case of deficiency, the amount required may be charged against the Maintenance and
Other Operating Expenses allotments of the concerned government agency, subject to
the rules on modification in allotments under Section 80 of the General Provisions of RA
No. 11975, and other pertinent budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

b. For GOCCs, the amount required for the SRI shall be charged against their approved
corporate operating budgets (COBs) for FY 2024 only; and

c. Should the identified funding sources be insufficient to cover the full amount of the SRI,
a lower but uniform amount shall be granted to all qualified employees of the NGA or
GOCC.

Section 5. SRI for Employees in the Legislative and Judicial Branches and
Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees of the Senate, House of
Representatives, Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman and Constitutional Offices vested with
fiscal autonomy may likewise be granted a one-time SRI by their respective heads of office
at a uniform rate not exceeding 20,000.00 each, chargeable against the available PS
allotment of their respective agencies, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof.

Should the identified funding sources be insufficient to cover the full amount of the
SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the concerned
office.

Section 6. SRI for Employees in the Local Government Units (LGUs). The grant
of one-time SRI to employees in LGUs, including those in the barangays, shall be
determined by their respective sanggunians depending on the LGU’s financial capability,
subject to the PS limitation in LGU budgets under RA No. 7160 or the “Local Govemment
Code of 1991,” as amended, and the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof, at a uniform
rate not exceeding P20,000.00 each, chargeable against their respective FY 2024 local
government funds. Should the identified funding source be insufficient to cover the full
amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of
the LGU.

In determining the amount of the SRI, the sanggunians shall exercise prudence and
judicious use of government funds, ensuring that the expenditure is reasonable and will not,
in any way, prejudice the delivery of services to the public.

The amount required shall be chargeable against the available FY 2024
appropriations or surplus, upon the enactment by the local sanggunian of the corresponding
supplemental budget (SB) for the purpose. In case the LGU fails to enact an SB within FY
2024, the concerned LGU may enact an SB for FY 2025, provided that the: (i) SB shall be
charged against the LGU’s reverted and unused surplus for prior years, subject to
compliance with pertinent provisions of RA No. 7160, as amended, and other existing laws,
rules and regulations; (ii) prior year's surplus is backed by cash; and (iii) annual budget for
FY 2025 is already approved.

Section 7. SRI for Employees in Local Water Districts (.WDs). LWDs may also
grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined by their Boards of
Directors (BOD), which shall not exceed 20,000.00 each, chargeable against their
respective BOD-approved FY 2024 COBs only, subject to the conditions set forth in Section
2 hereof.

Should the identified funding source be insufficient to cover the full amount of the
SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the LWD.

Section 8. SRI for Employees in Agencies Exempted from the Coverage of RA
No. 6758, as amended. NGAs and GOCCs exempted from the coverage of RA No. 6758,
as amended, may also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined
by their agency heads or governing boards, which shall not exceed ®20,000.00 each,
chargeable against the NGA’s available funds and the GOCC’s FY 2024 COB, subject to
the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof.

Should the identified funding source be insufficient to cover the full amount of the
SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the concerned
agency.

Section 9. Payment Date. The payment of the SRI to all qualified government
employees shall be made not earlier than 15 December 2024.

Section 10. Supplemental Guidelines. As may be necessary, the DBM shall issue
supplemental guidelines to effectively implement this Order.

Section 11. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Section 12. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof
which are inconsistent. with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its publication
in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 12th day of December , in the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President: 5

  

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

HT UIT LA

 

 

 

 

   
  

 

ATTY. LQVEXY V. TOLENTINO-NAVA
S h4s-uy AGING DIRECTOR IV