MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 36

ESTABLISHING THE EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT GROUP

WHEREAS, Section 2(1), Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the State
shall establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate, and integrated system of
education that is relevant to the needs of the people and society;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 10533 or the “Enhanced Basic
Education Act of 2013” provides that the State shall create a functional basic
education system that will develop productive and responsible citizens equipped with
the essential competencies, skills and values for both life-long learning and
employment;

WHEREAS, Section 6 of RA No. 9155 or the “Governance of Basic Education
Act of 2001,” vests the Department of Education (DepEd) with authority,
accountability, and responsibility for ensuring access to, promoting equity in, and
improving the quality of basic education;

WHEREAS, Section 4 of RA No. 11899 or the “Second Congressional
Commission on Education (EDCOM II) Act” created EDCOM II to undertake a
comprehensive national assessment and evaluation of the performance of the
country’s education sector for the purpose of recommending transformative, concrete,
and targeted reforms in the sector, with the end in view of making the Philippines
globally competitive in both education and labor markets;

WHEREAS, EDCOM 1's report, “Miseducation: The Failed System of Philippine
Education,” noted, among others, that at present, implementation of education
programs is fragmented, pathways in teacher development are misaligned, and
education plans and policies remain incoherent;

WHEREAS, EDCOM II further observed that coordination within the education
sector remains a challenge despite the existence of multiple inter-agency bodies on
education jointly participated in by government agencies with mandates related
thereto;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, it is necessary to establish an effective coordinating mechanism
among agencies involved in education and workforce development in order to address
long-standing concerns in the education sector, and foster a complete, adequate, and
integrated system of education in the country;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title Ill of Executive Order No. 292 or the
“Administrative Code of 1987” provides that the President, in order to achieve
simplicity, economy, and efficiency, shall have the continuing authority to reorganize
the administrative structure of the Office of the President; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the
mandate to ensure faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Education and Workforce Development Group. The Education
and Workforce Development Group (“EWDG") is hereby created. It shall be chaired
by the President, and shall be composed of the following:

Co-Chairperson : Secretary, DepEd
Vice Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment
Members : Chairperson, Commission on Higher Education

Secretary, Department of Migrant Workers

Secretary, Department of Economy, Planning, and
Development

Director General, Technical Education and _ Skills
Development Authority

The DepEd shall serve as the Secretariat of the EWDG, and shall provide
technical and administrative support to the EWDG. For this purpose, the Secretariat
shall be headed by an Executive Director who shall be designated by the DepEd
Secretary from among the senior officials of DepEd.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The EWDG shall serve as the central
coordinating body on all matters related to education and workforce development in
the country. Subject to existing laws, rules and regulations, the EWDG shall perform
the following duties and functions:

a. Formulate a 10-year National Education and Workforce Development Plan
(NEWDP), which shall guide concerned government agencies in formulating and
implementing strategies to align the country’s education and workforce systems
with the rapidly evolving demands of the global economy. The NEWDP shall,
among others:

i. Address challenges confronting the education sector, encompassing
childhood education, basic education, higher education, and vocational skills
training;

ii. Identify priority programs, activities, and projects for the education sector, with
focus on learning recovery, tracking learner progress, and meeting the current
and future human resource requirements of the education sector; and

iii. Provide mechanisms to strengthen the country’s labor market information
system to guide the decision-making of learners and educational institutions,
as well as the formulation of policies and programs of concerned government
agencies, particularly with regard to scholarship programs, teacher training
and specialization, and offerings in Senior High School, higher education, and
technical and vocational education and training.

b. Study and evaluate all existing inter-agency bodies with duties and functions
related to education and workforce development, and propose mechanisms to
streamline and rationalize the same.

In this regard, the EWDG, in consultation with the member-agencies of said
inter-agency bodies, shall evaluate the structure, duties and functions, and
performance of said inter-agency bodies and determine whether they can be
merged, streamlined, or abolished;

c. Oversee and monitor the implementation of all government programs, activities
and projects related to education and workforce development, and recommend
appropriate actions thereon;

d. Study the current legal and policy framework related to education and workforce
development, and recommend appropriate actions thereon;

e. As may be necessary, create technical working groups to assist and support the
EWDG in the effective and efficient implementation of this Order; and

f. Submit monthly reports to the President and the Executive Secretary on its
performance and activities, including updates on the formulation of the NEWDP,
evaluation of inter-agency bodies, and implementation of education and workforce
development programs; and

g. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Convergence. All concerned national government agencies are
hereby directed, and all local government units (LGUs) and the private sector are
hereby encouraged, to render full support to and cooperation with the EWDG to ensure
the effective implementation of this Order.

As may be necessary, the EWDG may collaborate with and/or call upon any
government department, agency, bureau, office, or instrumentality, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations and state colleges and universities,
and invite LGUs and representatives from the private sector, to provide assistance in
attaining its objectives.

Section 4. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against the current and available appropriations of the
member-agencies of the EWDG and such other available funding sources as may be
identified by the Department of Budget and Management, subject to pertinent
budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules, and regulations. Thereafter, the
funding requirements necessary for the continued implementation of this Order shall
be included in the budget proposals of said agencies, subject to the usual budget
preparation process.

Section 5. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 13th day of August , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President: df

Offica of the President
i G RECORDS OFFICE

 

    

m
REPUBLIC 01 ‘LIPPINES

HU UY UTM

PBBM009551