MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 23

IMPLEMENTING A DIGITAL AND INTEGRATED SYSTEM FOR THE
PRE-BORDER TECHNICAL VERIFICATION AND CROSS-BORDER
ELECTRONIC INVOICING OF ALL IMPORT COMMODITIES

WHEREAS, Section 101 of Republic Act No. 10863 or the “Customs
Modernization and Tariff Act” directs the State to develop and implement programs for
the continuous enhancement of customs systems and processes;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is a signatory to the World Customs Organization
International Convention on the Simplification and Harmonization of Customs
Procedures or the “Revised Kyoto Convention,” which requires Contracting Parties to
simplify customs procedures and ensure that these are predictable and transparent,
in accordance with international standards;

WHEREAS, the implementation of a pre-border technical verification of all
imported goods aims to expedite the inspection of all imported goods entering the
country, and further strengthen national security, safeguard consumers’ rights, and
protect the environment against sub-standard and dangerous imported goods;

WHEREAS, a single electronic invoicing system controlled by the Philippine
Government is necessary to effectively monitor international trade transactions of all
imported goods; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Definition of Terms. For the purpose of this Order, the following
terms shall mean:

a. Agricultural Goods - pertain, but not limited, to fresh or frozen meats, fish and other
aquatic products, vegetables, fruits, cereals whether processed or not, and animal

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

feeds and feed ingredients. Agricultural goods may be shipped in bulk, break bulk,
or shipping containers.

b. Accredited Testing, Inspection, and Certification (TIC) Companies - refer to
qualified third-party TIC Companies selected by the Committee for Pre-border
Technical Verification and Cross-border Electronic Invoicing under Section 3
hereof, which have demonstrated legal, financial, and technical capabilities to
implement both the Pre-border Technical Verification and Cross-border Electronic —
Invoicing System as a digital and integrated package.

c. Cross-border Electronic Invoicing System - refers to a system used by a verified
and registered foreign exporter to create export invoice on a single electronic
platform controlled by the Philippine Government. The electronic invoice is shared
transparently and in real time with the Bureau of Customs (BOC), Bureau of
Internal Revenue, Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI), and other relevant government agencies.

d. Pre-border Technical Verification - refers to testing and inspection of all
commodities by accredited TIC Companies prior to exporting to the Philippines for
purposes of verifying in advance the declared specifications, description, weight,
volume, and country of origin, and ensuring that these commodities are safe and
of good quality, in accordance with the World Trade Organization Facilitation
Agreement, and existing laws, rules and regulations.

e. TIC Companies - refer to companies which are members of the TIC Council with
the necessary staff and facilities to test, inspect, and certify all import commodities
bound for export to the Philippines.

Section 2. Committee for Pre-border Technical Verification and Cross-
border Electronic Invoicing. To undertake the necessary steps for the successful
implementation of the Pre-border Technical Verification and Cross-border Electronic
Invoicing System, the Committee for Pre-border Technical Verification and Cross-
border Electronic Invoicing (Committee) is hereby created, which shall be composed
of the following:

Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Finance

Members : Secretary, DA;
Secretary, DTI;
Secretary, Department of Energy;
Secretary, Department of Health;
Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural Resources;
Secretary, Department of Information and Communications

Technology;

Commissioner, BOC;
Director General, Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency; and
Two (2) non-voting Representatives from duly recognized
industry associations, to be appointed by the Chairperson, upon
recommendation. of the Committee.

The DOF shall serve as the Secretariat of the Committee, and shall provide
administrative and technical support to the Committee.

The Chairperson and Members of the Committee may designate their
alternates, with ranks not lower than a Director IV or its equivalent, who are fully
authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The Committee shall regularly convene at least once every quarter or as often
as may be deemed necessary by the Chairperson.

Section 3. Powers and Functions of the Committee. The Committee shall
have the following powers and functions:

a. Formulate guidelines and implementing rules and regulations for the conduct of
Pre-Border Technical Verification of all commodities by accredited TIC Companies
prior to the export of these commodities to the Philippines. The conduct of
Pre-Border Technical Verification shall be at no cost to the Philippine Government.

b. Formulate procedures for the procurement of Cross-border Electronic Invoicing
System which shall serve as the single electronic platform for the creation,
uploading, and storage of electronic invoices for imported commodities covered by
a digital verification certificate from accredited TIC Companies. The procurement
of Cross-border Electronic Invoicing System shall be at no cost to the Philippine
Government;

c. Issue guidelines for the accreditation of third-party TIC Companies, including the
qualifications, documentary requirements, and procedures therefor. The
Committee shall ensure that the mechanism for the accreditation of third-party TIC
Companies shall be competitive, transparent, and in accordance with international
trade standards, and existing laws, rules and regulations;

d. Submit to the President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary, a bi-annual
report detailing, among others, the Committee’s accomplishments, and the status,
timelines and targets of the implementation of Pre-border Technical Verification
and Cross-border Electronic Invoicing System; and

e. Perform such other functions as may be necessary in the implementation of this
Order, or as may be directed by the President or the Executive Secretary.

Section 4. Implementation of Pre-border Technical Verification and
Cross-border Electronic Invoicing System. The BOC, as the primary government
entity responsible for implementing customs procedures, is hereby directed to
implement the Pre-border Technical Verification and Cross-border Electronic Invoicing
System, in accordance with the strategic direction and policy guidance issued by the
Committee, international trade standards, and existing laws, rules and regulations.

The BOC may request any government department, agency, or instrumentality,
including government-owned or -controlled corporations, to render full assistance and
cooperation to ensure the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 5. Phased Implementation. The provisions of this Order shall be
applied to all import commodities in three (3) phases:


es een

 

 

 

 

 

1 Agricultural goods
2 Non-agricultural goods with health and safety issues
3 Other goods with misdeclaration to avoid duties and taxes

 

In this regard, the Committee shall set timelines and targets for the phased
implementation, provided that the Pre-border Technical Verification and Cross-border
Electronic Invoicing System shall be fully implemented within two (2) years from the
effectivity of this Order.

Section 6. Funding. The initial funding requirements necessary for the
implementation of this Order shall be charged against available appropriations of the
BOC and other member-agencies of the Committee, subject to pertinent budgeting,
accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding
requirements necessary for the continued implementation of this Order shall be
included: in the budget proposal of said agencies, subject to the usual budget
preparation process.

Section 7. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 8. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 13th day of May ,in
the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

By the President:

EN. ESPINO
ACTI DIRECTOR IV

  

 

OF THE Y PIILEPPIARS

fi ii tH

PBBM004558

REPUBLI'