MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 19.

CREATING THE INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY
ACTIVITIES FOR NATIONAL RAILWAY PROJECTS

WHEREAS, Section 9, Article Ill of the Constitution provides that private property
shall not be taken for public use without just compensation, and the State shall ensure
ihat owners of real property acquired for national government infrastructure projects are
promptly paid just compensation;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 10752 or the “Right-of-Way (ROW) Act”
authorizes the government to acquire real property needed as ROW site or location for
any national government infrastructure project through donation, negotiated sale,
expropriation, or any other mode of acquisition as provided by law;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028 and the Administration’s
8-Point Socioeconomic Agenda aim to improve transportation by providing sustainable
and affordable transportation options that will link communities to economic, social and
cultural centers;

WHEREAS, at present, there are various priority infrastructure projects in the
transportation sector that are envisioned to boost mobility, enhance connectivity and
promote growth centers outside the urban-indusirial region, including the Metro Manila
Subway Project, North-South Commuter Railway System, Mindanao Railway Project,
and Philippine National Railway (PNR) South Long Haul, among others:

WHEREAS, issues concerning land acquisition, as well as resettlement activities
for Project Affected Persons (PAPs), adversely affect the timelines for the implementation
of railway projects;

WHEREAS, there is a need to constitute an Inter-Agency Committee for ROW
activities to accelerate the implementation of railway projects, and ensure high-level
cooperation and support from concerned government agencies to streamline the process
of land acquisition and delivery of services to PAPs; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of coniroi over all Executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Inter-Agency Committee for ROW Activities for National Railway
Projects. The Inter-Agency Committee for ROW Activities for National Railway Projects
(Committee) is hereby created to study and devise an efficient and collaborative
mechanism to streamline the process of land acquisition necessary for the
implementation of all railway projects. The Committee shall be composed of the heads
of the following agencies:

Chairperson : Department of Transportation (DOT)
Co-Chairperson : Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development
Members : Department of the Interior and Local Government:

Department of Social Welfare and Development;
Department of Environment and Natural Resources;
Department of Finance;

Department of Budget and Management;
Department of Justice; and

Office of the Solicitor General.

The PNR shall serve as the Secretariat of the Committee, and shall provide
administrative and technical support to the Committee.

The Chairperson, Co-Chairperson, and members of the Committee may designate
their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or its equivalent,
who are fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The Committee shall regularly convene at least once every quarter or as often as
may be deemed necessary by the Chairperson.

Section 2. Powers and Functions. The Committee shall have the following
powers and functions:

a. Coordinate among concerned agencies regarding the implementation of railway
policies, programs, and projects;

b. Craft and approve project-specific policies, programs, and manuals consistent with
relevant laws, rules and regulations, and social and environmental safeguards;

c. Identify the appropriate services or programs, as well as the specific implementing
government agencies, to ensure effective completion of these services and programs
in relation to land acquisition and other ROW activities, such as livelihood, income
restoration, and resettlement;

d. Identify effective existing policies, agreements, contracts, and other similar
arrangements between and among government agencies, and consider adopting or
enhancing the same;

e. Consolidate and mobilize agency resources to streamline and synchronize budgeting
and impiementation of relevant programs and projects;

f. Review, deliberate, and resolve or act on issues and grievance complaints elevated
to the Committee;

g. Create, convene and reorganize technical working groups to assist in the
implementation of this Order; and

h. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Convergence. The Committee may call upon the assistance of
concerned government agencies and entities, as may be necessary in the performance
of its functions. For this purpose, all concerned agencies and instrumentalities of the
National Government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations are
hereby directed, and all local government units are hereby encouraged, to undertake
efforts in support of the implementation of this Order.

Section 4. Reporting. The Committee shall submit to the President, through the

Office of the Executive Secretary, a bi-annual report detailing, among others, the

Committee’s accomplishments, and status of land acquisition and ROW activities for
. ongoing railway projects.

Section 5. Funding. The funds necessary for the implementation of this Order
shall be charged against the available appropriations of concerned agencies, subject to
pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the
funding requirements for succeeding years shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 6. Implementing Guidelines. Within thirty (30) working days from the
effectivity of this Order, the Committee, in coordination with relevant government
agencies, shall formulate the guidelines necessary to effectively implement this Order.

Section 7. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 8. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof,
that are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 25th dayof March , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President: ?

 

   

oo EET

CERTIFIET/COPY

Hille. ESPINO
%-}-usy ACTING DIRECTOR IV