MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 12

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SERVICE RECOGNITION INCENTIVE
TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2023

WHEREAS, Section (4)(h) of Congressional Joint Resolution (JR) No. 4 (s.
2009) authorizes the grant of: (i) incentives to reward an employee’s loyalty to
government service and their contributions to the agency's continuing viable
existence; (ii) incentives as reward for exceeding agency financial and operational
performance targets to motivate employee efforts toward higher productivity; and (iii)
other existing benefits to be categorized by the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) as incentives;

WHEREAS, Section (17)(iv) of JR No. 4 authorizes the President, upon the
recommendation of the DBM, to update the Compensation and Position Classification
System for civilian personnel, Base Pay Schedule for military and uniformed
personnel, and policies on and levels of allowances, benefits, and incentives
applicable to all government personnel;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) Nos. 19 (s. 2019), 37 (s. 2020), 45
(s. 2021), and 1 (s. 2022) authorized the grant of Service Recognition Incentive to
government employees for Fiscal Years (FYs) 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022,
respectively, in recognition of the hard work, commitment, and dedication to public
service of government personnel; and

WHEREAS, the Administration recognizes all government employees for their
collective and invaluable contribution to the government's continuing efforts in
pursuing the objectives, commitments, targets and deliverables under the Philippine
Development Plan 2023-2028 and the President's 8-Point Socioeconomic Agenda;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Service Recognition Incentive for Employees in the Executive
Department. This Order authorizes the grant of a one-time Service Recognition
Incentive (SRI) at a uniform rate not exceeding Twenty Thousand Pesos (220,000.00)
for each of the following personnel in the Executive branch:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

a. Civilian personnel in national government agencies (NGAs), including those in
state universities and colleges (SUCs) and government-owned or -controlled
corporations (GOCCs), occupying regular, contractual or casual positions; and

b. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department of
National Defense, and uniformed personnel of the Philippine National Police,
Bureau of Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology under
the Department of the Interior and Local Government, the Bureau of Corrections
under the Department of Justice, the Philippine Coast Guard under the
Department of Transportation, and the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority under the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.

Section 2. Conditions on the Grant of the SRI. The grant of the SRI shall be
subject to the following conditions:

a. The civilian personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions;

b. The personnel are still in government service as of 30 November 2023;

c. The personnel have rendered at least a total or an aggregate of four (4) months
of satisfactory service as of 30 November 2023, inclusive of services rendered
under any of the alternative work arrangements prescribed by the Civil Service

Commission;

d. Those who have rendered less than a total or an aggregate of four (4) months of
satisfactory service as of 30 November 2023 shall be entitled to a pro-rated SRI,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

as follows:
LENGTH OF SERVICE PERCENTAGE OF INCENTIVE
Less than 1 month 10%
and;

e. The employees have not received any additional year-end benefit in FY 2023 over
and above the benefit authorized under Republic Act (RA) No. 6686, as amended
by RA No. 8441.

Section 3. Exclusion from the Grant of the SRI. Those engaged without
employer-employee relationship and whose compensation are funded from
non-Personnel Services (PS) appropriations/budgets are excluded from the grant of
the SRI, such as:

a. Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific activities
or services with expected outputs;

b. Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework
basis;

c. Student workers and apprentices; and

d. Individuals and groups of people whose services are engaged through job orders,
contracts of service or others similarly situated.

Section 4. Funding Source of the SRI for Employees in the Executive
Department. The funding source for the grant of the SRI to employees in the
Executive branch shall be governed by the following:

a. For NGAs, including SUCs, and military and uniformed personnel, the amount
required shall be charged against the available PS allotments of the respective
agencies under RA No. 11936 or the “General Appropriations Act (GAA) for FY

In case of deficiency, the amount required may be charged against the
Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses allotment of the concerned
government agency, subject to the rules on modification in allotments under
Section 80 of the General Provisions of RA No. 11936, and other pertinent
budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

b. For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets (COBs) for FY 2023 only; and

c. Should the identified funding sources be insufficient to cover the full amount of the
SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the
NGA, SUC or GOCC.

Section 5. SRI for Employees in the Legislative and Judicial Departments
and Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees of the Senate, House
of Representatives, Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman and Constitutional Offices
vested with fiscal autonomy may likewise be granted a one-time SRI by their
respective heads of office at a uniform rate not exceeding Twenty Thousand Pesos
(P20,000.00) each, chargeable against the available PS allotment of their respective
agencies, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof.

Should the identified funding source be insufficient to cover the full amount of
the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the
concerned office.

Section 6. SRI for Employees in Local Government Units (LGUs). The grant
of the one-time SRI to employees in LGUs, including those in the barangays, shall be
determined by their respective sanggunians depending on the LGU’s financial
capability, subject to the PS limitation in LGU budgets under RA No. 7160 or the “Local
Government Code of 1991,” and the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof, at a
uniform rate not exceeding Twenty Thousand Pesos (220,000.00), chargeable against
their respective FY 2023 local government funds. Should the identified funding source

be insufficient to cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be
paid to all qualified employees of the LGU.

In determining the amount of the SRI, the sanggunians shall exercise prudence
and judicious use of government funds, ensuring that the expenditure is reasonable
and will not, in any way, prejudice the delivery of services to the public.

The amount required shall be chargeable against the available FY 2023
appropriations or surplus, upon the enactment by the local sanggunian of the
corresponding supplemental budget (SB) for the purpose. In case the LGU fails to
enact an SB within FY 2023, the LGU concerned may enact an SB for FY 2024,
provided that the: (i) SB shall be charged against the |.GU’s reverted and unused
surplus for prior years, subject to compliance with pertinent provisions of RA No. 7160,
and other existing laws, rules and regulations; (ii) prior year’s surplus is backed by
cash; and (iii) annual budget for FY 2024 is already approved.

Section 7. SRI for Employees in Local Water Districts (LWDs). LWDs may
also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined by their
Boards of Directors (BOD), which shall not exceed Twenty Thousand Pesos
(P20,000.00) each, chargeable only against their respective BOD-approved FY 2023
COBs, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof.

Should the identified funding source be insufficient to cover the full amount of
the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the
LWD.

Section 8. SRI for Employees in Agencies Exempted from the Coverage
of RA No. 6758, as amended. NGAs and GOCCs exempted from the coverage of RA
No. 6758, as amended, may also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to
be determined by their agency heads or governing boards, which shall not exceed
Twenty Thousand Pesos (R20,000.00) each, chargeable against the NGA’s available
funds and the GOCC's FY 2023 COB, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 2
hereof.

Should the identified funding source be insufficient to cover the full amount of
the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the
concerned agency.

Section 9. Payment Date. The payment of the SRI to all qualified government
employees shall not be earlier than 15 December 2023.

Section 10. Supplemental Guidelines. As may be necessary, the DBM shall
issue supplemental guidelines to effectively implement this Order.

Section 11. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 12. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th day of December , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President: /

   

i
Ex

P. BERSAMIN
ive Secretary

  

Office of ihe esl

 

 

Epoatae OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

Il

 

[HM AIH

PBBM003449

 

HL