MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 33

CONSTITUTING THE INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE TO SUPPORT
THE HOSTING OF THE 332 ASIA-PACIFIC REGIONAL SCOUT
JAMBOREE

WHEREAS, under Section 13, Article Il of the Constitution, the State recognizes
the vital role of the youth in nation-building, and shall promote and protect their
physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well-being, inculcate in them
patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and civic affairs;

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 111, as amended by Presidential Decree
No. 460 and Republic Act No. 7278, mandates the Boy Scouts of the Philippines (BSP)
to: (i) promote, through organization and cooperation with other agencies, the ability
of boys to do things for themselves and others; (ii) train them in scoutcraft; and
(iii) teach them patriotism, courage, self-reliance, kindred virtues, and moral values,
using methods commonly used by boy scouts;

WHEREAS, the Asia-Pacific Regional Scout Jamboree (APRSJ), organized by
the Asia-Pacific Regional Scout Committee of the World Organization of the Scout
Movement, is a major scouting event in the Asia-Pacific region which aims to provide
opportunity for scouts aged 12 to 17 years old to experience fellowship of world
scouting in a fun and learning environment;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, through the BSP, is set to host the 33"? APRSJ on
14-21 December 2025 at Kainomayan Scout Camp, Botolan, Zambales, with the
theme, “Be Prepared: Scouts for Peace and Sustainable Development,” and

WHEREAS, the successful hosting of the 33 APRSJ requires the involvement
and support of all concerned government agencies, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), state universities and colleges (SUCs), local
government units (LGUs), and the private sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the

Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Section 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force. The Inter-Agency Task
Force (“Task Force”) to support the preparation, organization, and hosting of the 334
APRSJ is hereby created. The Task Force shall be composed of the heads of the
following:

Chairperson : BSP

Members : Department of Education
Department of Foreign Affairs
Department of Health

Department of Information and Communications Technology
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Department of Public Works and Highways

Department of Tourism

Department of Transportation

Bureau of Immigration

Philippine National Police

Philippine Information Agency

The BSP shall serve as the Secretariat of the Task Force, and shall provide
administrative and technical support to the Task Force.

The Chairperson and members of the Task Force may designate their respective
alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or its equivalent, who shall
be fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The Task Force may invite other concerned government agencies, as well as
non-government organizations (NGOs), civil society groups, the academe, and other
stakeholders as observers and/or resource persons to aid in the performance of the
functions of the Task Force, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The Task Force shall perform the following
duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Support the BSP in the formulation and implementation of programs, activities and
projects, as well as in the organization and management of the requirements for
the hosting of the 33"? APRSJ;

b. Ensure coordination and collaboration with other departments, bureaus, offices,
agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including GOCCs and SUCs,
regarding programs, activities and projects for the preparation, organization and
hosting of the 33° APRSJ; and

c. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Agency Support. All national government agencies and
instrumentalities, including GOCCs and SUCs, are hereby directed, and all LGUs,
NGOs, and the private sector are hereby encouraged, to render support and
assistance for the effective and efficient implementation of this Order.

Section 4. Funding. The amounts necessary for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against available appropriations of concerned agencies,
subject to existing budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations.


Section 5. Repeal. All other issuances, administrative rules and regulations, or
parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or modified

accordingly.

Section 6. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared invalid
or unconstitutional, the other sections not otherwise affected shall remain in full force

and effect.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 21st dayof May , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President:

 

    

Office of the President
MALACANAN@ RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

ATTY. LOVELY/V. TOLENTINO-NAVA
Dh DIRECTOR IV

        
 

   
  
 

 

 
 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PBBM008854