MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 26

AUTHORIZING THE ONE-TIME GRANT OF RICE ASSISTANCE TO ALL
MILITARY AND UNIFORMED PERSONNEL FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

WHEREAS, Section 5(2), Article XVI of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to strengthen the patriotic spirit and nationalistic consciousness of the military;

WHEREAS, Section 5 of Presidential Decree No. 1597 provides that allowances,
honoraria, and other fringe benefits which may be granted to government employees,
whether payable by their respective offices or by other agencies of government, shall be
approved by the President upon recommendation of the Secretary of the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM);

WHEREAS, Section 17(iv) of Congress Joint Resolution No. 4 (s. 2009) provides
that the President, upon recommendation of the DBM, is authorized to update the
Compensation and Position Classification System of civilian personnel and Base Pay
Schedule of military and uniformed personnel (MUPs), as well as the policies on and
levels of allowances, benefits, and incentives of government personnel;

WHEREAS, the Administration recognizes the vital role of MUPs in providing
internal and external security, promoting peace and order, and ensuring public safety
through the implementation of various programs and initiatives;

WHEREAS, the Department of Agriculture (DA) and DBM recommend the grant of
one (1)-time rice assistance to all MUPs for fiscal year (FY) 2024 in recognition of their
invaluable contribution to the country, to assist them in coping with the effects of the
current socio-economic challenges, and to likewise provide economic opportunities for
those in the agriculture sector; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus, and offices, as well as the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Rice Assistance for all MUPs. A one (1)-time rice assistance at a
uniform quantity of 25 kilograms of rice is hereby granted to each of the following,
provided they are in active service as of 30 November 2024:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

a. Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department of
National Defense; and ' :

b. Uniformed personnel of the Philippine National Police, Bureau of Fire Protection,
Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, and Philippine Public Safety College
under the Department of the Interior and Local Government, Bureau of Corrections
under the Department of Justice, Philippine Coast Guard under the Department of
Transportation, and National Mapping and Resource Information Authority under the
Department of Environment and Natural Resources.

The one (1)-time rice assistance shall be sourced from local and participating
farmers of the KADIWA ni ANI at KITA or KADIWA Program of DA.

Section 2. Distribution of Rice Assistance. The distribution of rice shall be from
December 2024 to March 2025, and shall be done in.designated National Food Authority
(NFA) warehouses, to authorized representatives of MUPs, based on a schedule set by
NFA.

Section 3. Funding. The funding requirement for the grant of the rice assistance
to MUPs shall be charged against the Contingent Fund under Republic Act No. 11975 or
the “General Appropriations Act for FY 2024,” subject to compliance with relevant laws,
rules and regulations.

Section 4. Implementing Guidelines. Within 15 days from the effectivity of this
Order, the DA and DBM, in consultation with NFA, shall formulate and issue the
necessary rules and/or guidelines for the effective implementation of this Order, including
the efficient and effective mechanisms for the distribution of the abovementioned rice
assistance.

Section 5. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order is held invalid or
unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November , in the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President:

   

} e-
UGAS P. BERSAMIN

j!

  

CERTIFIED COPY

    

  

ATTY. LQVELY V.-TOLENTINO-NAVA
ACTING DIRECTOR IV