MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 38

CREATING THE NATIONAL SPORTS TOURISM INTER-AGENCY
COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, Article Il, Section 17 of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to prioritize education, science and technology, arts, culture, and sports, to foster
patriotism and nationalism, accelerate social progress, and promote total human
liberation and development;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 6847 or the “Philippine Sports Commission
Act” mandates the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) to provide leadership,
formulate policies, and set the priorities and directions for the promotion and
development of all national sports, and for this purpose, collaborate with and
encourage participation of all sectors, including government agencies and
instrumentalities, such as the Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone Authority
(TIEZA) and Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR);

WHEREAS, RA No. 9593 or the “Tourism Act of 2009” and Presidential Decree
No. 1869 (s. 1983), as amended, provides that government-owned or -controlled
corporations (GOCCs) and government financial institutions (GFls) authorized by their
respective charters, including TIEZA and PAGCOR, play a critical role in financing and
supporting tourism and sports development programs, and may provide funds or
technical assistance for projects which shall be used for the development, promotion,
and marketing of tourism and other projects that will boost tourism in the country;

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987,”
the Department of Tourism (DOT) shall be the primary government agency responsible
for the development and promotion of tourism in the Philippines, both domestic and
international;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028 emphasizes the
importance of increasing the country's participation in high-impact international events
and dedicated investment missions to build on positive perceptions and success
stories of destinations and people;

WHEREAS, according to PSC, sports tourism has emerged as a vital tool for
economic growth, cultural exchange, and global recognition, and the development of
sports tourism in the country will not only strengthen the Philippines’ position as a
premier international sports destination, but also generate employment, attract
investments, stimulate local economies, and contribute to infrastructure and tourism
development;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, it is necessary to create an inter-agency committee to harmonize,
coordinate, and oversee all government initiatives to develop, promote, and sustain
sports tourism in the country, but still maintaining the policy of non-interference in the
international affairs of national sports associations; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution
and existing laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. National Sports Tourism Inter-Agency Committee (NST-IAC). The
NST-IAC is hereby created for the purpose of harmonizing, coordinating, and
overseeing the development, promotion, and implementation of sports tourism
initiatives, including the bidding for and hosting of strategic, high-level, and high-impact
international sporting events, and the facilitation of large-scale domestic sports tourism
activities, consistent with existing laws, rules and regulations.

The NST-IAC shall be composed of the heads of the following agencies:

Chairperson : PSC

Vice-Chairperson : DOT

Members : Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG);
Department of Budget and Management (DBM);
TIEZA;
PAGCOR; and

Two (2) Private Sector Representatives, who shall be
designated by the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, and
shall come from the tourism sector.

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and ex-officio members of the NST-IAC may
designate their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or
its equivalent, who shall be fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The NST-IAC may invite other concerned government agencies, as well as local
government units (LGUs), non-government organizations, civil society groups, the
academe, and other stakeholders as observers and/or resource persons to aid in the
performance of its duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The NST-IAC shall perform the following
duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Advise the President on all matters regarding policies, plans, activities, and
programs of the government towards the development of sports tourism in the
country;

b. Identify and pursue bids for the hosting of strategic, high-level, high-impact, and
large-scale international sporting events;

c. Lead, plan, source and/or allocate funds necessary for the bidding and hosting of
said sporting events, in coordination with relevant international sports governing

2

bodies, sports associations, and other government agencies, including LGUs,
subject to applicable laws, rules, and regulations;

d. Formulate and implement marketing and promotional strategies to maximize the
economic, cultural, and social benefits of sports tourism;

e. Through the PSC, enter into contracts, agreements or partnerships with other
government agencies or private entities and individuals to support sports tourism
projects and activities;

f. In accordance with the provisions of applicable laws, rules and regulations, and
through the PSC or any of the member-agencies of the NST-IAC, accept
donations, contributions, grants, bequests or gifts from domestic or foreign
sources, for purposes relevant to its mandates and functions;

g. Ensure that the development of sports-related infrastructure in the country is
consistent with existing, laws, rules and regulations, including various national and
regional development plans;

h. As may be necessary, create, convene and reorganize task forces and/or working
groups to assist in the performance of its duties and functions;

i. Formulate a development plan for sports tourism in the country, which shall serve
as a comprehensive strategic framework for the country’s sports tourism;

j. Monitor and evaluate sports tourism projects of the government, and submit annual
reports to the Office of the President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary;

k. Request assistance of any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality
of the government, including GOCCs, as may be necessary in the discharge of its
functions;

|. Recommend and coordinate the allocation of funds or technical assistance from
member-agencies, GOCCs, and GFls authorized by their respective charters to
support tourism and sports development, subject to existing budgeting, accounting,
and auditing laws, rules and regulations; and

m. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Secretariat. The PSC shall serve as Secretariat of the NST-IAC, and
shall be tasked to provide the necessary technical, administrative and operational
support to the NST-IAC.

Section 4. Executive Committee. To assist the NST-IAC, an Executive
Committee is hereby created consisting of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of
the NST-IAC, the Heads of TIEZA and PAGCOR, and such other members as the
Chairperson may designate, or their duly authorized representatives.

Section 5. Convergence. All concerned government agencies are hereby
directed, and all LGUs and the private sector are hereby encouraged, to render full
support to and cooperation with the NST-IAC to ensure the effective and efficient
implementation of this Order.

Section 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the initial implementation of
this Order shall be charged against the current and available appropriations of PSC,
DOT, DILG, and DBM, the annual corporate operating budget (COB) of TIEZA and
PAGCOR, and such other sources as may be determined by DBM, subject to pertinent
budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the
funding requirements for the continued implementation of this Order shall be included
in the budget proposals of PSC, DOT, DILG, and DBM, and the annual COB of TIEZA
and PAGCOR, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 7. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held
unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or provisions not affected thereby shall
continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 8. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and issuances or parts
thereof inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 29th day of October _, inthe
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

 

By the President:

     
  

eet ree

Off Lodi the President

MALACAWANG RECORDS OFFICE
fy

   
 

  
   
  

 

CERTIFIED COPY

FINV. TOLENTINO-NAVA
DIRECTOR IV

ane Se ae!

 
 

THE PHILIPPINES

REP

PBBM010728