MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 24

INSTITUTIONALIZING THE USE OF THE ELECTRONIC TRAVEL
INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR INTERNATIONAL INBOUND AND
OUTBOUND PASSENGERS AND CREW MEMBERS

WHEREAS, Section 12, Article XIV of the Constitution provides that the State shall
regulate the transfer and promote the adaptation of technology from all sources for
national benefit;

WHEREAS, under Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 10173 or the “Data Privacy
Act of 2012,” the State recognizes the vital role of information and communications
technology in nation-building and its inherent obligation to ensure that personal
information in information and communications systems in the government and in the
private sector are secured and protected;

WHEREAS, Section 6 of RA No. 10844 or the “Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT) Act of 2015” empowers the DICT to implement
national policies, plans, programs, and guidelines that will promote the development and
use of information and communications technology;

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title II], Book IV of Executive Order (EO) No.
292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987” mandates the Bureau of Immigration (Bl) to
administer and enforce immigration, citizenship, and alien admission and registration
laws in accordance with the provisions of the Philippine Commonwealth Act No. 613 or
the “Immigration Act of 1940,” as amended;

WHEREAS, Section 3 of RA No. 9271 or the “Quarantine Act of 2004” vests the
Bureau of Quarantine (BOQ) with authority to examine entry and exit of incoming and
outgoing passengers and crew members to ensure security against introduction and
spread of infectious and emerging diseases, and public health emergencies of
international concern;

WHEREAS, Section 437 of RA No. 10863 or the “Customs Modernization and
Tariff Act” requires the Bureau of Customs (BOC) to provide simplified customs clearance
procedures for passengers and baggage processing, in accordance with international
agreements, and customs best practices;

WHEREAS, Section 6 of RA No. 9593 or the “Tourism Act of 2009,” as amended
by RA No. 11262, authorizes the Department of Tourism (DOT) to undertake research

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

studies and surveys to analyze the country’s travel conditions and trends relating to
tourism;

WHEREAS, Section 5 of RA No. 11641 or the “Department of Migrant Workers
(DMW) Act” mandates the DMW to promote, administer, and undertake systems that will
regulate, manage, and monitor overseas employment of Filipino workers;

WHEREAS, on 5 December 2022, the DICT, BI, DOT, BOQ, and BOC launched
a unified and integrated digital data collection platform known as the Electronic Travel
Information (eTravel) System to streamline various travel declaration procedures for
international inbound passengers;

WHEREAS, on 15 April 2023, the abovementioned agencies expanded the
eTravel System to cover all international inbound and outbound passengers and crew
members arriving to and departing from the Philippines;

WHEREAS, there is a need to institutionalize the use of eTravel System as the
government's one-stop electronic travel declaration system for all international inbound
and outbound passengers and crew members, for the purpose of ensuring efficiency in
the conduct of border control, health surveillance, tourism statistics analysis, and other
travel related procedures;

WHEREAS, under Section 2 of RA No. 9485 or the “Anti-Red Tape Act of 2007,”
as amended by RA No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government
Service Delivery Act of 2018,” the State shall take appropriate measures to promote
transparency in each agency with regard to the manner of transacting with the public,
which shall encompass initiating and maintaining a program for the adoption of simplified
procedures that will reduce red tape and expedite business and non-business related
transactions in government; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution vests in the President
the power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Institutionalization of eTravel System. The eTravel System is
hereby institutionalized as the government's one-stop electronic travel declaration
system for all international inbound and outbound passengers and crew members. It shall
be used by the government to efficiently conduct border control, health surveillance,
tourism statistics analysis, and other travel related procedures.

Section 2. Technical Working Group. A Technical Working Group (TWG) on
eTravel System is hereby created to study and, as may be necessary, adopt measures
that will further improve the eTravel System, including its usage, management, and
operation, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

The TWG shall be composed of DICT as Chairperson, BI as Co-Chairperson, and
the following as Members: (a) DOT; (b) DMW; (c) Department of Transportation (DOTr);
(d) BOQ; and (e) BOC.

Section 3. Convergence. All relevant departments, agencies, bureaus, offices
and instrumentalities shall provide full support to, and cooperation with the TWG to
ensure effective implementation of this Order.

For this purpose, the TWG and all relevant departments, agencies, bureaus,
offices and instrumentalities shall ensure compliance with RA No. 10173 in the
implementation of this Order, as well the usage, management and operation of the
eTravel System.

Section 4. Funding. The funding requirements for the implementation of this
Order shall be charged against current and available appropriations of DICT, BI, DOT,
DMW, DOTr, BOQ, and BOC, subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing
laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary for the
continued implementation of this Order shall be included in the budget proposals of said
agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 5. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional, the provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts
thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication
in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 27th dayof Aufust , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

   
 
 

sre ecretary

steeesseee

Wil OF THE mii

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

TN ESPINO

ALA DIRECTOR IV