MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 34

CONSTITUTING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE AND DIRECTING
ALL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND INSTRUMENTALITIES TO
SUPPORT THE PHILIPPINES’ HOSTING OF THE WORLDSKILLS
ASEAN MANILA 2025

WHEREAS, Section 14, Article XII of the Constitution provides that the State
shall promote sustained development of a reservoir of national talents consisting of
Filipino scientists, entrepreneurs, professionals, managers, high-level technical
manpower and skilled workers, and craftsmen in all fields;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 7796 or the “Technical
Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) Act of 1994” declares it a policy
of the State to provide relevant, accessible, high-quality, and efficient technical
education and skills development for Filipinos that is responsive to and in accordance
wilh the country's development goals and priorities;

WHEREAS, Section 30 of RA No. 7796 directs TESDA to organize and conduct
the annual National Skills Olympics to promote quality skills development in the
country, with the end in view of participating in international skills competitions;

WHEREAS, the 14'* WorldSkills Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Competition or the “WorldSkills ASEAN Manila 2025 (WSASEAN 2025)” is
a regional event that aims to bring together top youth talents from the ASEAN
member-countries to showcase their technical and vocational skills, and to establish a
global standard for skills excellence in the region;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, through TESDA, is set to host the WSASEAN 2025
on 26 to 28 August 2025 in Pasay City, where around 300 participants from 10 ASEAN
member-countries are expected to compete in 32 skill areas covering six (6) different
sectors, namely: (i) information and communication technology; (il) construction and
building technology; (iii) creative arts and fashion; (iv) manufacturing and engineering
technology; (v) social and personal services; and (vi) transportation and logistics;

WHEREAS, to ensure the successful preparation and hosting of WSASEAN

2025, there is a need to constitute an Inter-Agency Task Force tasked with
spearheading all government efforts relating to the preparation and hosting of

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WSASEAN 2025, and encourage the support from the national government, local
government units (LGUs) and the private sector; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the Executive departments, bureaus, and offices:

NOW THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force. There is hereby
constituted an Inter-Agency Task Force (“Task Force”) which shall have the primary
duty of spearheading all government efforts relating to the preparation and hosting of
WSASEAN 2025.

The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

Chairperson : Director General, TESDA
Co-Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment
Members : Secretary, Department of Agriculture

Secretary, Department of Education

Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs

Secretary, Department of Health

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government
Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways
Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry

Secretary, Department of Transportation

Secretary, Department of Tourism

Chairperson, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority
Chief, Philippine National Police

Commissioner, Bureau of Customs

Commissioner, Bureau of Immigration

The TESDA shall serve as the Secretariat of the Task Force, and shall be
tasked to provide the necessary technical, administrative, and operational support to
the Task Force.

The Chairperson, Co-Chairperson, and the ex officio members of the Task
Force may designate their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant
Secretary or its equivalent, as may be applicable, and who are fully authorized to
decide for or on their behalf.

The Task Force shall be deemed functus officio upon the completion of
WSASEAN 2025.

Section 2. Working Committees. To ensure smooth and efficient preparations
for the WSASEAN 2025, the Task Force may establish working committees composed
of the representatives of the member-agencies of the Task Force, with ranks not lower
than an Assistant Secretary or its equivalent. As needed, the working committees may
expand their membership to include other government agencies, subject to existing,

laws, rules and regulations. Each working committee shall have its own secretariat to
be provided by the designated committee chair, with assistance from TESDA as may
be necessary.

Section 3. Agency Support. In accordance with their respective mandates, all
departments, agencies, instrumentalities, bureaus, and offices of the national
government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, government
financial institutions, and state universities and colleges, are hereby ordered to render
full support, assistance, and cooperation to the Task Force in the implementation of
this Order. LGUs and the private sector are hereby encouraged to cooperate and
participate in the preparation and hosting of WSASEAN 2025.

Section 4. Funding. The funds necessary for the implementation of this Order
shall be charged against the available appropriations of the member-agencies of the
Task Force, subject to applicable budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and
regulations.

Section 5. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 6. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof, that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 19th day of June , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By the President: a)

 

 

     
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

by rary
A OVELY V. TOLENTINO-NAVA
625 DIRECTOR IV

    

  
     
 

 

REPUBLIC OF T!

HI MMII

PBBM009148

1 ‘NES