MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 18

PROHIBITING GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL FROM
USING SIRENS, BLINKERS, AND OTHER SIMILAR SIGNALING OR
FLASHING DEVICES

WHEREAS, Section 1, Article XI of the Constitution provides that public office
is a public trust, and that public officers and employees must at all times be
accountable to the people, serve them with utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty, and
efficiency, act with patriotism and justice, and lead modest lives;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 6713 or the “Code of Conduct and Ethical
Standards for Public Officials and Employees” declares it a policy of the State to
promote high standard of ethics in public service;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 96 (s. 1973), prohibited the use or
attachment of any siren, bell, horn, whistle or similar gadgets that produce
exceptionally loud or startling sound, including dome lights, blinkers, and other similar
signaling or flashing devices to any motor vehicle, except motor vehicles designated
for official use by the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), Philippine National Police
(PNP), National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), and fire trucks and hospital
ambulances;

WHEREAS, it has been observed that the unauthorized and indiscriminate use
of sirens, blinkers and other similar signaling or flashing devices has been rampant,
causing traffic disruptions and unsafe road and traffic environment;

WHEREAS, this Administration is committed to promote the welfare and

well-being of the general public by ensuring a safe and more organized road and traffic
environment;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all executive departments, bureaus, and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the

Republic of the Philippines, by the virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution
and existing laws, do hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Section 1. Prohibition. All government officials and personnel are hereby
prohibited from utilizing sirens, blinkers, and other similar gadgets that produce
exceptionally loud or startling sound, including dome lights, blinkers, or other similar
signaling or flashing devices.

Unauthorized and improper use of signaling or flashing devices by government
officials and employees shall be dealt with in accordance with applicable laws, rules
and regulations.

Section 2. Exceptions. In accordance with PD No. 96, sirens, blinkers, and
other similar devices shall not be used unless in clearly appropriate circumstances,
and only by motor vehicles designated for official use by the AFP, NBI, and PNP, and
fire trucks, hospital ambulances and other emergency vehicles.

In this light, all government officials and personnel are hereby reminded that
use of sirens, dome lights, blinkers, and other similar devices shall only be under
exigent or emergency circumstances or situations or to ensure the expedient and safe
passage of emergency responders.

Section 3. Directive to the Department of Transportation. The Department
of Transportation (DOTr), in coordination with other concerned agencies, is hereby
directed to review, evaluate and update existing policies and guidelines to ensure the
effective implementation of this Order, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 4. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 5. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March ,in
the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

ie
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

 

  
 
  

  
  
    

LEU A

MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

t
7, ESPINO

CTIN DIRECTOR IV