MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 11

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 18 (S. 2019) BY
ALLOWING THE PROCESSING AND EVALUATION OF
APPLICATIONS FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL
ECONOMIC ZONES IN METRO MANILA UNDER CERTAIN
CONDITIONS

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 7916 or the “Special Economic Zone Act of
1995,” as amended by RA No. 8748, established the legal framework and mechanism
for the integration, coordination, planning and monitoring of special economic zones,
industrial estates/parks, export processing zones and other economic zones
(ecozones), and created the Philippine Economic Zone Authority (PEZA) to review and
endorse proposals for the establishment of ecozones to the President;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) No. 18 (s. 2019) imposed a moratorium
on the processing of applications for ecozones in Metro Manila to promote rural
development, ensure inclusive growth in the countryside, and create robust economic
activity and wealth generation in areas outside Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, the services. sector, which includes information and
communications, continues to be a reliable source of economic activity in the country,
and with Metro Manila registering the biggest share in the services sector;

WHEREAS, Section 3 in relation with Section 4, Rule IV of the Implementing
Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA No. 7916 provides that, upon submission of all the
requirements for Pre-Qualification Clearance for endorsement of a proposed ecozone
for Presidential proclamation, the PEZA shall evaluate the application for ecozone
development, and if found viable in its technical, financial, marketing and management
aspects, the PEZA Board shall recommend to the President the issuance of a
proclamation delineating the metes and bounds of the ecozone;

WHEREAS, allowing the processing and evaluation of applications for
ecozones in Metro Manila that have successfully been issued a Pre-Qualification
Clearance by the PEZA Board prior to the implementation of the moratorium under AO
No. 18 will have a positive impact on job creation and will further strengthen Metro
Manila's position as a leading information and communications technology hub in the
country;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Administration's 8-Point Socioeconomic Agenda aims to
bolster employment opportunities for the Filipino people through the promotion of
investments that boost productivity; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution provides that the
President shall have control of all executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Continued Moratorium under AO No. 18. The moratorium on the
processing of applications for the establishment of ecozones in Metro Manila under
Section 2 of AO No. 18 shall continue to be in effect.

Section 2. Amendment to Section 3 of AO No. 18. All applications for
ecozones which have been excluded under the provisions of Sections 2 and 3 of AO
No. 18, but have already been issued the pertinent Pre-Qualification Clearances by
the PEZA Board pursuant to the IRR of RA No. 7916 prior to the effectivity date of the
moratorium under AO No. 18 (covered applications), shall be allowed to resubmit their
applications, subject to the following conditions:

a. Within a non-extendible period of ten (10) working days from the effectivity of this
Order, the PEZA shall submit to the Office of the President (OP), through the Office
of the Executive Secretary, a Board Resolution certifying the Masterlist of covered
applications under the immediately preceding paragraph. For this purpose, the
PEZA shall submit, along with the said Board Resolution and Masterlist, certified
true copies of the pertinent Pre-Qualification Clearances issued by the PEZA Board
to the developers/project proponents concerned and the minutes of the meeting
when the same were approved by the Board;

b. Only those included in the Masterlist shall have the option to resubmit their
applications for ecozones, provided that they undergo anew the pre-qualification
process of the PEZA pursuant to the IRR of RA No. 7916. For this purpose, all
required national or local licenses, clearances, permits, certifications or
authorizations that have already expired shall have to be renewed in accordance
with pertinent laws, rules and regulations; and

c. The inclusion in the Masterlist or the acceptance, processing, and/or evaluation of
applications by PEZA and thereafter, by the OP, shall by no means constitute as a
guarantee that such applications shall be approved and subsequently proclaimed
as ecozones.

This Order does not establish or provide any legal or equitable rights or
advantages to any individual or entity enforceable against the National Government,
including its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or
any other person.

Section 3. Implementing Guidelines. The PEZA Board shall formulate the
Guidelines necessary to effectively implement this Order.

Section 4. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in
full force and effect.

Section 5. Repeal. Section 3 of AO No. 18 is hereby amended. Unaffected
provisions of AO No. 18 shall remain in full force and effect. All other issuances, orders,
rules and regulations, or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby
repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately after its
publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 24th dayof - November , in the

year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

 

 

rine  PaLTPPIAES

 

ii LU 3

PBBMOO3.

 

 

i] i i |