MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 09

CONSTITUTING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE
HOSTING OF THE 2024 ASIA-PACIFIC MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE
ON DISASTER RISK REDUCTION IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the Asia-Pacific Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction
(APMCDRR) is the main regional platform for promoting the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction in the Asia-Pacific Region;

WHEREAS, the APMCDRR facilitates exchange of experiences, sharing of
good practices, and identification of challenges and opportunities in disaster risk
reduction, as well as promoting political commitment, cooperation, and
knowledge-sharing to reduce disaster risk and build resilience in the Asia-Pacific
Region;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has accepted the hosting of the 10‘ session of the

WHEREAS, to ensure the successful preparation and hosting of the 2024
APMCDRR, an inter-agency committee shail be constituted to oversee preparatory
and organizing activities; and

WHEREAS, the successful conduct of the 2024 APMCDRR requires the
involvement, coordination and support of concerned government agencies and local
government units (LGUs);

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Inter-Agency Committee (IAC) for the Hosting of the 2024
APMCDRR. An IAC for the hosting of the 2024 APMCDRR is hereby constituted, and
shall be composed of the following:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Co-Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR)

Co-Chairperson : Administrator, Department of National Defense-Office
of Civil Defense (DND-OCD)

Members : Secretary, Department of Science and Technology

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local
Government

Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and
Development

Secretary, National Economic and Development
Authority

Secretary, Department of Budget and Management

Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs

Secretary, Department of Energy

Secretary, Department of Finance

Secretary, Department of Health

Secretary, Department of Information and
Communications Technology

Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways

Secretary, Department of Tourism

Secretary, Department of Transportation

Secretary, Department of Human Settlements and
Urban Development

Secretary, Presidential Communications Office

Secretary, National Commission for Culture and the
Arts

Secretary, Climate Change Commission

Chairperson, Metropolitan Manila Development
Authority

The Chief Executives of LGUs hosting the venues and sites of the 2024
APMCDRR activities shall be invited as Special Members of the IAC and relevant
working committees.

The IAC member-agencies may designate their respective alternates to
represent them in the IAC. The alternates must have a rank not lower than
Undersecretary or its equivalent, and must be fully authorized to decide for and on
behalf of their respective principals. The designation of said alternates or
representatives shall be in writing and must be submitted to the IAC Secretariat.

The IAC Secretariat shall be composed of existing personnel of the DENR and
DND-OCD, and shall provide administrative and technical support to the IAC.

Section 2. Powers and Functions. in pursuit of its objectives and subject to
existing laws, rules and regulations, the IAC shall have the following powers and
functions:

a. Formulate and implement plans, programs and activities, as well as organize and
manage the requirements for the hosting of the 2024 APMCDRR;

b. Submit periodic reports to the Office of the President, through the Office of ithe
Executive Secretary, on the 2024 APMCDRR hosting;

c. Perform actions as may be deemed appropriate for the successful conduct of the
activity; and

d. Call on other departments and agencies, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations (GOCCs), and invite concerned LGUs and
representatives from the private sector, civil society organizations, volunteer
groups, and the academe, as may be necessary.

Section 3. Working Committees. To ensure the smooth and efficient
preparation for the 2024 APMCDRR, the IAC may establish working committees
composed of member-agencies of the IAC, with permanent representatives ranked
not lower than an Assistant Secretary, and alternate representatives ranked not lower
than a Director. As needed, the working committees may expand their membership to
include other government agencies. Each working committee shall have its own
secretariat to be provided by the designated committee chair, with assistance from the
DENR.

The working committees will work closely with each other fo ensure
communication, coordination, and cooperation in the performance of their respective
functions.

Section 4. Meetings. The Chairperson shall convene the regular quarterly
meetings of the IAC and such other meetings as often as necessary, to ensure proper
coordination relative to the hosting of the 2024 APMCDRR. Likewise, the working
committees, as may be created pursuant to Section 2 of this Order, may call for regular
coordination meetings among its members, to ensure the timely and efficient execution
of their respective tasks.

Section 5. Agency Support. Consistent with their respective mandates, all
departments, bureaus, offices, agencies or instrumentalities of the government,
including GOCCs and government financial institutions, are hereby directed to render
full assistance and cooperation to the IAC to effectively carry out the objectives of this
Order, including the provision of the necessary human resources for the 2024

Section 6. Implementing Guidelines. The IAC shall issue the necessary rules
and/or guidelines for the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 7. Funding. The funds necessary for the initial year of implementation
of this Order may be sourced from available appropriations of the DENR and other
concerned government agencies and instrumentalities, subject to applicable
budgeting, accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding
requirements for the purpose shail be included in the budget proposals of the
aforementioned agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

    
  

REPUBLIC OF

UT MI

Section 8. Cessation. The IAC shall be rendered functus officio after 31
December 2024. The IAC, through its Secretariat, shall submit to the Office of the
President and the DBM a final report within forty-five (45) days after the closing of the
2024 APMCDRR. The said report shall include the expenses, accomplishments, and
recommendations for future hosting of the APMCDRR.

Section 9. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, other portions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

Section 10. Repeal. All issuances or parts thereof that are inconsistent with or
contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 11. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 26thJay of September _, in the year of our
Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

 

  

  
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

OLING-ERAD

 

 
 

 

ATTY. CONCEPCION
4-UB -205, DIRECTOR IV

   
  

Min

PBBM002824