MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 39

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF GRATUITY PAY TO CONTRACT OF
SERVICE AND JOB ORDER WORKERS IN GOVERNMENT FOR
FISCAL YEAR 2025

WHEREAS, various government agencies are engaging the services of
individual workers under contract of service (COS) and job order (JO) basis to support
the implementation of their respective programs, activities, and projects (PAPs),
especially the priority items under the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028 and
the President's 8-point Socioeconomic Agenda;

WHEREAS, under the Commission on Audit (COA)-Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) Joint Circular (JC) No. 2 (s. 2020), as amended by COA-DBM JC
Nos. 2 (s. 2022) and 2 (s. 2024), government agencies may engage the services of
new COS and JO workers through individual contracts, and renew the individual
contracts of their existing COS and JO workers until 31 December 2025;

WHEREAS, while COS and JO workers in the government are paid salaries or
wages equivalent to those received by personnel occupying comparable positions in
government and a premium of up to 20% of such salary or wage, they do not enjoy
the benefits accorded to regular government employees such as Mid-Year and
Year-End Bonuses, Performance-Based Bonus, and Personnel Economic Relief
Allowance;

WHEREAS, granting a year-end Gratuity Pay to COS and JO workers is a
well-deserved recognition of their hard work and valuable participation in the
implementation of various PAPs of the government, and their pivotal role in the delivery
of government services amidst the present socio-economic challenges;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order Nos. 2 (s. 2017), 20 (s. 2020), 38 (s. 2020),
46 (s. 2021), 3 (s. 2022), 13 (s. 2023), and 28 (s. 2024) authorized the grant of Gratuity
Pay to COS and JO workers in government for Fiscal Years (FY) 2017, 2019, 2020,
2021, 2022, 2023, and 2024, respectively; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Grant of Gratuity Pay in National Government Agencies (NGAs)
and Instrumentalities. All workers whose services are engaged through COS and
JO, who have rendered a total or an aggregate of at least four (4) months of actual
satisfactory performance of service, as stipulated in their respective contracts, as of
15 December 2025, and whose contracts are still effective as of the same date, may
be granted a one (1)-time Gratuity Pay not exceeding P7,000.00 each for FY 2025.

Those who have rendered less than four (4) months of actual satisfactory
performance of service, as stipulated in their respective contracts, as of 15 December
2025, and whose contracts are still effective as of same date, may also be granted the
one (1)-time Gratuity Pay, on a pro rata basis, as follows:

    

    
    

  
    

LENGTH OF SERVICE AMOUNT OF GRATUITY PAY
3 months but less than 4 months Not exceeding #6,000.00
2 months but less than 3 months Not exceeding ?5,000.00
| Less than 2 months Not exceeding F4,000.00

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

For this purpose, actual service shall refer to services rendered on-site.
However, subject to the discretion of the Agency Head and the availability of funds,
services rendered by COS and JO workers under any alternative work arrangement
prescribed under Section 6.1 COA-DBM JC No. 1 (s. 2022) may also be considered
as actual service.

Section 2. Coverage. This Order shall cover workers whose services are
directly engaged through COS and JO by NGAs, state universities and colleges
(SUCs), government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) and local water

Section 3. Funding Sources. The funding source for the implementation of
this Order shall be governed by the following:

a. For NGAs and SUCs, the amount required shall be charged against their
respective available Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE)
allotment for the same PAP where the compensation of workers engaged through
COS and JO are sourced, subject to the approval of the Agency Head.

In case of deficiency, agencies may modify the allotment issued within the PAP,
subject to the approval of the Agency Head or the DBM, as the case may be,
pursuant to the rules on the modification in allotments under Section 80 of the
General Provisions of Republic Act (RA) No. 12116 or the “General Appropriations
Act for FY 2025,” and existing laws, rules and regulations, and other issuances,
or submit a request to augment actual deficiencies from savings in other PAPs,
subject to the approval of the President, in accordance with rules on use of savings
and augmentation under Sections 76, 77, 78 and 79 of the General Provisions of
RA No. 12116, and existing laws and issuances; and

b. For GOCCs and LWDs, the amount required shall be charged against their
respective approved corporate operating budgets.

Section 4. Use of Savings. Requests for the use of savings under Section 3(a)
hereof shall be submitted by NGAs and SUCs to DBM not later than five (5) working
days from the effectivity of this Order, for endorsement to the Office of the President.
All such requests shall be supported by the following documents:

a. Report on the number and names of workers directly engaged through COS and
JO schemes who are qualified for Gratuity Pay, as certified by the head of the
human resource management unit and endorsed by the Department Secretary or
Agency Head; and

b. Certification from the budget officer that the required amount from the existing
MOOE allotment is free from any obligation and may be declared as savings,
pursuant to Sections 77 and 79 of the General Provisions of RA No. 12116, to
cover the funding requirements for the grant of Gratuity Pay, likewise endorsed by
the Department Secretary or Agency Head.

The DBM shall release the corresponding Special Allotment Release Order and
Notice of Cash Allocation, as needed, upon approval of the President.

Section 5. Grant of Gratuity Pay in Local Government Units (LGUs). LGUs
are encouraged to adopt in their respective offices the grant of Gratuity Pay to workers
whose services are engaged through COS and JO, utilizing appropriate and available
funding sources from their respective local government funds.

The corresponding supplemental budget (SB) for the purpose shall be enacted
by the local sanggunian concerned chargeable against the available FY 2025
appropriations or surplus. In case an LGU fails to enact an SB within FY 2025, the
LGU concerned may enact an SB during FY 2026, provided that the: (i) SB shall be
charged against the LGU’s reverted and unused prior year’s surplus, subject to
compliance with the provisions of RA No. 7160 or the “Local Government Code of
1991,” as amended, and pertinent laws, rules and regulations; (ii) prior year’s surplus
is backed by cash; and (iii) annual budget for FY 2026 is already approved.

Section 6. Payment Date. The payment of Gratuity Pay to qualified COS and
JO workers in government for FY 2025 shall be made not earlier than 15 December

Section 7. Supplemental Guidelines. As may be necessary, the DBM shall
issue supplemental guidelines for the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 8. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 9. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 11th dayof December , inthe

year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

     

By the President:

    
 

Secretary

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINI 4

ll i i i i in

PBBM010931