MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 15

DIRECTING THE ACCELERATED IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
GOVERNMENT ENERGY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (GEMP)

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 7638 or the “Department of Energy
(DOE) Act of 1992,” declares it a policy of the State to ensure continuous, adequate and
economic supply of energy, with the end in view of achieving self-reliance in the country’s
energy requirements through judicious conservation and efficient utilization of energy in
accordance with the country’s growth and economic development;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of RA No. 11285 or the “Energy Efficiency and Conservation
(EEC) Act,” declares it a policy of the State to: (i) institutionalize EEC as a national way
of life; (ii) secure sufficiency and stability of energy supply in the country to cushion the
impact of high prices of imported fuels to local markets; and (iii) protect the environment
in support of the economic and social development goals of the country;

WHEREAS, Section 9, Chapter Ill of RA No. 11285 created the Inter-Agency EEC
Committee (IAEECC) to evaluate and approve government energy efficiency projects,
and provide strategic direction in the implementation of the Government Energy
Management Program (GEMP);

WHEREAS, the GEMP is a government-wide program aimed at reducing the
government's monthly consumption of electricity and petroleum products through
efficient use and conservation of energy and fuel, among others;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 110 (s. 2004) recognizes the compelling
need for the government.to undertake a comprehensive program to promote judicious
use of energy resources through intensified conservation efforts and efficient utilization
thereof in order to mitigate the ill effects of excessive use of energy on the environment,
and for this purpose, institutionalizes the GEMP to be carried out by all government
agencies, including all local government units (LGUs), under the strategic direction of the
IAEECC;

WHEREAS, there is a need to intensify efficient utilization and conservation efforts
of electricity and fuel to mitigate power demand amidst the ongoing E/ Nifio phenomenon;
and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the

power of control over all executive departments, bureaus, and offices, as well as the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND ROMUALDEZ MARCOS, JR., President of

the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Accelerated Implementation of the GEMP and Relevant IAEECC

Resolutions. All agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations are hereby directed, and all LGUs are
hereby encouraged, to undertake efforts to ensure efficient and judicious utilization of
energy. For this purpose, all concerned government agencies shall accelerate the
implementation of GEMP and relevant IAEECC Resolutions by:

a.

Conducting energy audits from Certified Energy Auditors, and cooperating with
random energy spot-checks;

Submitting an inventory of existing energy consuming equipment, and timelines for
upgrading to more energy efficient equivalents:

i. Lighting for buildings, facilities, and streets;

ii. Heating, ventilation and airconditioning (HVAC);
iii. Build shell fenestration (insulation); and

iv. Vehicles;

Ensuring compliance with the DOE Guidelines on Energy Conserving Design of
Buildings, as well as the Philippine Green Building Code for new building construction
and building retrofits;

Adopting low-cost EEC measures consistent with the GEMP, such as but not limited
to: (i) maintaining ambient temperature of 24°C in airconditioned spaces; (ii) turning
off unused lights and air-conditioning units; and (iii) activating sleep settings on office
equipment; and

Institutionalizing EEC in their respective offices by:

i. Designating an EEC Officer and Focal Person; /

ii. Adopting the DOE-GEMP Online System for monitoring and reporting of energy
consumption;

iii. Preparing and/or updating their respective EEC Programs, which shall include
energy conservation measures, target savings, motor vehicle inventory and other
strategies consistent with GEMP; and

iv. Allocating appropriate amount from its approved budget for the implementation
of its prioritized and planned energy management program, subject to existing
laws, policies and regulations. :

Section 2. Monitoring, Evaluation and Communication. Consistent with

IAEECC Resolution No. 5 (s. 2022) or the “GEMP Guidelines,” government agencies are
hereby directed to establish a mechanism for monitoring the energy consumption in their
respective offices, and adhere to the reportorial requirements of the DOE.


In coordination with the Presidential Communications Office, the DOE shall
develop effective ways of communicating EEC measures to all government offices and
the public.

Section 3. Implementing Guidelines. Within 30 days from the effectivity of this
Order, the DOE shall formulate and issue the necessary rules and/or guidelines for the
effective implementation of this Order.

Section 4. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other sections not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and
effect.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 16th dayof January , in the year
of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

By the President:

 

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFTICE

CERTJEJED COPY

  
 

oe

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES DIRECTOR IV

PBBM003714