MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 41

CONSTITUTING THE PHILIPPINE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR
THE GREEN EXPO 2027

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act No. 6657 or the “Comprehensive
Agrarian Reform Law of 1998,” as amended, declares it a policy of the State to provide
support to the agricultural sector through appropriate research and technology, and
adequate financial, production, marketing, and other support services;

WHEREAS, the Green Expo 2027, an international horticultural exposition
recognized by the Bureau International des Expositions (BIE) and the International
Association of Horticultural Producers (AIPH), will be held in Yokohama, Japan, from
March to September 2027, with the theme “Scenery of the Future for Happiness,” for
the purpose of providing opportunities to participating countries to promote their rich
biodiversity, sustainable agricultural practices, innovation in high-value crops,
agri-fishery products, green technologies, eco-tourism initiatives, and cultural heritage,
while fostering bilateral and multilateral partnerships in sustainability and innovation;

WHEREAS, participation in the Green Expo 2027 aligns with the thrusts and
commitments of the Administration under the Philippine Development Plan
2023-2028, particularly on the transformation of the agricultural and production sector
toward sustainability and competitiveness, advancement of science and technology,
and innovation for sustainable development;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create an Inter-Agency Committee to plan,
manage, and coordinate the Philippines’ participation in the Green Expo 2027, and to
facilitate preparations through effective coordination and collaboration among
concerned agencies and the private sector; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS JR., President of the

Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do
hereby order:

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

Section 1. Constitution of the Philippine Organizing Committee (POC).
There is hereby constituted a POC for the purpose of facilitating the participation of
the Philippines in the Green Expo 2027 in Yokohama, Japan. The POC shall be
composed of the heads of the following:

Chairperson ; Department of Agriculture
Vice Chairperson: Department of Tourism
Members : Department of Foreign Affairs;

Department of Trade and Industry;

Department of Science and Technology;

National Commission for Culture and the Arts; and
Center for International Trade Expositions and Missions.

The Chairperson shall convene the meetings of POC regularly and as often as
may be necessary to ensure proper coordination among concerned agencies relative
to the participation of the Philippines in the Green Expo 2027.

The Chairperson shall act as the Philippine focal person to the Green Expo
2027, attend all activities that may be required by the organizers, and perform such
other functions as may be necessary for the successful participation of the Philippines
in the Expo. He may designate lead agencies or sub-committees for the specific
thematic functions or components of the Expo.

The Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and Members of POC may designate their
respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or its equivalent,
who shall be fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

The DA shall serve as Secretariat of POC, and shall be tasked to provide the
necessary technical, administrative, and operational support to POC.

Section 2. Duties and Functions of POC. The POC shall have the following
duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Through the POC Chairperson, enter into contracts, agreements, or partnerships
for the attainment of the objectives of this Order;

b. Formulate and implement a comprehensive National Participation Plan for the
Green Expo 2027, to include, among others, the: (i) design, construction, and
management of the Philippine Pavilion and exhibits; and (ii) implementation of
thematic sub-components of the project, such as but not limited to business-to-
business meetings, trade promotion events, activation campaigns, and other
marketing activities;

c. Identify and coordinate with public and private stakeholders for content
development, promotional activities, and logistical support;

d. Ensure alignment of the Philippine participation with the overall theme and
objectives of the Green Expo 2027;

e. Develop financing strategies, prepare a budget proposal, and coordinate with the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and other funding institutions for
the provision of necessary resources;

f. Accept and receive donations, sponsorships, and other gratuitous transfers of
funds or properties relevant to the Green Expo 2027, subject to pertinent
budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws, rules and regulations;

g. Facilitate compliance with host country requirements and international standards
set by the organizers of the Green Expo 2027, BIE, and AIPH;

h. Ensure that all cultural elements are developed in coordination with relevant
cultural stakeholders, with due regard to authenticity, intellectual property and
cultural sensitivity;

i. As may be necessary, create, convene, and reorganize sub-committees to assist
POC in the implementation of this Order;

j. Invite representatives from relevant government agencies, the private sector,
non-governmental organizations, and the academe to provide technical advice
or support as may be necessary; and

k. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 3. Funding. The funding requirements necessary for the initial
implementation of this Order shall be charged against available appropriations of
member-agencies of the POC, subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing
laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary for the
continued implementation of this Order shall be included in the budget proposals of
the member-agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 4. Convergence. All concerned government agencies are hereby
directed, and all local government units and the private sector are hereby encouraged,
to render full support to and cooperation with POC to ensure the effective and efficient
implementation of this Order.

Section 5. Implementing Guidelines. The POC shall issue the necessary
guidelines for the effective implementation of this Order.

Section 6. Reports. The POC, through the Chairperson, shall submit to the
President, through the Executive Secretary, and the DBM quarterly reports on the
Committee’s accomplishments within thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter, as
well as a final report within sixty (60) days after the closing of the Green Expo 2027.
The reports shall include details on expenses, income generated, accomplishments,
economic impact, and recommendations for future policy development and actions.

Section 7. Sunset Clause. The POC shall be rendered functus officio sixty
(60) days after the submission of its final report as provided in Section 6 hereof, unless
otherwise ordered by the President.

Section 8. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 9. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 4¢p day of February , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Six.

 

By the President:

  

Acting Executive Secretary

e President
ECORDS OFFIC

IED COPY

TOLENTINO-NAVA
PIRECTOR IV p

 

 
   

EPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

Ri
1915

PBBMO1