pRGUL
g vn gy

gpcisac
x we
SPRTaANe

*
+
*

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 01

AUTHORIZING THE GRANT OF SERVICE RECOGNITION INCENTIVE TO
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2022

WHEREAS, Section (4)(h) of Congressional Joint Resolution (JR) No. 4 (s. 2009)
authorizes the grant of (i) incentives to reward an employee's loyalty to government service
and contributions to the agency's continuing viable existence; (ii) incentives as rewards for
exceeding agency financial and operational performance targets to motivate employee
efforts toward higher productivity; and (iii) other existing benefits to be categorized by the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) as incentives;

WHEREAS, Section (17)(iv) of JR No. 4 provides that the President, upon the
recommendation of the DBM, is authorized to update the Compensation and Position
Classification System for civilian personnel and the Base Pay Schedule for military and
uniformed personnel, as well as policies on and levels of allowances, benefits, and
incentives applicable to all government personnel;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AQ) Nos. 19 (s. 2019), 37 (s. 2020), and 45
(s. 2021) authorized the grant of Service Recognition Incentive to government employees
for Fiscal Years (FYs) 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively, in recognition of the hardwork,
commitment, and dedication to public service of government personnel; and

WHEREAS, the Administration recognizes all government employees for their
collective and invaluable contribution to the government's continuing efforts to ensure
responsive delivery of services to the public, especially in the midst of the continuing public
health emergency due to the COVID-19 pandemic and other socio-economic challenges;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Service Recognition Incentive for Employees in the Executive
Department. This Order authorizes the grant of a one-time Service Recognition Incentive
(SRI) at a uniform rate not exceeding Twenty Thousand Pesos (220,000.00) for each of
the following personnel in the Executive Department:

a. Civilian personnel in national government agencies (NGAs), including those in

state universities and colleges (SUCs) and government-owned or -controlled
corporations (GOCCs), occupying regular, contractual or casual positions; and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

b.

Military personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines under the Department
of National Defense, and uniformed personnel of the Philippine National Police,
Bureau of Fire Protection, and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology under
the Department of the Interior and Local Government, the Bureau of Corrections
under the Department of Justice, the Philippine Coast Guard under the
Department of Transportation, and the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority under the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.

Section 2. Conditions on the Grant of the SRI. The grant of the SRI shall be
subject to the following conditions:

a.

b.

The civilian personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions;
The personnel are still in government service as of 30 November 2022;

The personnel have rendered at least a total or an aggregate of four (4) months
of satisfactory service as of 30 November 2022, inclusive of services rendered
under any of the alternative work arrangements prescribed by the Civil Service
Commission;

. Those who have rendered less than a total or an aggregate of four (4) months

of satisfactory service as of 30 November 2022 shall be entitled to a pro-rated
share of the SRI, as follows:

 

 

 

Length of Service Percentage of the Incentive
[ Less than 1 month 10 %

 

 

and;

The employees have not received any additional year-end benefit in FY 2022
over and above the benefit authorized under Republic Act (RA) No. 6686, as
amended by RA No. 8441.

Section 3. Exclusion from the Grant of the SRI. Those engaged without
employer-employee relationship and whose compensation are funded from non-Personnel
Services (PS) appropriations/budgets are excluded from the grant of the SRI, such as:

a.

Consultants and experts engaged for a limited period to perform specific
activities or services with expected outputs;

Laborers engaged through job contracts (pakyaw) and those paid on piecework
basis;

Student workers and apprentices; and

Individuals and groups of people whose services are engaged through job

 

orders, contracts of service or others similarly situated.

Section 4. Funding Source of the SRI for Employees in the Executive
Department. The funding source for the grant of the SRI to employees in the Executive
Department shall be governed by the following:

a. For NGAs, including SUCs, and military and uniformed personnel, the amount
required shall be charged against the available released Personnel Services
(PS) allotments of the respective agencies under RA No. 11639 or the "FY 2022
General Appropriations Act (GAA)”;

b. In case of deficiency, the amount required may be charged against the
Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses allotment of the concerned
government agency, subject to the rules on modification in allotments under
Section 78 of the General Provisions of the FY 2022 GAA, and other pertinent
budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

c. For GOCCs, the amount required shall be charged against their respective
approved corporate operating budgets (COBs) for FY 2022 only; and

d. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to cover the full amount
of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all qualified employees
of the NGA or GOCC.

Section 5. SRI for Employees in the Legislative and Judicial Departments and
Other Offices Vested with Fiscal Autonomy. Employees of the Senate, House of
Representatives, Judiciary, Office of the Ombudsman and Constitutional Offices vested
with fiscal autonomy may likewise be granted a one-time SRI by their respective heads of
office at a uniform rate not exceeding Twenty Thousand Pesos (220,000.00) each,
chargeable against the available released allotment of their respective agencies, subject
to the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified funding source prove
insufficient to cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to
all qualified employees of the concerned office.

Section 6. SRI for Employees in Local Government Units (LGUs).

a. The grant of the one-time SRI to employees in LGUs, including those in the
barangays, shall be determined by their respective sanggunians depending on
the LGU's financial capability, subject to the PS limitation in LGU budgets under
RA No. 7160 or the "Local Government Code of 1991," and the conditions set
forth in Section 2 hereof, at a uniform rate not exceeding Twenty Thousand
Pesos (P20,000.00), chargeable against their respective FY 2022 local
government funds. Should the identified funding source prove insufficient to
cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to all
qualified employees of the LGU; and

b. In determining the amount of the SRI, the sanggunians shall exercise prudence
and judicious use of government funds, ensuring that the expenditure is
reasonable and will not, in any way, prejudice the delivery of services to the
public.

The corresponding supplemental budget for the purpose shall be enacted by
the local sanggunian concerned within FY 2022.

Section 7. SRI for Employees in Local Water Districts (LWDs). LWDs may also
grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined by their Boards of
Directors (BOD), which shall not exceed Twenty Thousand Pesos (220,000.00) each,
chargeable only against their respective BOD-approved FY 2022 COBs, subject to the
conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified funding source prove
insufficient to cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform amount shall be paid to
all qualified employees of the LWD.

Section 8. SRI for Employees in Agencies Exempted from the Coverage of RA
No. 6758, as amended. NGAs and GOCCs exempted from the coverage of RA No. 6758,
as amended, may also grant the SRI to their employees at a uniform rate to be determined
by their agency heads or governing boards, which shall not exceed Twenty Thousand
Pesos (220,000.00) each, chargeable against the NGA's available funds and the GOCC's
FY 2022 COB, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 2 hereof. Should the identified
funding source prove insufficient to cover the full amount of the SRI, a lower but uniform
amount shall be paid to all qualified employees of the concerned agency.

Section 9. Payment Date. The payment of the SRI to all qualified government
employees shall not be earlier than 20 December 2022.

Section 10. Supplemental Guidelines. As may be necessary, the DBM shall issue
supplemental guidelines to effectively implement this Order.

Section 11. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 12. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Section 13. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 16th day of December , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Two.

By the President:

     
        

 

MaLtACANIANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

PERROURC-EHAD |

   

2 =! a.
REI LIC HE NES
4 UY POU O0 AT
PBBM001126