MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 06

CREATING A SPECIAL TASK FORCE TO MAINTAIN PEACE AND
ORDER, AND SUPPRESS THREATS TO SAFETY AND SECURITY IN
NEGROS ISLAND

WHEREAS, Section 5, Article Il of the Constitution provides that the
maintenance of peace and order, protection of life, liberty and property, and promotion
of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings
of democracy;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Executive Order No. 110 (s. 1999) provides that there
shall be established a joint Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)-Philippine National
Police (PNP) system, which shall provide the mechanism, structure and procedures
for the integrated assessment of security situations and for the integrated planning,
coordinating, implementing and monitoring of necessary measures aimed at
enhancing the internal security of the State and its institutions;

WHEREAS, on 04 March 2023, several armed men shot to death Negros
Oriental Governor Roel R. Degamo at his residence in Pamplona, Negros Oriental,
killing eight (8) other civilians and wounding seventeen (17) more;

WHEREAS, similar violent incidents have occurred in the past, and at present,
threats to safety and security cut across different sectors and affect various
stakeholders in Negros Island;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a Special Task Force to prevent the
spread and escalation of violence elsewhere in the Philippines, and to preserve peace
and order in Negros Island, with due regard to the fundamental civil and political rights
of the people;

WHEREAS, Section 6, Article XVI of the Constitution provides that the State
shall establish and maintain one police force, which shall be national in scope and
civilian in character, to be administered and controlled by the National Police
Commission; and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Special Task Force. The Special Task Force “DEGAMO” (Task
Force) is hereby created, to be composed of the following:

Chairperson : Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local
Government (DILG)

Vice Chairpersons : Secretary, Department of Justice
Secretary, Department of National Defense

Task Force Commanders : Chief, PNP
Chief, AFP
Director, National Bureau of Investigation (NBI)

The Chief, Public Information Office of the PNP, shall serve as the
Spokesperson of the Task Force.

The Task Force members may designate an alternate to represent their
respective offices in their absence. Such alternate must be fully authorized to decide
for and on behalf of the Task Force member.

Section 2. Powers and Functions of the Task Force. The Task Force shall
formulate and implement measures to prevent further violence and ensure peace and
order in Negros Island. Towards this end, the Task Force shall have the following
powers and functions:

a. Coordinate and rationalize the efforts of concerned government agencies and
instrumentalities to ensure a whole-of-government approach in the prevention,
investigation, prosecution and punishment of violence in Negros Island;

b. Intensify campaign against private armed groups and loose firearms;

c. Prepare and submit to the President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary
(OES), reports on the state of peace and order in Negros Island, as well as the
Task Force’s initiatives and recommendations relative thereto; and

d. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

Section 3. Secretariat. The Task Force shall have a Secretariat to be
composed of personnel from its member-agencies, which shall provide administrative,
operational and technical assistance to the Task Force. The Secretariat shall be
headed by the Deputy Chief, PNP for Operations.

Section 4. Support of Government Agencies. The Task Force may enlist the
support and assistance of other government agencies and instrumentalities in the
attainment of the objectives of this Order. Local Government Units are enjoined to
render such necessary assistance to the Task Force in the implementation of this
Order.

The Department of Social Welfare and Development shall extend emergency
relief assistance to the families of the victims.

The Department of Health shall provide psychological rehabilitation to affected
individuals.

Section 5. National Task Groups. The Task Force shall be composed of the
following National Task Groups (NTGs):

a. Intelligence. NTG Intelligence shall utilize the Joint AFP-PNP Intelligence
Committee (JAPIC) mechanism composed of AFP and PNP intelligence
community with NBI from the national, area-wide, and regional levels;

b. Law Enforcement Operations. NTG Law Enforcement Operations shall utilize the
Joint Peace and Security Coordinating Center (JPSCC) mechanism composed of
AFP, PNP, NBI and Philippine Coast Guard (PCG) from the national down to the
regional levels. The DILG, together with the PNP, shall establish an Informer
Rewards Program for the apprehension of suspects in the killing, subject to existing
laws, rules and regulations;

c. Investigation and Legal. NTG Investigation and Legal shall be composed of: (i)
PNP Special Investigation Task Group (SITG) “DEGAMO?”; (ii) Police Regional
Office 7 SITG “DEGAMO”; (iii) NBI; (iv) Presidential Anti-Organized Crime
Commission; (iv) Bureau of Immigration; (v) Land Transportation Office; (vi)
Anti-Money Laundering Council; (vii) Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines; (viii)
PCG; (ix) Bureau of Internal Revenue; and (x) Cyber Crime Investigation and
Coordinating Center-Department of Information and Communications Technology;
and

d. Strategic Communications (StratCom) and Community Relations. NTG StratCom
and Community Relations shall utilize the JPSCC mechanism composed of AFP,
PNP, NBI and PCG from the national down to the regional levels.

Section 6. Operational Guidelines. Within twenty (20) days from the effectivity
of this Order, the Task Force shall issue the necessary Operational Guidelines to
effectively implement this Order.

Section 7. Presidential Assistant for the Visayas (PAFV). The PAFV shall
coordinate with the Task Force with the aim of enlisting the full support of all
stakeholders. The PAFV shall report to the Office of the Special Assistant to the
President and the OES on the developments on the ground.

Section 8. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 9. Repeal. Orders and issuances inconsistent with this Order are
hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 3rd dayof April , in the
year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

 

: Office of the President ”
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

V-ERTIFZED COPY

   

 

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

U1

 

| il

PBBM001823

 

 

WL 4