MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 10

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL STEERING COMMITTEE FOR THE
COMMEMORATION OF THE 650TH ANNIVERSARY OF PHILIPPINE
MUSLIM HISTORY AND HERITAGE

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article Il of the Constitution provides for the policy of
the State to prioritize education, arts, and culture, among others, to foster patriotism
and nationalism, accelerate social progress, and promote total human liberation and
development;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 10086 or the "Strengthening Peoples’
Nationalism Through Philippine History Act," provides the policy of the State to provide
the means to strengthen people's nationalism, love of country, respect for its heroes
and pride for the people's accomplishments by reinforcing the importance of Philippine
national and local history in daily life with the end in view of raising social
consciousness, reinvigorating government support for historical research, and,
sustaining and enhancing programs for the protection, preservation and conservation
of historical relics and memorabilia, monuments, sites and other historical resources;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9997 or the “National Commission on Muslim Filipinos Act
of 2009,” recognizes the importance of ensuring the rights and well-being of Muslim
Filipinos with due regard to their beliefs, customs, traditions and institutions, as well as
their contribution to national goals and aspirations, and to make them active
participants in nation-building; and that by preserving and developing the culture,
traditions, institutions, and well-being of Muslim Filipinos, we affirm and sustain
national unity and promote progress in accordance with the laws of our country;

WHEREAS, RA No. 11054 or the "Organic Law for the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao," recognizes the justness and legitimacy of
the cause of the Bangsamoro people, as well as the aspirations of Muslim Filipinos
and all indigenous cultural communities in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in
Muslim Mindanao (BARMM) to secure their identity and posterity, allowing for
meaningful self-governance within the framework of the Constitution and the national
sovereignty as well as territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 24, Article IX of RA No. 11054 emphasizes the importance
of preserving the history, culture, arts, traditions, and rich cultural heritage of the
Bangsamoro people and their Sultanates, and for such: purpose, has created the
Bangsamoro Commission for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage (BCPCH), which
coordinates with the appropriate and relevant national government agencies to ensure
the protection and promotion of the Bangsamoro's cultural legacy;

WHEREAS, scholars of Philippine Muslim History agree that the beginning of
the Islamic faith in the Philippines took place between 1350 to 1380, making Islam the
oldest monotheistic religion in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the year 1380 signifies the arrival of the Islam religion in the
country, which was officially recognized by the National Historical Institute, the
predecessor of the National Historical Commission of the Philippines, through the
installation of a historical marker in 1980;

WHEREAS, the country will commemorate the 650" Anniversary of Philippine
Muslim History and Heritage beginning 2024 through 2030 in recognition of the role of
Muslim Filipinos in shaping Philippine history and heritage, and the staging of
commemorative activities for this milestone will not only promote local and national
tourism but also reignite nationalism in every Filipino, inculcate values for the common
good, strengthen social cohesiveness of the community, and intensify social
awareness;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to constitute a National Steering Committee that
shall organize, coordinate, and synchronize programs, projects and activities for the
said commemoration rites;

WHEREAS, the BARMM through BCPCH expressed its affirmation and
acquiescence to the mainstreaming of the role of Muslim history and heritage in
shaping Philippine culture, and conveyed its intention for its inclusion in the National
Steering Committee towards the inclusive representation of the Bangsamoro
Government in carrying out the National Government's commitment for the strategic
implementation of programs, activities and projects for the promotion of Philippine
Muslim history and heritage in the country;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution provides that the
President shall have control of all the executive departments, bureaus, and offices; and

WHEREAS, Section 2, Article V of RA No. 11054 provides that subject to
Section 20, Article X of the Constitution and the Bangsamoro Organic Law, the
Bangsamoro Government shall exercise authority over culture, language, libraries,
museums, historical, cultural and archaeological sites, and tourism development,
among others, without prejudice to the general supervision of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. The Situmiayat Wakhamsun Aldhikraa National Committee
(SWANC). In order to facilitate the planning and implementation of programs, projects
and activities for the commemoration of the 650" Anniversary of Philippine Muslim
History and Heritage, a National Steering Committee to be known as the Situmiayat
Wakhamsun Aldhikraa, which is derived from the Arabic language that literally means
"six hundred and fiftieth anniversary," is hereby constituted, to be composed of the
following:

Chairperson : Chairman, National Historical Commission of
the Philippines (NHCP)
Co-Vice Chairpersons — : Secretary, National Commission on Muslim

Filipinos; and
Chairperson, Bangsamoro Commission for the
Preservation of Cultural Heritage
Members ; Secretary, Department of Budget and
Management;
Secretary, Department of Education;
Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs;
Secretary, Department of the Interior and
Local Government;
Secretary, Department of National Defense;
Secretary, Department of Tourism; and
Secretary, Office of the Presidential Adviser on
Peace, Reconciliation, and Unity.

The Chairperson, Co-Vice Chairpersons and Members of the SWANC may
designate their respective alternates, with the rank of Assistant Secretary or higher,
who shall be fully authorized to decide for and on their behalf.

The NHCP shall serve as the Secretariat of the SWANC, and shall provide the
necessary technical, administrative, and operational support to the Committee. As may
be necessary, the Secretariat may be complemented by existing personnel from its
member-agencies, subject to the authorization from their respective heads of
agencies.

Section 2. Functions. The SWANC shall take charge of the preparations for
the commemorative activities, and for this purpose, shall perform the following
functions:

a. Undertake the comprehensive study, conceptualization, and implementation of
programs, projects and activities relevant to the commemoration, and leverage on
the significance of history, culture, and media to reinvigorate the spirit of national
unity and foster international comity;

b. Act as the principal coordinator for all activities related to the commemoration,
including those intended to increase awareness of the 650 Anniversary of
Philippine Muslim History and Heritage among Filipinos;

c. Serve as clearing house for the preparation and dissemination of all information on
the programs, projects and activities related to the 650 Anniversary of Philippine
Muslim History and Heritage;

d. Organize sub-committees or working groups, as may be necessary, to undertake
the implementation of specific programs, projects and activities;

e. Undertake fund-raising activities, as may be necessary, to attain the objectives of
this Order, subject to applicable laws, as well as budgeting, accounting, and auditing
rules and regulations;

f. Call on any government agency or instrumentality, and invite private individuals and
organizations, to assist in the preparation and celebration of the 650¢ Anniversary
of Philippine Muslim History and Heritage; and

g. Perform other functions as may be directed by the President.

Section 3. Comprehensive Plan. The SWANC shall prepare a Comprehensive
Plan for the commemoration of the 650" Anniversary of Philippine Muslim History and
Heritage, and shall endorse the same for approval of the President, within six (6)
months from the effectivity of this Order.

Section 4. Agency Support. All departments, agencies, instrumentalities,
bureaus, and offices of the national government, including government-owned
or -controlled corporations, government financial institutions, and state universities and
colleges, are hereby ordered to give full support, assistance, and cooperation to the
SWANC in the implementation of this Order, in accordance with their respective
mandates. The Bangsamoro Government, local government units, civil society groups
and the private sector are encouraged to cooperate and participate in the
commemoration of the 650" Anniversary of Philippine Muslim History and Heritage.

Section 5. Funding. The initial funding requirements necessary for the
implementation of this Order shall be charged against the available appropriations of
the NHCP and the participating government agencies and instrumentalities, subject to
existing budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Thereafter, the
funding requirements necessary for the continued implementation of this Order shall
be included in the budget proposals of the NHCP and other concerned government
agencies and instrumentalities, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

The funding requirements of local government units concerned and the
Bangsamoro Government may be taken from their respective funds subject to
applicable laws, rules and regulations.

Section 6. Cessation. The Committee shall be functus officio once the NHCP
issues a certification/declaration confirming the completion of the liquidation and
turnover of all documents and properties by the SWANC to the NHCP, or twelve (12)
months from 31 December 2030, whichever occurs earlier.

Section 7. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 8. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof
inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in.the City of Manila, this 7th dayof November __, inthe year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

By the President:

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

 

REPUBLIC OF

 

PBBM003087