MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 31

STRENGTHENING THE COUNTRY’S SEMICONDUCTOR AND
ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY, AND CREATING A SEMICONDUCTOR
AND ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR THE
PURPOSE

WHEREAS, Section 1, Article XII of the Constitution provides that the State
shall promote industrialization and full employment through industries that make full
and efficient use of human and natural resources, and which are competitive in both
domestic and foreign markets;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Executive Order (EO) No. 49 (s. 2023) mandates the
Office of the Special Assistant to the President for Investment and Economic Affairs
(OSAPIEA) to, among others, identify the priority programs, activities and projects
(PAPs) in the Philippine Development Plan 2023-2028, ensure that the President’s
priority investment and economic agenda is actively pursued, and expedite
inter-agency action to achieve key targets indicated in the relevant performance and
project roadmaps;

WHEREAS, the Philippines holds a vital position in the global semiconductors
and electronics packaging value chain with approximately 5% share of the global
semiconductor and electronics market;

WHEREAS, to further accelerate the growth of the semiconductor and
electronics industry, it is essential to develop a strategic roadmap that defines the
National Government's objectives, strengthens the country’s global competitiveness,
and ensures effective implementation of policies through a whole-of-government
approach;

WHEREAS, to ensure the successful implementation of the abovementioned
roadmap, it is necessary to establish a council tasked to advise the President on
matters related to the development, promotion, and competitiveness of the
semiconductor and electronics industry; and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the Executive departments, bureaus, and offices;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

NOW THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. The Philippine Semiconductor and Electronics Industry
Roadmap. The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), in coordination with the
Semiconductor and Electronics Industry (SEI) Advisory Council under Section 2
hereof, is hereby directed to develop the Philippine Semiconductor and Electronics
Industry (PSEI) Roadmap which shall serve as a strategic framework aimed at
accelerating the growth and global competitiveness of the country’s semiconductor
and electronics industry.

Section 2. Semiconductor and Electronics Industry Advisory Council. The
SEI Advisory Council is hereby established. It shall serve as the primary advisory body
to the President on matters related to the development, promotion, and
competitiveness of the semiconductor and electronics industry. In this regard, the SEl
Advisory Council shall provide strategic guidance and industry insights for the effective
implementation of the abovementioned PSEI Roadmap, and ensure its alignment with
national economic development goals. The SEI Advisory Council shall be composed
of the following:

Chairperson : Special Assistant to the President for Investment and
Economic Affairs
Vice-Chairperson : Secretary, DTI
Members : Secretary, National Economic and Development Authority;
Secretary, Department of Finance;
Secretary, Department of Energy;
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology;
Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment;
Secretary, Department of Education;
Chairperson, Commission on Higher Education;
Director General, Technical Education and Skills
Development Authority;
Chairperson, Bases Conversion and Development Authority;
and
One (1) representative from the private sector, coming from
the semiconductor and electronics industry in the
Philippines, to be appointed by the President upon the
recommendation of the Council, from a list of nominees
submitted by reputable business groups or associations,
for a term of three (3) years with one (1) reappointment.

The DTI shall serve as the Secretariat of the SEI Advisory Council, and shall
be tasked to provide the necessary technical, administrative, and operational support
to the SEI Advisory Council.

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and the ex officio members of the SEI
Advisory Council may designate their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than
Assistant Secretary or its equivalent, as may be applicable, and who are fully
authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

Section 3. Duties and Functions. The SEI Advisory Council shall perform the
following duties and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations:

a. Advise the President on all matters related to the development and promotion of
the country’s semiconductor and electronics industry;

b. Oversee the implementation of the PSEI Roadmap;

c. Coordinate with government agencies to harmonize their development plans,
policies, and programs with the PSEI Roadmap, in support of the local
semiconductor and electronics industry;

d. Collaborate with the relevant stakeholders from the private sector to ensure a
multi-disciplinary approach in the development and implementation of the PSEl
Roadmap;

e. Study the current legal and policy framework related to the semiconductor and
electronics industry, and recommend appropriate actions thereon;

f. As may be necessary, create technical working groups responsible for crafting
detailed action plans and timelines for identified key strategies in the PSEI
Roadmap, including, among others, (i) business environment with regard to
investment attraction and ease of doing business, (ii) talent development, and (iii)
infrastructure and cluster development;

g. Organize trainings, workshops, and seminars for relevant stakeholders to enhance
awareness and understanding of issues, strategies, and best practices in
promoting and developing the semiconductor and electronics industry;

h. Formulate and issue guidelines, as may be necessary, for the effective
implementation of the proposed AO, subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations; and

i. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the
Executive Secretary.

Section 4. Agency Support. As may be necessary, the SEI Advisory Council
may call upon the assistance of concerned government agencies and entities in the
performance of its functions. For this purpose, all concerned agencies of the National
Government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, are hereby
directed, and all local government units and the private sector are hereby encouraged,
to undertake efforts in support of the implementation of this Order.

Section 5. Funding. The funding requirements necessary for the
implementation of this Order shall be charged against available appropriations of the
member-agencies of the SEI Council, subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and
auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements necessary
for the continued implementation of this Order shall be included in the budget
proposals of the member-agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 6. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall
remain in full force and effect.

Section 7. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts
thereof, that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 28th day of March , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Five.

By the President:

   

   

     
    
 

Office of the President
MALACANA i RECORDS OFFICE

ED COPY

OLENTINO- NAVA
OR IV

   

REPUBLIC or THE PaTLIREToEd

ll i 1 i IM

PBBM008014