MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 16

DIRECTING THE IDENTIFICATION OF FISHERIES MANAGEMENT
AREAS AS STRATEGIC AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES
DEVELOPMENT ZONES

WHEREAS, Section 1 of Article XII of the Constitution declares it a policy of the
State to promote industrialization and full employment through industries that make
full and efficient use of human and natural resources, and which are competitive in
both domestic and foreign markets;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 8550 or the “Philippine
Fisheries Code of 1998,” as amended by RA No. 10654, declares the policies of the
State to: (a) protect the preferential right of fisherfolk on the use of municipal waters;
and (b) adopt a precautionary principle in the management of fishery and aquatic
resources;

WHEREAS, Section 8 of RA No. 8550, as amended, prescribes the
establishment of Fisheries Management Areas (FMAs) in the country for fishery
resource conservation and management; ,

WHEREAS, Section 6 of RA No 8435 or “Agriculture and Fisheries
Modernization Act of 1997,” as amended by RA No. 9281, requires the identification
of Strategic Agriculture and Fisheries Development Zones (SAFDZs) within the
network of protected areas for agricultural and agro-industrialization purposes and as
centers for development of agriculture and fisheries sectors;

WHEREAS, Sections 149 and 151, Chapter 2, Title 1, Book Il of RA No. 7160
or the “Local Government Code of 1991,” grant municipalities and cities the exclusive
authority to grant fishery privileges in municipal waters;

WHEREAS, the establishment of a SAFDZ aims to address the urgency and
paramount necessity to: (i) ensure the rational and sustainable use of resources in the
country; (ii) modernize the fisheries sector by transforming it from a resource-based to
a science and technology-based industry; (iii) enhance the global competitiveness of

local fishery products; and (iv) improve the quality of life of fishers and stakeholders;
and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Identification of FMAs as Areas for the Establishment of
SAFDZs. The Department of Agriculture (DA), in coordination with the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), Department of the Interior and Local
Government (DILG), and Department of Science and Technology (DOST), is hereby
directed to identify FMAs where SAFDZs may be established pursuant to RA No.
8435, as amended, subject to relevant provisions of RA No. 7160, existing laws, rules
and regulations.

Section 2. Protective Measures. Pursuant to Section 2 of RA No. 8550, as
amended, the DA shall implement measures to protect the preferential use of
subsistence fisherfolk over municipal waters, and ensure the conservation, protection
and sustained management of fishery and aquatic resources within the SAFDZs to be
established in identified FMAs.

Section 3. Convergence. The DA shall coordinate, collaborate and consult
with the National Economic and Development Authority, Department of Finance, Fiscal
Incentives Review Board, Department of Trade and Industry, Board of Investments,
Philippine Economic Zone Authority, and the Office of the Special Assistant to the
President for Investment and Economic Affairs, towards ensuring that SAFDZs to be
established shall be optimized for agro-industrialization and development of
agriculture and fisheries sectors through, among others, seamless integration of
forward and backward linkages and grant of fiscal incentives to qualified strategic
industries and activities in these sectors.

Section 4. Funding. The funds necessary for the implementation of this Order
shall be charged against current and available appropriations of the DA and other
concerned agencies, subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting, and auditing laws,
rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements for succeeding years shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act, subject to the usual budget
preparation process.

Section 5. Implementing Guidelines. Within thirty (30) working days from the
effectivity of this Order, the DA, in coordination with DENR, DILG, and DOST, shall
formulate and issue guidelines, as may be necessary, for the effective implementation
of this Order.

Il il i il

Section 6. Separability. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and

subsisting.

Section 7. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby revoked, amended,
or modified accordingly.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately following its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 11th day of March ,in
the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

   
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

,
LM nc
$-12-162y ACTING DIRECTOR IV

   
 

  

F THE PHILIPPINES

HL NALA 3

PBBM0041