MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 17

CONSTITUTING THE NATIONAL ORGANIZING COUNCIL FOR THE
PHILIPPINE HOSTING OF THE ASSOCIATION OF THE SOUTHEAST
ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) SUMMIT MEETINGS IN 2026, DEFINING ITS
MANDATES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES ‘

WHEREAS, the Philippines is one (1) of the founding members of the ASEAN
and a signatory to the ASEAN Charter which entered into force on 15 December 2008;

WHEREAS, the ASEAN Summit Meetings is a biannual series of meetings
hosted by the member state holding the ASEAN Chairpersonship, and attended by the
leaders of ASEAN member states to discuss relevant economic, political, security, and
socio-cultural development matters;

WHEREAS, during the 43% ASEAN Summit Meetings in September 2023, the
ASEAN leaders agreed that the Philippines will assume the Chairpersonship of
ASEAN and host the ASEAN Summit Meetings in 2026 (ASEAN 2026);

WHEREAS, it is imperative to constitute a National Organizing Council to
organize, manage and supervise all major and ancillary programs, activities and
projects related to the hosting of ASEAN 2026 in the country;

- WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the mandate
to ensure the faithful execution of laws; and

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title !I!, Book Ill of Executive Order (EO)
No. 292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987” provides that the President shall have
the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the
President (OP);

NOW, THEREFORE, |, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. National Organizing Council. The ASEAN National Organizing
Council (NOG) is hereby constituted to facilitate the planning, implementation and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

monitoring of programs, activities and projects for the hosting of ASEAN 2026. The
ASEAN NOC shall be composed of the following:

Chairperson : Executive Secretary

Vice-Chairperson for ASEAN : Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA)
Political Community

Vice-Chairperson for ASEAN : Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)
Economic Community

Vice-Chairperson for ASEAN : Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and
Socio-Cultural Community Development (DSWD)

Members : Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local

Government (DILG);

Secretary, Department of National Defense (DND);

Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways
(DPWh);

Secretary, Department of Transportation (DOTr);

Secretary, Department of Information and
Communications Technology (DICT);

Secretary, Department of Tourism (DOT);

Secretary, Department of Budget and Management
(DBM); and

Secretary, Presidential Communications Office (PCO).

The Chief Executives of local government units (LGUs) selected to serve as the
sites for the hosting of ASEAN 2026 may be invited as Special Members of the ASEAN
NOC. As may be necessary, the ASEAN NOC may invite or require the participation
of such other government agencies to assist in the performance of its functions,
subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and members of the ASEAN NOC may
designate their respective alternates who shall be fully authorized to decide for and on
their behalf. The designated alternates of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
members of the ASEAN NOC shail have ranks not lower than an Undersecretary or
its equivalent.

The ASEAN NOC shall have regular meetings, and such special meetings as
may be called upon by the Chairperson or his representative when deemed necessary.

Section 2. Duties and Functions of the ASEAN NOC. The ASEAN NOC shall
perform the following functions:

a. Within 60 days from the issuance of this Order, formulate and submit for the
President's approval a Master Plan for the country’s hosting of ASEAN 2026. The
Master Plan shall include, among others, the estimated budget for the hosting of
ASEAN 2026 and its related meetings, and necessary communication mechanisms
to ensure efficient and effective coordination among member-agencies;

. Monitor the implementation of the Master Plan, as well as the Work Plans of the

ASEAN NOC Committees under Section 5 hereof, and ensure. proper coordination
among all concerned agencies relative to the implementation of this Order;

. Submit periodic reports to the President throughout the duration of the country’s

hosting of ASEAN 2026; and

. Perform such other functions as may be necessary or incidental to its mandate or

as may be directed by the President and/or the Executive Secretary.

Section 3. NOC Executive Committee. To ensure that the programs, activities

and projects necessary for the preparation of the hosting of ASEAN 2026 will run
continuously, smoothly, efficiently, and effectively, the NOC Executive Committee
(ExeCom) is hereby created. The Director-General for Operations under Section 6
hereof shall serve as head of the NOC ExeCom, while a representative, with a rank
not lower than an Assistant Secretary, from the following agencies shall serve as
members thereof:

pr apoasgZrmAT ST sampaA9TD

DFA;
DTI;
DSWD;
DBM;
DPWH;
DILG;
DND;
DOTr;
DICT;
DOT;
PCO;
Department of Finance (DOF);

. Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR);

National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA);

Office of the Executive Secretary (OES);

Presidential Management Staff (PMS);

Office of the National Security Adviser;

Office of Presidential Protocol; and

Other agencies as may be deemed necessary by the ASEAN NOC.

Section 4. Duties and Functions of the NOC ExeCom. The NOC ExeCom

shall perform and act, by majority vote of all its members, on such specific matters not
otherwise within the exclusive competence of the ASEAN NOC and as may be
delegated to it, such as:

a.

Manage the implementation of the Master Plan approved by the President, and
supervise all activities related to the execution thereof;

Recommend to the ASEAN NOC, as may be necessary, modifications or
improvements to the Master Plan to ensure the successful hosting of ASEAN

c. Issue implementing rules and instructions necessary and appropriate to effectively
execute the Master Plan;

d. As may be necessary, call upon the assistance of any government official,
employee, agency or instrumentality to carry out the objectives of this Order and
the Master Plan, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations; and

€. Submit periodic reports to the ASEAN NOC Chairperson throughout the duration
of the hosting of ASEAN 2026.

Section 5. ASEAN NOC Committees. The NOC ExeCom shall be assisted by
seven (7) Committees to be in-charge of the following functional areas of
responsibility:

    

FUNCTIONAL AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY

a. Security, Peace and Order, and Emergency
Preparedness and Response

b. Infrastructure

c. Transport and Telecommunications

d. Tourism Hospitality, Tours, Social Events and Site
Enhancement

e. Finance, Budget and Procurement

f, Business and Investment Promotion
g. Media Affairs and Strategic Communications

     

LEAD AGENCIES

 
     
 
  

   
 

 

     
 
      

The general mandates and membership of each Committee is provided under
Annex A hereof. The ASEAN NOC is hereby authorized to continuously assess and
evaluate, and on the basis thereof, reorganize the composition and functional areas
of responsibility of the Committees. The Director-General for Operations under Section
6 is hereby included as a member of all the Committees. .

The Chief Executives of LGUs selected to serve as the site for the hosting of

ASEAN 2026 may be invited as Special Members of the ASEAN NOC Committees.

. Secretariat support for each ASEAN NOC Committees shall be provided by the
respective lead agencies.

Within 30 days from the issuance of this Order, the NOC Committees are hereby
directed to formulate and submit to the ASEAN NOC their respective Work, Financial
and Budget Plans.

Section 6. Office of the Director-General for Operations. The Office of the
Director-General for Operations (ODGO) is hereby created under the OP. The ODGO
shall serve as the implementing arm of the ASEAN NOC, and shail provide technical
and secretariat support thereto.

The ODGO shall be led by a Director-General who shall be appointed by the
President upon the recommendation of the ASEAN NOC Chairperson. The
Director-General shall have the rank of Undersecretary.

The Director-General, in coordination with the Office of the Deputy Executive
Secretary for Finance and Administration, shall determine the organizational structure,


appropriate staffing pattern and corresponding qualification standards for all positions
in the ODGO, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations. Pending the approval of
the organizational structure and staffing pattern of ODGO, personnel of ASEAN NOC
member-agencies may be detailed or assigned to the ODGO, subject to applicable
Civil Service laws, rules and regulations. .

The initial funding requirements necessary for the operationalization of ODGO
shall be charged against the available appropriations of the OP and such other funding
sources as may be identified by the DBM. Thereafter, the funding requirements
necessary for the purpose shall be included in the budget proposal of the OP, subject
to the usual budget preparation process.

Section 7. Special Committee of Senior Officials for Substantive Matters.
The Special Committee of Senior Officials for Substantive Matters (Special
Committee) is hereby created to formulate and advance the agenda, substantive
theme, priorities, strategies and activities of the Philippines as Chairperson of ASEAN
2026. The Special Committee shall be composed of:

Chairperson : DFA Senior Officials Meeting Leader

Co-Chairpersons : DTI Senior Economic Officials Meeting Leader
DSWD Senior Officials Committee for the ASEAN Socio-Cultural
Committee Leader

Members : Member-agencies of the ASEAN Matters Technical Board of the
: Philippines Council for Regional Cooperation under Administrative
Order No. 20 (s. 2011)

The DFA Office of ASEAN Affairs shall provide technical and administrative
support to the Special Committee.

Section 8. Agency Support. All national government agencies and
instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled corporations and
government financial institutions, are hereby directed, and all LGUs are hereby
encouraged, to render support and assistance for the effective and efficient
implementation of this Order.

For this purpose, all concerned agencies shall designate an internal ASEAN
Hosting Team and Focal Person, who shall serve as the point-of-contact for all
communications and coordination related to the country’s hosting of ASEAN 2026.
The ASEAN Hosting Team of each agency shall regularly submit to the ExeCom
reports on the status of the agency's activities relative to the hosting of ASEAN 2026.

Section 9. Funding. The initial funding requirements necessary for the
implementation of this Order, including the operationalization of the ASEAN NOC,
shall be charged against the available appropriations of the OP and other
member-agencies of the ASEAN NOC, subject to pertinent budgeting, accounting,
and auditing laws, rules and regulations. Thereafter, the funding requirements
necessary for the hosting of ASEAN 2026 shall be included in the budget proposal of
said agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation process.

The funding requirements necessary for the ASEAN NOC for FYs 2025 and 2026
shall be incorporated in the budget proposal of the OP, subject to the usual budget
preparation process.

Section 10. Administrative Guidelines and Orders. Within 30 days from the
effectivity of this Order, the ASEAN NOC and/or ExeCom shall formulate and issue
guidelines for the effective implementation of this Order, which shall include, among
others, specific duties and functions of the ASEAN NOC Committees and timelines for
the preparation of the Philippine hosting of ASEAN 2026.

Section 11. Cessation. The ASEAN NOC, its Committees, and ExeCom shall
only convene meetings related to the Philippine hosting of ASEAN 2026.

Except for the settlement of obligations and other commitments to third persons
incurred during the effectivity of this AO and for purposes of winding-up its operations,
the ASEAN NOC, ASEAN NOC Committees, NOC ExeCom, ODGO, and all other
bodies as may be established pursuant to this AO, including the authority and
functions of the Chairperson and the member-agencies herein; shall be functus officio
within thirty (30) calendar days from the conclusion of ASEAN 2026, and not in any
case later than 31 January 2027.

Section 12. Separability. If any provision of this Order is dectared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected thereby shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Section 13. Repeal. All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby revoked and/or
modified accordingly.

Section 14. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication
in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation, and shall remain in full
force and effect unti! 31 January 2027.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of March , in the
year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President: (

 

PUBLIC OF THE PHK!

wv wa 1 TT ee

PBBKO04252

ANNEX A

GENERAL MANDATES AND MEMBERSHIP OF ASEAN NATIONAL ORGANIZING
COUNCIL COMMITTEES

1.

3.

Committee on Security, Peace and Order,. Emergency Preparedness and
Response. The Committee shall oversee and direct the overall preparations for
security, peace and order, and emergency preparedness and response for the
Philippine hosting of ASEAN 2026.

Chairperson : Department of the Interior and Local Government
Members : Department of National Defense

National Security Council

Department of Health

Department of Social Welfare and Development

National Intelligence Coordinating Agency

Presidential Security Command

National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council

Department of Foreign Affairs (Office of Intelligence Services)

Department of Science and Technology

Department of Information and Communications Technology

Armed Forces of the Philippines

Philippine National Police

Bureau of Immigration

Metro Manila Development Authority

Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines

Bureau of Fire Protection

Department of Transportation (Office for Transport Security and
Philippine Coast Guard)

Committee on Infrastructure. The Committee shall direct the overall improvement
and maintenance of all facilities and critical infrastructure, such as roads, bridges,
ports, airports, including the availability of energy services (i.¢., oil and electric
power) to ensure the country’s readiness to host ASEAN 2026.

Chairperson : Department of Public Works and Highways
Members : Department of Transportation
Department of Information and Communications recites
Department of Budget and Management
Department of Energy
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Metro Manila Development Authority

Committee on Transport and Communications. In coordination with the
Committee on Security, the Committee on Transport and Communications shall
ensure the availability, efficiency, and security of all transportation and
telecommunications requirements for the hosting of ASEAN 2026, and facilitate
the safe and secure movement of persons, cargo, and equipment in all the
activities during the event.

Co-Chairpersons +: Department of Transportation
Department of Information and Communications Technology
Members : Department of Public Works and Highways
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Department of Nationa! Defense
Bureau of Customs
National Telecommunications Commission

4. Committee on Tourism Hospitality, Tours, Social Events and Site Enhancement.
The Committee shall plan, execute and supervise all cultural events including
dinner shows and tours, supervise welcome receptions at the ports of entry and
social events, and plan, execute and supervise the enhancement of sites that will
be used for ASEAN 2026 in cooperation with the concerned LGUs.

Chairperson : Department of Tourism

Members : Department of Foreign Affairs
Tourism Promotions Board
Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Authority
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Department of Social Welfare and Development
Cultural Center of the Philippines
Metro Manila Development Authority
National Commission on Culture and the Arts
Department of Social Welfare and Development
Department of Public Works and Highways

5. Committee on Finance, Budget and Procurement. The Committee shall ensure
the approval and timely release of budget for the hosting, address the
procurement requirements from various Committees for all activities and
improvements necessary for the hosting of ASEAN 2026, and coordinate with all
Committees for their financial and procurement requirements.

Chairperson : Department of Budget and Management
Members : Office of the President
Government Procurement Policy Board
Department of Trade and Industry
Department of Social Welfare and Development
Procurement Service - Department of Budget and Management
Department of Foreign Affairs (Office of Financial Management
Services)

6. Committee on Business and Investment Promotion. The Committee shall engage
the intemational business community, investors, governments, and other
stakeholders, and organize and supervise potential business and
investment-related activities, including trade expositions and missions, investment
roadshows, and other promotional activities.

Chairperson : Department of Trade and Industry
Members : Department of Finance

Department of Tourism

Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone Authority
Department of Agriculture

Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Philippine Economic Zone Authority

Board of Investments

Department of Foreign Affairs

National Competitiveness Council

Mindanao Development Authority

7. Committee on Media Affairs and Strategic Communications. The Committee shall
ensure the proper management of public information regarding the Philippine
Chairpersonship of the ASEAN, and the hosting of ASEAN 2026, including the
provision of facilities for media and coverage of public events, formulate
communication plans and craft strategic messages for dissemination to the public,

Chairperson : Presidential Communications Office
Members : Department of Trade and Industry
Department of Foreign Affairs
Department of Social Welfare and Development