MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 14

INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF THE RECOVERY, RECONSTRUCTION,
AND REHABILITATION EFFORTS IN THE CITY OF MARAWI AND
STREAMLINING THE FUNCTIONS OF IMPLEMENTING
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES INVOLVED THEREIN

WHEREAS, the Task Force Bangon Marawi (TFBM) created pursuant to
Administrative Order (AO) No. 03 (s. 2017), as amended by AO No. 09 (s. 2017), is
mandated to oversee the restoration, reconstruction and rehabilitation of the City of
Marawi and other affected localities;

WHEREAS, the TFBM has successfully overseen the progress and completion
of several programs, projects and activities under the Bangon Marawi Comprehensive
Rehabilitation and Recovery Program (CRRP), including various infrastructure
projects which are ready for turnover in 2023;

WHEREAS, the TFBM performs a supervisory role such as coordination and
monitoring activities, while the implementing government agencies carry out the
essential tasks and routinely executes the necessary works for the recovery,
reconstruction, and rehabilitation of the City of Marawi and other affected localities, in
pursuit of their respective mandates under relevant laws;

WHEREAS, in order to reduce delays due to redundant and superfluous
bureaucratic layers in the National Government and to accelerate reconstruction and
recovery efforts in the City of Marawi and other affected localities, the Administration
is actively pursuing the rationalization of the functional structures of government
agencies in order to promote efficiency and organizational coherence in the
bureaucracy consistent with the Rightsizing policy;

WHEREAS, one of the key pillars of the Philippine Development Plan
2023-2028 and the 8-Point Socioeconomic Agenda of the Administration is to improve
bureaucratic efficiency;

WHEREAS, to ensure institutional stability, it is imperative to institutionalize and
strengthen the functions of implementing government agencies involved in the
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts in the City of Marawi and other affected
localities;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the Administration that the affected local
government units (LGUs) in the City of Marawi and nearby localities be given
significant involvement in the reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts to foster a sense
of local ownership and inclusive reconstruction process;

WHEREAS, under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of Executive Order
No. 292 or the “Administrative Code of 1987,” the President, in order to achieve
simplicity, economy and efficiency, shall have continuing authority to reorganize the
administrative structure of the Office of the President (OP); and

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VI of the Constitution confers to the President
the power of control over all Executive departments, bureaus and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS, JR., President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws,
do hereby order:

Section 1. Institutionalizing and Streamlining of Rehabilitation Efforts.
Consistent with their respective mandates under existing laws, all concerned
government agencies involved in the reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts, shall
expedite and ensure the completion of the projects and activities pertaining to their
respective agencies under the CRRP, in coordination with the LGUs concerned. More
specifically, the following implementing government agencies shall perform the
following:

a. The Department of the Interior and Local Government shall ensure the continued
maintenance of peace and order in the City of Marawi and other affected localities;

b. The Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development (DHSUD) shall
facilitate and oversee completion of the construction of temporary and or
permanent shelters for displaced persons;

c. The Department of Public Works and Highways shall coordinate the complete
restoration of public utilities, such as water and electricity and the repair and re-
construction of public buildings and infrastructure;

d. The Department of Health and Department of Social Welfare and Development
shall attend to the health, sanitation, food and other basic needs of affected
residents; and

e. The Department of Trade and Industry shall provide an environment conducive to
the revival of business and livelihood activities.

Section 2. Transition. The TFBM shall terminate its operations on 31
December 2023, and shall be deemed functus officio by 31 March 2024. Relative
thereto, and as part of winding down its operations, the TFBM shall perform the
following:

a. Facilitate the reversion to the OP of the remaining balance of the TFBM Trust Fund,
which was created through a Memorandum of Agreement dated 13 April 2018
between OP and TFBM;

b. Conduct an inventory of its assets and properties, and ensure proper accounting
and turnover thereof to concerned implementing agencies under Section 1 of this
Order on or before 31 December 2023;

c. Settle its outstanding obligations and submit a Consolidated Audited Report of
Disbursements to the OP not later than 31 March 2024: and

d. Submit a Comprehensive Transition Report to the President, through the Office of
the Executive Secretary, not later than 31 March 2024. The Comprehensive
Transition Report shall contain an evaluation of the projects and activities identified
in the CRRP, causes of delay in the implementation thereof, and the respective
catch-up plans of concerned government agencies involved in the reconstruction
and rehabilitation efforts.

Section 3. Separability. If any section or part of this Order is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shalll
remain in full force and effect.

Section 4. Repeal. AO Nos. 03 and 09 (s. 2017) and all other orders, rules and
regulations, and issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions
of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication
in the Official Gazette.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22nday of December, in the year of our Lord,
Two Thousand and Twenty-Three.

 

By the President:

AS P. BE
Executive Secretary

   

   
 

  
 

OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

  

ar)
rt ore
REPUBLIC OF THE PHIL: INES ‘ 3

 

 

 

 

 

WLU

PBBM003587