MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 22

FURTHER ENHANCING MECHANISMS FOR THE PROMOTION AND
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE COUNTRY AND CREATING
THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS COORDINATION
FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, Section 11, Article Il of the Constitution declares it a policy of the

State to value the dignity of every human person and guarantees full respect for human
rights;

WHEREAS, Section 12, Article III of the Constitution prohibits the use of torture,
force, violence, threat, intimidation, or any other means which vitiate the free will
against any person under investigation for the commission of an offense;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is a State Party to various international human
rights instruments, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AO) No. 101 (s. 1988), as amended by AO
No. 29 (s. 2002) and AO No. 163 (s. 2006), established the Presidential Human Rights
Committee (PHRC) to, among others, formulate a National Human Rights Action Plan
and ensure the Philippines’ compliance with its obligations under various international
human rights instruments;

WHEREAS, consistent with the government's efforts to strengthen mechanisms
for promotion and protection of human rights mechanisms in the country, the
Philippines partnered with the United Nations (UN) for the Joint Program on Human
Rights (UNJP) to engage in capacity-building and technical cooperation in the areas of
law enforcement, criminal justice, and policy-making in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to sustain and enhance the accomplishments under
the UNJP, which is set to expire on 31 July 2024, through institutionalization of a robust
multi-stakeholder process for the promotion and protection of human rights in the
Philippines; and

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article VII of the Constitution vests in the President the
power of control over all the executive departments, bureaus, and offices, and the
mandate to ensure the faithful execution of laws;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND R. MARCOS JR., President of the
Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution
and existing laws, do hereby order:

Section 1. Special Committee on Human Rights Coordination. A Special
Committee on Human Rights Coordination (“Special Committee”) is hereby created
under the PHRC. The Special Committee shall be in-charge of sustaining initiatives
and accomplishments of the UNJP in the areas of law enforcement, criminal justice,
and policy-making. The Special Committee shall be composed of the following:

Chairperson : Executive Secretary, Office of the Executive Secretary
Co-Chairperson : Secretary, Department of Justice
Members : Secretary, Department of Foreign Affairs; and

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government.

The PHRC Secretariat shall serve as the Secretariat of the Special Committee,
and shall provide the necessary technical, administrative, and operational support to
the Special Committee.

As may be necessary, the Special Committee is hereby authorized to include
as members and/or observers such other relevant agencies, subject to existing laws,
rules and regulations. Further, the member-agencies of the Special Committee may
designate their existing personnel to the Secretariat, subject to existing laws, rules,
and regulations.

The Chairperson, Co-Chairperson and Members of the Special Committee may
designate their respective alternates, with ranks not lower than Assistant Secretary or
its equivalent, who are fully authorized to decide for or on their behalf.

Section 2. Duties and Functions. The Special Committee shall have the
following duties and functions:

a. Strengthen existing mechanisms for the protection and promotion of human rights,
particularly in the following key areas of the UNJP: (i) investigation and
accountability; (ii) data-gathering on alleged human rights violations by law
enforcement agencies; (iii) expanding civic space and engagement with private
sector; (iv) National Mechanisms for Implementation, Reporting, and Follow-up; (v)
human rights-based approach towards drug control; and (vi) human rights-based
approach towards counter-terrorism.

For this purpose, the Special Committee may, whenever necessary, invite as
member and/or observer such other government agencies, including the
Commission on Human Rights, Dangerous Drugs Board, and Anti-Terrorism
Council-Program Management Center;

b. Complement and rationalize the efforts of concerned government agencies,
instrumentalities, and bodies to ensure a holistic approach in the implementation
of their thrusts, programs, and policies on the abovementioned key areas;

c. Facilitate access to redress mechanism by victims of human rights violations;

d. Monitor and ensure effective implementation of government policies and programs
aimed at upholding and protecting human rights of persons deprived of liberty,
particularly in guaranteeing that no one is subjected to torture and other cruel,
inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment;

e. As may be necessary, provide technical support and assistance to concerned
government agencies, instrumentalities, and bodies in identifying human rights
concerns and issues, and in processing reports relative thereto to ensure that
appropriate action is taken;

f. Submit an annual report to the President, through the PHRC, relative to the
implementation of this Order; and

g. Perform other functions as may be directed by the President and/or the Executive
Secretary.

Section 3. Authority to Accept Assistance and/or Donations. The Special
Committee, through its member-agencies, is hereby authorized to accept donations,
contributions, grants, bequests or gifts from domestic or foreign sources, for purposes
relevant to their mandates and functions, subject to existing laws, rules and
regulations.

Section 4, Agency Support and Cooperation. All national government
agencies and_ instrumentalities, including government-owned or -controlled
corporations, are hereby directed, and all local government units, as well as the private
sector, are hereby encouraged to render full support and assistance to the Special
Committee relative to the implementation of this Order.

Section 5. Implementing Guidelines. Within thirty (30) days from the effectivity
of this Order, the Special Committee shall issue the necessary guidelines for the
effective implementation of this Order which may include, among others, mechanisms
for coordination and/or consultation with the public, non-government organizations,
and civil society groups, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 6. Funding. The funding requirements for the initial implementation of
this Order shall be charged against the current and available appropriations of the
member-agencies of the Special Committee. Thereafter, the funding requirements
necessary for the continued implementation of this Order shall be included in the
budget proposals of the member-agencies, subject to the usual budget preparation
process. ;

Section 7. Separability. If any part or provision of this Order is held
unconstitutional or invalid, other parts not affected thereby shall continue to be in full
force and effect.

Section 8. Repeal. All orders, rules and regulations, and other issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon its
publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 8thday of May , inthe year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twenty-Four.

 

By the President:

 

   
 

  

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

     
 

 

  
 

   
  

A

: N. ESPINO
& 8-204 ACTING DIR

can or ae
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES ECTOR IV
HU NUVI TRV Va ;

PBBM004529