MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 733

DIRECTING THE RESTORATION OF CERTAIN AREAS IN INTRAMUROS

WHEREAS, existing laws directs that the construction of buildings in Intramuros conform with the highest historical and aesthetic standards;

WHEREAS, the government owns various historical sites and building in Intramuros;

WHEREAS, the national objective of fostering historical and artistic consciousness must be reflected in the construction of public buildings;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby issue the following instructions:

1. An Ad Hoc Restoration Committee for Intramuros is hereby instructed to prepare a restoration plan for the following areas/buildings in Intramuros:

a. Palacio del Governador b. Commission on Elections Building c. Ayuntamiento Building d. Intendencia Building e. Intramuros Fire Station f. Rural Bankers Association Building g. Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila h. Edward J. Nell Building i . The row of buildings on Aduana Street fronting Plaza de Roma j. Plaza de Roma k. open space fronting the Comelec l. open space around the Intendencia

2. The recommendation of the Committee shall cover the exterior appearance of these buildings, both public and private, the major interior features and utilization of the public buildings, and the utilization and design of the open spaces.

3. The Committee shall be chaired by the Director of the National Historical Institute and shall have as members, the Director of the Bureau of Building and Real Property Management, the Director, National Parks Development Committee, and such persons as the President shall designate.

4. The following guidelines shall be observed by the Committee in its work:

a. The external appearance (including building design dimensions) of the named public buildings shall faithfully reproduce their respective appearances at some definite cut-off date as may be determined by the Committee;

b. The main rooms of the public buildings shall, whenever possible, reproduce their former appearance.

c. The use of the buildings shall be compatible with the historic value of the structures;

d. The construction/renovation of the government buildings included in the abovementioned list shall be included in the CY 1979 infrastructure program;

e. Any new construction/expansion pertaining to the private buildings listed in these Instructions shall conform with the plans and designs prepared by the Committee.

5. The construction of the ” Palacio del Governador Condominium” is hereby suspended. The site and the construction in progress shall be returned to the national government under such terms and conditions as may be approved upon recommendation of the Committee.

6. No external modifications in the buildings/ruins listed herein shall be authorized or undertaken pending the results of the Committee’s work.

7. The Committee shall submit its recommendations on or before September 30, 1978.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia