Malacañang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1413

DIRECTING THE SIMPLIFICATION OF RETIREMENT PROCEDURES FOR SCHOOLTEACHERS

Whereas, it normally takes an average of nine (9) months to complete the twenty-one (21) major steps presently necessary before a retiring schoolteacher can obtain her retirement check under R.A. No. 1616, oftentimes necessitating personal follow-up in Manila;

Whereas, the difficulty and expense of obtaining retirement benefits is poor reward for long years of service with the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Law, do hereby Order and Instruct the simplification of the procedure for obtaining retirement benefits:

1. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, in consultation with the Minister of the Budget and the President of the Government Service Insurance System, shall establish the documentary and other requirements needed for the various types of retirement programs and shall fully inform prospective retirees of such requirements;

2. The Ministers of Education, Culture and Sports and of the Budget, the President of the Government Service Insurance System, and the Presidential Executive Assistant shall study and implement a decentralized system of retirement processing and payments such that final action is taken at regional levels without need for Manila office processing;

3. The Minister of the Budget shall study the possibility of a simpler retirement fund, release system, including that of releasing an advance for the purpose, subject to replenishment on submission of batches of processed and paid retirement applications;

4. The Presidential Executive Assistant and the Director of the Malacanang Clinic shall study, in coordination with the Minister of Health, a system whereby medical, examinations attendant to early retirement are performed at regional hospitals, subject to the requirements and visitorial powers of Malacanang Clinic personnel.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of June, nineteen hundred and eighty four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : Presidential Management Staff