MALACAÑANG MANILA

October 5, 1972

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 14-A

TO : All Heads of Departments, Agencies and Offices of the Government

Letter of Instructions No. 14, dated September 29, 1972, is hereby amended as follows:

“In order to facilitate the reorganization of the Government and to speed up the current intensified effort to weed out undesirable government officials and employees, you are hereby directed to require all officials and employees in your department, office or agency, who are facing administrative charges, or who are notoriously undesirable on the ground of dishonesty, incompetence or other kinds of misconduct defined in the Civil Service Law or rules, or have been repeatedly charged, to render their resignations within one week after the publication of this Order in your department, office or agency.”

“This Order must be published immediately in your office.

“Should the officers or employees concerned fail or refuse to resign within the one-week period prescribed in the foregoing paragraph, they shall be suspended immediately until their cases are disposed of, as follows:

“1. For those actually facing administrative charges, if after preliminary inquiry into the same, the head of department, office or agency is convinced that the evidence of guilt against the respondent or respondents is strong, he shall dismiss or consider them resigned or otherwise separated from the service, or impose the proper penalty prescribed of the offense.

“2. In the case of an officer of employee who is notoriously undesirable, or has been repeatedly charged administratively but has for any reason escaped disciplinary action, the head of department, office or agency shall take notice of such notoriety and, without the necessity of filing charges, shall summarily dismiss or otherwise terminate the services of the respondent official or employee.

“The heads of departments, offices and other agencies of the government shall determine if the officials and employees who voluntarily resign in obedience to this Order shall enjoy any of the benefits granted by law to retiring officials and employees.

“The heads of departments, offices or other agencies of the Government shall report to the President within fifteen (15) days from the date of issue of this Order the names of the officials and employees who have rendered their resignations, have been charged and suspended or dismissed or otherwise meted a disciplinary penalty in accordance with this Order.

“Strict compliance with this Letter of Instructions is desired.”

“Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

“(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines.”

This Order supersedes letter of Instruction No. 14, dated September 29, 1972.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia