LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 389

TO : 1. The Secretary Department of Trade

2. The Chairman Board of Investments

The Governor Central Bank of the Philippines

The Commissioner Bureau of Customs

WHEREAS, it is the policy of government to develop and promote a local truck manufacturing industry together with the tire manufacturing industry in line with the objective of accelerating the country’s economic development by utilizing local materials in the manufacture of industrial products with the use of Filipino skill and labor;

WHEREAS, the attainment of the said objective is hampered at present by unfair competition provided by low-priced used trucks and tires originating from other countries;

WHEREAS, the safety features of used trucks have to be ascertained to protect our people from physical injuries;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct the following:

a. That there be created an Inter-Agency Committee comprised of the Secretary of the Department of Trade, as Chairman, the Chairman of the Board of Investments, the Governor of the Central Bank, and the Commissioner of the Bureau of Customs, as members, the function of which shall be the preparation of an in-depth study on the local truck/tire manufacturing industries and the safety of the citizenry;

b. That all importations under any mode of payment of used trucks and tires be temporarily suspended until such time as the in-depth study and recommendations to be prepared by the above-constituted Inter-Agency Committee is completed;

c.  That, as an interim policy, importations of used trucks and tires shall not be allowed, except for all necessary and priority projects duly certified for such projects and as safe by the Inter-Agency Committee;

d. That the Inter-Agency Committee shall submit to me the initial report on the study with four (4) weeks from this date.

The provisions of this Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia