MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 297

TO : The Secretary of Foreign Affairs The Secretary of Tourism The Governor, Central Bank of the Philippines The President, Philippine National Bank The Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines The Governor, Land Bank of the Philippines The Chairman, Philippine Veterans Bank The Commissioner of Customs The Commissioner of Immigration and Deportation All police, Agencies and Local Governments in Metropolitan Manila and the Manila International Airport

To insure the successful hosting of the First Asian Securities Industry Forum to be held from November 10 to November 16, 1975 in Manila under the auspices of the Department of Trade and the Securities and Exchange Commission, you are hereby directed to implement the following instructions:

1. Communicate immediately with either the Secretary of Trade or the Securities and Exchange Commissioner with regard to your active participation in this significant international conference.

2. Assume the proper tasks, duties and responsibilities in the various aspects of preparation of the Forum which may be required by either of the above named government officials.

3. The Department of Foreign Affairs shall assist in the protocolar and secretariat requirements of the Forum and the informational activities abroad to generate participation therein.

4. All the financial institutions abovenamed shall extend financial and moral support for the Forum and designate representatives to the various technical study committees being formed by the Secretariat as part of the preparation for the Forum.

5. The Department of Tourism, the Local Governments, the Bureau of Customs and Immigration and Deportation and the Manila International Airport shall coordinate with the Forum Secretariat all plans and activities for the reception and entertainment of the delegates and for facilitating their entry into and departure from the Philippines.

6. The Metropolitan police agencies shall coordinate with the Forum Secretariat all plans and activities for providing adequate security for the delegates, particularly those coming from abroad.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia