Malacañang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION No. 1116

DIRECTING THE REVIEW OF THE COMPENSATION PLAN FOR THE UNIFORMED MEN OF THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE.

WHEREAS, the Constitution directs the adoption of a standard compensation scheme in Government, which mandate is implemented by Presidential Decree No. 985 authorizing the President to, among other establish compensation plan for all government officials and employees;

WHEREAS, the standard salary rates prescribed by Letter of Implementation Number 98 dated September 10, 1979 for the members of the Integrated National Police created administrative problem which restricted INP leadership from redeploying its members;

WHEREAS, there is a need to restructure the salary rates of the members to make it compatible with the National Salary Schedule;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby instruct the following:

Section 1. – The Minister of National Defense and the Minister of the Budget shall review the compensation structure for the Integrated National Police (INP) with the purpose of adjusting the Compensation Levels for the uniformed personnel of the INP to achieve more equitable levels relative to the entire Armed Forces of the Philippines at the same time make it compatible with the National Salary Schedule.

Section 2. – To achieve this purpose, appropriate amendments shall be made on Letter of Implementation 98 and P.D. 985 providing for compensation plans and guidelines for the uniformed men of the Integrated National Police to effect such adjustments to be implemented in Calendar Year 1981.

Section 3. – Any additional budgetary requirements called for by such modification shall be funded out of funds provided for the purpose and out of savings of the integrated National Police. Any further augmentation shall come from the Salary Adjustment Fund so provided in the General Appropriations Act.

Section 4. – Guidelines for the implementation of such revised compensation scheme shall be jointly prepared by the Minister of National Defense and the Minister of the Budget.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st March Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-One.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia