Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

Letter of Instructions No. 1370

Lifting of Letter of Instructions No. 757, thereby reopening an area in the Bicol Region to mining location.

Whereas, in line with the government approved plan to accelerate the assessment and evaluation of the nuclear fuel potential of an area in the Bicol Region, Letter of Instructions No. 757 was issued on October 28, 1978 closing an area in the Bicol Region to mining location, more particularly described as follows:

“A parcel of mineral bearing land bounded on the South by Latitude 14°00’00” North, on the West by Longitude 122°23’00” East, and elsewhere by the Philippine Sea Coastline.”

Whereas, exploration activities conducted by service contractors in the area has been completed and the results thereof were not encouraging to support a viable mining operation for uranium and or other radioactive minerals;

Whereas, Letter of Instructions No. 757 has no doubt deterred and impeded the immediate exploration, development, exploitation and wise utilization of other minerals found therein;

Whereas, there are vast tracts of lands rich in gold, silver, copper and other minerals in the area banned under Letter of Instructions No. 757 which are either unregistered or covered by abandoned mining claims, which could be the subject of registration, occupation, exploration and development;

Whereas, there are investors, local and/or foreign possessed with necessary financial resources and technical competence who are willing to engage in mining ventures in the area;

Whereas, it would be in the national interest to re-open the area to mining location and exploration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby Order and directs:

The immediate lifting of Letter of Instructions No. 757, and allowing the registration of all mining locations and other claims proposed to be located within the above-described area; Provided that the development of Uranium and/or any nuclear fuel mineral deposit that may be found therein shall be governed by the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1101.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of December, in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia