MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1162

MOBILIZING A SPECIAL TASK FORCE ON THE APPLICATION OF BIO-GENETICS DEVELOPMENT ON RESOURCES UTILIZATION

WHEREAS, international and local trends in population growth and resource utilization indicate a growing need for more efficient technologies consistent with the requirements for stable economic development;

WHEREAS, the application of bio-genetics on resource utilization has provided such alternative technologies that maximize the use of existing resources as well as creating new resources;

WHEREAS, the adoption of bio-genetics as an alternative approach to resource utilization may provide a new industrial base for our country’s development ;

NOW, THEREFORE, in view of the foregoing and pursuant to the policy of encouraging scientific growth for national development, the following instructions are hereby issued:

1. You are hereby directed to constitute yourselves into a Special Task Force on Bio-genetics Development with the Minister of Human Settlements as Chairman and the Chairman of the National Science Development Board as Co-Chairman to supervise the study on the applications of bio-genetics for resource utilization. The priority sectors for research shall be on health, energy and food production.

2. The Task Force shall prepare a Program on Bio-Genetics Research, for implementation, and shall submit a detailed program plan within thirty (30) days from the date of the issuance of these instructions, for approval by the President of the Philippines.

3. The Task Force is hereby authorized to establish and constitute a secretariat and support staff to be headed by an Executive Officer from among their personnel to assist the Task Force in the implementation of the program. The services of other scientific personnel from scheme and other agencies may be availed of as necessary, and incentives in the form of honoraria is hereby authorized to be granted to deserving personnel.

4. The Task Force is hereby granted a budget allocation of P1.5 Million for its first year of operation to be derived from the current budgetary allocations of your respective agencies earmarked for Technology research. All releases shall be subject to existing rules on auditing and accounting.

For immediate implementation.

Done, this 18th day of September 1981.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia