MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 859

DIRECTING THE REVIEW AND RATIONALIZATION OF VOCATIONAL/TECHNICAL EDUCATION

WHEREAS, there is imperative need to assure that the country’s vocational/technical education is responsive to the ever expanding and qualifying needs for manpower by industry, agriculture and the services as called for by the Philippine Development Plan.

WHEREAS, a review of vocational/technical education is called for in accordance with the recommendations of the Presidential Commission to Survey Philippine Education as embodied in Presidential Decree No. 6-A.

WHEREAS, vocational and technical education needs to be rationalized in the light of substantial requirements for capital and operating funds by educational institutions carrying on these programs.

WHEREAS, there is need to rationalize and make more effective the system and structure of vocational/technical including non-formal education in the Philippines in the light of the establishment of the National Polytechnic System pursuant to LOI No. 79.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, hereby direct the conduct of such a review and study of the vocational/technical education sector of the educational system that will include, among others:

a) secondary and tertiary, including post-secondary, vocational/technical education in both the public and private education systems;

b) non-formal vocational/technical education and training conducted through the Regional Manpower Training Centers, the schools of arts and trades, technical and vocational schools, and other institutions;

c) the newly established National Polytechnic System and its component institutions with a view to rationalizing its programs and institutional structure including the aspect, of regionalization;

d) involvement and participation of the private business and industry sectors in vocational and technical education;

e) the financing of vocational/technical education in the Philippines;

f) employment, manpower demand and supply projections and manpower planning;

g) other areas of concern in vocational/technical education as they relates to national development.

2. The study shall generate the following outputs:

a) Policy recommendations for improvement of vocational/technical education program including coordination between formal and non-formal programs and between state and private education institutions;

b) Reorganizational proposals to strengthen the institutional framework for vocational/technical education including the system of governance;

c) Recommendations for financing of vocational/technical education including investments for capital and equipment;

d) Recommendations for programs and projects for international financing assistance;

e) Recommendations related to government and private sector partnership in vocational/technical education; and

f) Recommendations useful in manpower planning.

3. You are to constitute yourselves into a Presidential Study Committee on Vocational/Technical Education, hereinafter referred to as Committee, with the Minister of Education and Culture as Chairman. To be included in the membership of the Committee are the President of the Fund for Assistance to Private Education, the President of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the President of Coordinating Council for Private Education Association (COCOPEA). The ministries concerned shall designate their respective alternate representatives to the Committee with the rank of Deputy Minister.

4. The Committee shall provide the overall direction and terms of reference for the study.

5. The Committee shall be supported by a Project Staff to be headed by the President of the Technological University of the Philippines (TUP) as Project Director and the Executive Director of the Educational Development Projects Implementing Task Force (EDPITAF), as Deputy Project Director.

6. A Technical Advisory Group shall be constituted by representatives from the offices represented in the Committee to advise and assist the Project Staff in the conduct of the study.

7. The project staff shall be drawn primarily from the personnel of TUP, EDPITAF and NMYC and the private sector.

8. The funding for the study shall come from the Ministry of Education and Culture and the National Manpower and Youth Council and from such other government sources as may be made available under existing policies and regulations. In addition, the Committee shall tap funding contribution from the private sector.

9. The study shall be completed within six months and its Report shall be submitted to the President after endorsement by the Social Development Cabinet Committee of the NEDA Board.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of May, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia