MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 720

To insure the successful hosting of the 8th World Basketball Championship Games scheduled in October 1978, under the auspices of the Basketball Association of the Philippines (BAP) and the Federation Internationale de Basketball Amateur (FIBA), you are hereby directed to implement the following instructions:

1. Communicate immediately with the President of the Basketball Association of the Philippines (BAP) with regard to your active participation in this significant international sports event;

2. Assume the proper tasks, duties and responsibilities in the various aspects of preparation of the World Basketball Championship Games which may be required by the President of the BAP;

3. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall assist in the protocolar requirements of the World Basketball Championship Games to facilitate the entry and exit of delegations of participant countries;

4. The Ministry of Tourism, the Bureau of Customs, the Commission on Immigration and Deportation, the Manila International Airport and the agencies and local governments in Metropolitan Manila shall coordinate with the WBC Secretariat all plans and activities for the reception and entertainment of the delegates and for facilitation of their entry into and departure from the Philippines;

5. The Ministry of Trade shall assist and coordinate with the WBC Secretariat in the production and distribution of Commemorative items;

6. The Metropolitan police agencies shall coordinate with the WBC Secretariat all plans and activities for providing adequate security for the delegates, particularly those coming from abroad;

7. The National Media Production Center shall assist and coordinate with the WBC Secretariat to insure the proper promotion and publicity of the event through the mass media; and

8. The Bureau of Posts shall assist and coordinate with the WBC Secretariat for the printing of commemorative mail stamps and other commemorative items.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia