MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 77

Deeply concerned over the welfare of thousands of government officials and employees who were separated from the service as the regrettable but inevitable after-effect following the ratification of the new Constitution, the issuance of Proclamation No. 1081, including those who will be affected by the implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1 dated September 24, 1972, compelling the restructuring of the government offices;

Believing that many of these government workers forcibly laid-off through circumstances brought about by the need for changes are still in the prime of life, willing to serve and capable of many more years of useful service in their chosen field;

And mindful of the still useful manpower gone to waste with their premature lay-off and retirement;

You are hereby directed and instructed to explore and find all ways and means through which those qualified laid-off government workers may still be reemployed in the government service or employed in the private sector.

To that end, the following should be made as guidelines:

Application .

The general policy of absorbing laid-off personnel in other agencies of the government shall be limited to separated personnel who possess Civil Service eligibilities, and were separated as a result of the implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan or pertinent provisions of the new Constitution.

This policy shall not apply to personnel who have been separated under Letter of Instructions Nos. 11, 14, 14-A and 14-B.

Preparation of Master List .

The Civil Service Commissioner, in collaboration with the Budget Commissioner, shall prepare a Master List of all personnel mentioned above, who are willing to be employed either in the public service or in private business establishments, indicating therein their respective Civil Service eligibilities, experience and other qualifications and other relevant bio-data.

Rehiring of Separated Personnel .

Appropriate regulations and procedures shall hereafter be issued to ensure that such separated personnel belonging to the Master List shall be given priority in filling classified position vacancies over other Civil Service eligibles who are entering the government service for the first time. Such preference, however, shall be subject to the condition that the Civil Service eligibilities, experience and other qualifications of the previously separated personnel are consistent with the job requirements of the position vacancies, attention being invited to the special or technical qualifications called for in such positions as teachers, doctors, engineers, economists and the like.

Appointments not Covered by this Letter of Instruction .

The filling of position vacancies by casual appointments, appointments to positions in the non-competitive service, contractual appointments, promotional appointments and transfer appointments, are not covered by this Instruction. Department Heads and the Civil Service Commissioner shall continue to act on such appointments in accordance with existing policies and rules on the matter.

Action on Original Appointments of New Civil Service Entrants .

Pending completion of the Master List and the issuance of implementing regulations or procedures mentioned herein, all original appointments of new Civil Service entrants shall be referred to the Office of the President for appropriate action.

In implementing this Letter of Instruction, you should endeavor to achieve our objective of maximum utilization of our manpower reserve and at the same time, keeping intact the savings sought to be generated by the government reorganization. Government agencies directly involved in economic and social development efforts shall be given priority in employing personnel from the Master List.

You are also instructed to submit at least once a month progress reports on the implementation of this Letter of Instruction. I expect full implementation of this Instruction not later than December 30, 1973.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia