MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 379

TO: 1. The Chairman Board of Transportation

2. The Director National Bureau of Investigation

3. The Metrocom Commander

In view of persistent reports of inefficiency and various anomalies in the Board of Transportation, confirmed by reports you have yourself submitted to me, you are hereby directed to take the following actions and be guided by the following standards and policies:

1. All employees against whom there is prima facie evidence of dishonesty, inefficiency, laziness, tardiness, absences and other misconduct affecting the operations of the Board of Transportation, as well as all those found disregarding rules and regulations not necessarily criminal in nature or who are otherwise notoriously undesirable, shall be removed from office immediately.

2. All officials and employees involved in such acts as falsification, influence peddling, bribery and other forms of corruption shall be criminally prosecuted without delay, besides being removed from public office.

3. You shall immediately confer with the Civil Service Commission for the purpose of securing replacements for officials and employees who shall be removed.

4. You shall immediately cancel the certificate of public convenience of any taxi operator found to have committed any repeated violation of rules and regulations, pending the investigation of such violations.

5. With respect to violations which may not necessitate or warrant cancellation of a franchise you shall impose upon the operator an unusually heavy penalty, such as a fine ranging from ₱5,000 to ₱10,000, or in an amount which you shall determine on the basis of the average daily income of each unit operated by the taxi operator committing the violation.

6. Every provisional authority given to any taxi operator shall be cancelled immediately.

In this connection, you shall immediately conduct a study to determine who among the bus and jeepney operators should be allowed to convert their provisional authority to a permanent authority, based on public requirements for jeepney and bus services.

No provisional authority shall henceforth be issued.

7. No taxi whose permits is for an area outside Metro Manila shall be allowed within Metro Manila. All such taxis now operating within said area shall be given one week from today to get out.

8. You shall immediately require all taxis authorized to operate within Metro Manila to obtain new special permits from the BOT. Henceforth, only such special permit shall be recognized within the area.

9. The Director of the National Bureau of Investigation shall provide full support and assistance in investigations of anomalies in the BOT.

10. The Metrocom Commander is hereby directed to enforce these instructions and other existing rules and regulations.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia