MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 851

To insure the successful hosting of the 8th International Conference on Training and Development of Human Resources scheduled on November 7-12, 1979, being organized by the Philippine Society for Training and Development (PSTD), the Asian Regional Training and Development Organization (ARTDO), and the International Federation of Training and Development Organizations (IFTDO), you are hereby enjoined to implement the following instructions:

1. Coordinate and cooperate with the organizers of the 8th International Conference on Training and Development of Human Resources with regard to your active participation in this significant world forum;

2. Assume the appropriate tasks, duties and responsibilities in the various aspects of the planning and development of this international conference which may be requested by the organizers;

3. The Minister of Foreign Affairs shall assist in the protocol requirements to facilitate the entry and exit of delegations of participating organizations/countries;

4. The Ministry of Tourism, the Bureau of Customs, the Commission on Immigration and Deportation, the Manila International Airport and the agencies and local governments in Metropolitan Manila shall coordinate with the Conference organizers all plans and activities for the reception and entertainment of the delegates and for facilitation of their entry into and departure from the Philippines;

5. The Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank of the Philippines shall assist in extending exemption on taxes and customs duties to conference participants and in providing banking services at the Philippine International Convention Center (PICC);

6. The Ministry of Trade shall assist and coordinate with the Conference organizers in the planning and holding of an exposition on different products and services related to the training and development profession;

7. The Ministry of Public Information and the National Media Production Center shall assist and coordinate with the Conference organizers to insure the proper promotion and publicity of the Conference;

8. The Institute for Small-Scale Industries, University of the Philippines shall organize the Conference Secretariat; and

9. The Metropolitan police agencies shall coordinate with the Conference organizers all plans and activities for providing adequate security for the delegates, particularly those coming from abroad.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia