MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1022-A

SUBJECT: Centralization of the Training of Athletes for International Competitions

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 955 created the Gintong Alay Project directly under the President to train athletes (track and field) for international competitions;

WHEREAS, Gintong Alay’s intensive training program has achieved a significant improvement in athletic performance in track and field; and

WHEREAS, the government recognizes the need for the application of similar comprehensive training efforts to other sports wherein the Philippines competes at international levels.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

1. All training programs geared towards the preparation of athletes to represent the Philippines in specific international competition in these sports included in the Olympic, Asian, and Southeast Asian Games shall be centralized under the Gintong Alay Project. At present, these sports are archery, badminton, basketball, bowling, boxing, cycling, equestrian, fencing, football, gymnastics, judo, lawn tennis, shooting, softball, swimming, table tennis, track and field, weightlifting, wrestling, and sipa. Other sports which may later be included in the Olympic, Southeast Asian or Asian Games shall be automatically added to the list.

2. The Gintong Alay Project shall be headed by an Executive Director to be appointed by the President, who shall set overall training policies and shall supervise and monitor the implementation of training programs. He shall be responsible for providing the necessary logistic support and training facilities. He shall submit periodic reports to the President.

3. The Minister of Youth and Sports Development, in consultation with the Gintong Alay Executive Director, shall designate a Gintong Alay Project Director for each sport concerned. The Gintong Alay Executive Director, together with the Project Directors, shall prepare training strategies and programs for each sport. The Project Director, together with the national sports association concerned, shall be responsible for the implementation of training strategies and programs for his sport under the overall coordination of the Gintong Alay Executive Director.

4. The Gintong Alay Executive Director jointly with the national sports association concerned shall select the athletes to undergo training under the Gintong Alay Project.

5. Taking into account the qualifying standards set for each sport, the Gintong Alay Executive Director in consultation with the Minister of Youth and Sports Development shall submit to the Philippine Olympic Committee for endorsement to the specific international organizing committee or international sports federation, as appropriate, a list of athletes, coaches and trainers participating in the specific international competitions.

6. The Gintong Alay Project may call on any government entity for assistance in the performance of its task. All heads of Ministries, agencies, corporations and offices of the government are hereby instructed to render full assistance and cooperation to the Gintong Alay Project, to ensure success of its assigned functions.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19 day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1980). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 961 – 1095]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.