MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 727

In view of the alarming increase in death and injury to persons and loss and damage to property by fires, many of which were perpetrated by organized groups to serve their ulterior or selfish motives and which greatly undermine public confidence in the New Order, it has become imperative that additional measures be instituted to effectively secure the country from such criminal and terroristic acts.

In order to carry out an integrated effort on fire safety starting from the national level and down to field units, there is hereby constituted a National Fire Safety Council with the Minister of National Defense, as Chairman; the Chief of Constabulary/Director General  of the Integrated National Police, as Action Officer; and as members, the Minister of Human Settlements, the Minister of Local Government and Community Development; the Minister of Public Works, Transportation and Communication; the Minister of Justice; the Minister of Finance; the Minister of Trade; the Minister of the Budget; the Director, National Bureau of Investigation; the Insurance Commissioner; the Administrator of the Civil Aeronautics Administration; the Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines; the Director General, National Intelligence and Security Authority; the Commandant of the Philippine Coast Guard; the President, Safety Organization of the Philippines, Inc.; and the President of the National Fire Protection Association. The Council shall be responsible for the formulation of plans and policies, coordination, direction and supervision of all activities designed to prevent and suppress fires, specially arson and related criminally instigated activities.

The Council shall formulate a National Fire Safety Program with special emphasis on fire education and prevention and the campaign against arson, provide adequate organization and support for planning and implementation of such fire safety program.  Likewise, it shall initiate appropriate liaison and coordination, through proper channels with foreign police organizations and other agencies for the purpose of exchanging information about suspect personalities or groups involved in arson.

The Council is authorized to call directly on other Ministries, bureaus, offices, and other instrumentalities of the government and the private sectors for the accomplishment of the above tasks. It shall encourage the private sector to be involved in the implementation of this LOI.

Financial requirements shall be supported from appropriations provided for in Section 13 of Presidential Decree No. 1185, or from other sources authorized by law.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of August, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia