MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 542

DEFINING THE FUNCTIONS, POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL.

TO: All Chairmen, Regional Development Councils The Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority, and all Heads of Departments, Bureaus, Offices, Agencies and Government Instrumentalities, Including Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations Participating or Involved in Regional Development  Planning as well as in the Implementation of Regional Development Plans and Projects

In order to enhance the operational viability of the Regional Development Council as the chief planning body in the region and coordinator of regional development, and the necessity of strengthening the capacity of the Chairman of the Council, it is hereby directed that the Chairman of the Regional Development Council shall have and exercise the following functions, powers, duties and responsibilities:

1. Direct the formulation of an integrated regional development plan to include plans of national government agencies, regional development bodies and local governments in the regions.

2. Coordinate the implementation of development programs and projects in the region and establish a monitoring system therefor.

3. Recommend to the NEDA and the Budget Commission a system of priorities in the allocation of budgetary resources for programs and projects of national government offices in the region in accordance with the regional plan.

4. Administer the share of the region from the Regional Development Fund provided under the National Budget decree, and such other funds as may be provided by the national government and/or local governments for regional projects.

5. Coordinate local planning activities in the region to ensure the consistency of local plans with development plans for the region.

6. Call on any agency or instrumentality of the government and on private entities and organizations in the region for cooperation and assistance in the performance of the council of its functions.

7. Submit to the President through the NEDA quarterly and such other reports as may be required or necessary on the status of development efforts in the region and recommend measures for accelerating regional growth and development.

The Chairman of the Council shall also serve in the region in such capacities and exercise such additional functions, powers, duties and responsibilities as the President may determine.

The Chairman of the Council shall be assisted by the NEDA Regional Office in the exercise of the functions, powers, duties and responsibilities herein vested or additionally vested in him.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia