Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1517

Recognizing the urgent need to enhance the improvement of the quality of life of families in resettlement projects, slum improvement sites and other projects being undertaken by the National Housing Authority for marginal and low income families and to provide the requirements for schools in such NHA projects so that all children of school-age thereat can be given the opportunity to get an education;

Aware that the availability of schools for their children’s continuing education is the primary attraction that compels marginal and low-income family to settle and reside permanently in NHA projects particularly resettlement sites;

Appreciating the current funding difficulties of line agencies responsible for the provision of school and other community facilities and their inability to provide the requirements for such community facilities of a priority basis;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me, hereby direct as follows:

1. The Economic Support Fund Council shall allocate and make available to the National Housing Authority the amount of P90 Million from Economic Support Fund (ESF) for the development of the school system in the various projects of the National Housing Authority estimated to consist of a backlog of 640 classrooms. Thereafter, the Economic Support Fund Council shall allocate P30 Million yearly to the National Housing Authority for the development of the school system and other community facilities such as public markets, clinics, barangay centers, parks and playgrounds in various projects that the National Housing Authority shall develop for marginal and low income families.

2. The National Housing Authority shall submit at the beginning of the budget year to the Economic Support Fund Council the consolidated list of schools and community facilities in each specific projects to be constructed for the year with the funds provided under this LOI together with all the plans and estimates as necessary.

3. The Minister of the Budget and Management shall release the funds from the Economic Support Fund as subsidy or grant to the National Housing Authority which are to be apart and distinct from the yearly equity contribution of the national government for the capitalization of the said Corporation.

4. The National Housing Authority shall cause the construction and development of such schools and other community facilities funded through the ESF and upon their completion turnover of such facilities to the national or local government concerned for operation and maintenance.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of January, in the Year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia

Letter of Instruction No. 1517, January 31, 1986