MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 223

TO: The Secretary of Labor

In order to insure the implementation of the Labor Code on the date of its effectivity on November 1, 1974, you are hereby directed to immediately undertake and effect the following measures:

1. Organize the new offices created under the Labor Code and such other administrative entities authorized under the Code and the Integrated Reorganization Plan as are necessary to carry out effectively the programs and activities arising from the implementation of the Code, including the immediate recruitment and appointment of essential officials and personnel.

2. Prepare for the approval of the Office of the President, the budget estimates of the new offices which shall be drawn from the authorized appropriations of the Department of Labor for the current fiscal year and from the unexpended funds of the Court of Industrial Relations. In this connection, the Budget Commission is directed to extend such assistance as may be necessary to the Department of Labor and to give priority of action on the budget estimates submitted to it for consideration. Bureaus, offices, services and other entities in the Department of Labor Code whose functions and structures have been aligned in accordance with the Integrated Reorganization Plan and the Labor Code and whose budgets are already incorporated in Presidential Decree No. 503, should immediately be staffed and commence operations.

3. Submit for my consideration a list of candidates for presidential appointment to positions provided under Presidential Decree No. 503, as well as to the following key positions in the new offices created under the Labor Code.

a. National Labor Relations Commission

1) Chairman

2) Two members representing the public

3) Two members representing the employers

4) Two members representing the workers

b. Overseas Employment Development Board

1) Executive Director

c. National Seamen Board

1) Executive Director

Upon the issuance of the corresponding appointments, the Commission proper (NLRC) and the two Boards are deemed constituted, and the members thereof may enter upon their respective duties and take such steps as may be necessary as a body to place their organizations on an operational basis by November 1, 1974.

4. Take such other measures as may be necessary to effect the smooth transfer of all unexpended fund, properties, equipment, records of offices abolished under the Labor Code to the appropriate entities of the Department of Labor, including authorizing the holdover officials involved in such transfer until the same is completely effected.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of October, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia