MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 319

TO: All Heads of Departments, Bureaus, Offices, Agencies, Government-owned or Controlled Corporations and Local Governments;

The Civil Service Commission

WHEREAS, the Constitution provides that the Civil Service Commission shall establish a career service and adopt measures to provide morale, efficiency and integrity in the Civil Service;

WHEREAS, I have decreed that the Civil Service Commission, the Central personnel agency of the government, organize in each department, office agency, government-owned or controlled corporation, provincial and city government a Civil Service staff which shall serve as the liaison office between the Commission and these offices;

WHEREAS, there is an immediate need to establish this office in order to enhance the efforts of the Commission in extending assistance to the various government offices in their personnel programs and personnel administration and to monitor those and other activities which may be of interest to the Commission as a central personnel agency of the government and which is called upon by the Constitution to adopt measures to provide morale, efficiency and integrity in the Civil Service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order that:

1. Within a reasonable time, the Civil Service Commission, jointly with the different departments, offices, agencies or government-owned or controlled corporations or local governments concerned, shall establish a Civil Service Staff as envisioned to perform functions that may be assigned to it, including the following:

a. Provided technical assistance in all aspects of personnel management;

b. Monitor and audit periodically the personnel practices and performance of the Department or agency concerned as well as those of public officers and employees thereat.

c. Determine agency compliance with Civil Service Law and rules; and

d. In the performance of these functions, the Staff shall welcome and receive from the public any suggestions, observations and complaints pertaining the conduct of public officers and employees.

2. The Heads of departments, offices, agencies, government-owned or controlled corporations, and provincial and city governments shall provide the facilities and equipment as well as personnel for the staff except the head of the office, who shall be an official or employee of the Civil Service Commission. But the Commission may augment such personnel with its own.

3. In consultation with the heads of offices concerned, the Commission shall work out arrangements for the implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia