MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 142

In order to give significance to the policy of the government concerning the economic, social and cultural development of Muslim Mindanao to all the citizens of the Philippines, it is necessary to bring the government’s concern for its Muslim population by initiating the accomplishing a project for the Muslims right here in the heart of the national community.

In order to accomplish this avowed objective and in pursuance to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972 and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, it is hereby directed:

1. The Executive Secretary as Chairman, and the Chief of Staff of AFP and the Presidential Assistant on Housing and Resettlement Agency or their duly authorized representative, are hereby constituted as the Administrative Committee which shall exercise control and supervision of the land proclaimed and set aside for the Maharlika Village at Bicutan, Taguig, Rizal.

2. The Administrative Committee shall have the following functions:

a) To undertake the subdivision and titling of the land released for the Maharlika Village in the name of the Maharlika Village;

b) To make and implement the development scheme of the Maharlika Village consisting of housing, cemetery, infrastructure, elementary school, shopping and tourist center, cultural community center, park facilities, auditorium, mosque, market, hostel, student dormitories, clinic, water system, drainage, electrification, and security measures for the village;

3. The Executive Secretary shall appoint the Project Officer for the purpose of administering the village in accordance with this Instruction and rules and regulations which the Administrative Committee may impose for the efficient management of the village.

4. The Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, thru the Corps of Engineers shall undertake the immediate construction of the access road to the village and upon finalization of the plan for the village development, to undertake all infrastructure work including the establishment of the water system, drainage and electrification facilities for the area.

5. The Presidential Assistant on Housing and Resettlement Agency shall be responsible for the implementation of the project study involving low-cost housing, cemetery, electrification, school, shopping and tourist center, cultural community center, park facilities, student dormitories, auditorium, market, clinic, and other similar facilities.

This project shall be financed through a loan from any government financing institution, provided, it shall be a self-liquidating project and economically feasible.

The Administrative Committee is hereby authorized to issue rules and regulations for the management of the village and the administration of the village including the disposition and transfer of the titles to qualified Muslim applicants.

The amount of P.5M is hereby released to the Administrative Committee of the Maharlika Village for the initial development of the village from the General Funds.

Done in the City of Manila this 30th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia