MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1299

TO: LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES

SUBJECT: APPREHENSION OF UNAUTHORIZED MANUFACTURERS AND DISTRIBUTORS OF SCOUT PARAPHERNALIA AND IMPOUNDING OF SAID PARAPHERNALIA.

WHEREAS, the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts of the Philippines, in their noble task of preparing the youth of the land to be responsible citizens, inspire every generation with the highest ideals for citizenship, character, conduct and attainment;

WHEREAS, these Scout Organizations through their voluntary involvement in civic and community development projects, undertaken effectively with zeal and sincerity, have demonstrated that they are capable partners in nation-building;

WHEREAS, to support their activities, these Scout Organizations depend, among others, on the revenue source provided for in Section 7 of Commonwealth Act No. Ill, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 460, which provides:

“The corporation created by this Act shall adopt distinctive badges, uniform and insignia for the Scouts of the Philippines and once adopted shall have the sole and exclusive right to use the title, emblems, uniforms, badges, descriptive or designating marks, words and phrases used by the Scouts of the Philippines in carrying its programs in accordance with purposes of the Act.”

WHEREAS, the provision of law notwithstanding, the unauthorized manufacture and distribution of the Scout paraphernalia continue to proliferate and to go unabated to the prejudice of these Scout Organizations;

WHEREAS, in order to protect the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts of the Philippines and their members against the operations of these unauthorized manufacturers and distributors and in order to insure high quality scout paraphernalia at reasonable prices, it is necessary that all law enforcement agencies of the Republic of the Philippines actively participate in the apprehension of unauthorized manufacturers and distributors and impounding of the scout paraphernalia so manufactured or distributed for sale by them;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct all law enforcement agencies of the Republic of the Philippines, upon proper application by the Boy Scouts of the Philippines and/or Girl Scouts of the Philippines for a warrant of arrest and/or search warrant with a judge, or such other responsible officer as may be authorized by law, to apprehend unauthorized manufacturers and distributors of Scout paraphernalia, and to impound the same to be used as evidence in court or other appropriate administrative body.

Immediate and strict compliance with this Letter of Instruction is hereby ordered.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) MANUEL M. LAZARO Presidential Assistant for Legal Affairs

Source: Malacañang Records Office