MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1395

After considering all reports available to me about the developments in UNESCO, including the study made by the U.S. on it, which has led that country to serve notice of its withdrawal from the Organization, I consider it in the Philippines’ own national interest and of the interest of UNESCO as well that certain institutional and administrative reforms and improvement be effected.

It is, therefore, my desire that the following proposed amendments be submitted for adoption by the appropriate bodies of the Organization:

1. Proposed Amendment No. 1, which seeks to reduce the number of the members of the Executive Board from 51 to 27 members, who shall be representative of the General Conference only and enjoined to perform their duties as international officers.

2. Proposed Amendment No. 2, which further strengthens the international character of the members of the Board.

3. Proposed Amendment No. 3 – New Provision: Inhibiting members of the Executive Board from accepting other appointments or missions from UNESCO during incumbency and two-years thereafter.

4. Proposed Amendment No. 4 – New Provision: Making members of the Executive Board ex-officio members of the General Conference to help the Chairman of the Board in presenting programme and budget and other matters on Agenda to the General Conference, and to advise delegates who may need consultation.

5. Proposed Amendment No. 5, amending Article V, Paragraph 5, Requiring the Chairman of the Executive Board to “submit and present” the programme and budget to the General Conference with the Board’s specific observations and recommendations.

6. Proposed Amendment No. 6, amending Article V, Paragraph 9: Requiring likewise the Chairman of the Board to submit reports to the General Conference with its observations and recommendations .

7. Proposed Amendment No. 7, New Paragraph. After Paragraph A of Article V: Providing that in the consideration of programmes and budgets, member-states shall be consulted through their Permanent Delegates by the Board.

8. Proposed Amendment No. 8, requiring the Executive Board to improve means of communication, dialogue and consultation between UNESCO and members-states.

9. Proposed Amendment No. 9 – Amending Article V, Paragraph 7 – Making the Chairman of the Board full-time Chairman, and Prescribing his duties and functions.

10. Proposed Amendment No. 10, amending Article VI, Paragraph 4, providing that appointments of certain officers be subject to confirmation by the Board.

11. Proposed Amendment No. 11, requiring the Executive Board to prescribe the duties and define the authority of officers of the Secretariat.

12. Proposed Amendment No. 12, indicating to member-states the establishment of Permanent Missions.

13. Proposed Amendment No. 13, New Provision, defining the Role of Permanent Delegates Accredited to UNESCO.

14. Proposed Amendment No. 14 – Providing for the observance of a balanced geographical and cultural representation in the selection of officers of the UNESCO.

I find the allegations regarding the politicization of the Organization very disturbing for it was conceived as an organization for international collaboration and cooperation in the most urgent tasks in education, culture, science and technology and communication. The Philippines must contribute to the endeavors to de-politicize it. A similar review should be made of the procedures and directions being taken by the programs and activities of the Organization.

Our objectives shall always be the promotion of international goodwill and collaboration in the different educational, scientific, technological, cultural and communication endeavours of UNESCO.

The points must likewise be studied by the Philippine Permanent Mission to the UNESCO which shall submit its reports and recommendations periodically.

In carrying out the herein instructions you shall work in close consultation and coordination with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and you shall consult with Permanent Delegates of other UNESCO Member-States, especially those states which are close allies of the Philippines.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of March in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia