MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 41

TO: The Secretary of National Defense

In order to facilitate the implementation of Presidential Decree No. 27, dated October 21, 1972, emancipating the tenants from the bondage of the soil and transferring to them the ownership of the land they till, you are hereby directed to require all agricultural landowners to submit in three (3) copies to the PC Provincial Commander of their respective provinces, sworn statements in the form attached hereto, containing the following information:

1. List of agricultural lands owned by him throughout the country indicating therein the area and location of each parcel;

2. Principal crop to which each parcel of land is devoted. For those areas devoted primarily to rice and/or corn, the landowner shall indicate (a) the portions actually cultivated by tenants, (b) the names of such tenants, and (c) the area tilled by each tenant as of October 21, 1972;

3. The average gross harvest of each tenant (on rice/corn parcels of lands) during the three (3) crop years immediately preceding October 21, 1972;

4. Liens and/or encumbrances, if any, the amounts thereof, and the names and addresses of the parties who have liens and/or encumbrancers over such properties as of October 21, 1972.

The deadlines for landowners in submitting the above-mentioned sworn statements to the PC Provincial Commanders shall be as follows:

1. Group A

2. Group B

3. Group C

The PC Provincial Commander shall submit directly to you the above-mentioned statements accompanied by a summary sheet containing the names of the reporting landowners and the areas of their landholdings, not later than the following dates:

You shall submit these statements to the Office of the President immediately upon your receipt of same.

You shall cause these instructions to be disseminated to all parties concerned in the most expeditious manner so that the deadlines prescribed may be promptly complied with.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Reference: Sworn Statements on the declaration of Ownership of Agricultural Lands

Source: CDAsia