MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 43

TO : 1. The Secretary of National Defense 2. The Secretary of Public Works & Communications 3. The Commissioner, Land Transportation Commission 4. The Commissioner, Bureau of Public Highways 5. The Chairman, Board of Transportation 6. City and Municipal Mayors

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and in the interest of effecting a continuing flow of transportation on the streets and highways, you and the subordinate officials and employees under you are hereby ordered:

1. To effect the removal of all impediments on streets, sidewalks, and highways such as things, constructions, stalled and/or parked vehicles and other movable property that obstruct free passage;

2. To study, adopt and implement a system of expeditious repair of roads and highways and devise a method of traffic administration, management and control that ensure continuous flow of transportation on streets and highways;

3. To formulate and enforce reasonable measures designed to secure discipline and promote, in general, public safety and convenience on the streets and highways; and

4. To closely coordinate and render assistance for the prompt and efficacious implementation of these instructions.

Motor vehicles that stall on the streets and highways for any reason, or illegally parked vehicles on highways, streets and sidewalks, shall immediately be removed by their owners/users; otherwise said vehicles shall be dealt with and disposed in the manner stated hereunder:

1. For the first offense, the stalled or illegally parked vehicle shall be removed, towed and impounded at the expense of the owner, user or claimant;

2. For the second and subsequent offenses, the registry plates of the vehicle shall be confiscated and the owner’s certificate of registration cancelled.

In carrying out the foregoing instructions, it is enjoined that injury to persons or property must be carefully avoided.

The Secretary of National Defense is hereby designated to issue implementing rules and regulations necessary to give effect to these instructions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia