MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 613

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1097, the Technology Resource Center was created and established for certain purposes, among which are: to monitor technological advances and store the information generated as would affect social, economic and physical planning and development; to subscribe, to acquire, process and disseminate textual, statistical and graphic data and information needed by decision makers and other users; to establish a network of permanent coordinating committees in the following areas, but not limited to these: food, population control and distribution, health, nutrition, education, communications, energy, environmental management, science and technology transfer and utilization, housing and urban development, natural disaster prediction, control and moderation and planning management and decision making and

WHEREAS, one of the important areas where the Technology Resource Center can undertake needful program and activities in consonance with the above-mentioned purposes is in cartography and photogrammetry, in coordination with and to complement the efforts of other government offices and agencies in this regard;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, in order to carry out the above objectives, do hereby order and direct as follows:

1. You shall constitute, as there is hereby created and constituted under the Technology Resource Center, a National Cartography and Photogrammetry Committee to be composed of the Director of the Bureau of Lands, as Chairman, and the Director of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Commanding Officer of the Armed Forces of the Philippines Mapping Center, the Chairman of the Human Settlements Commission and the Director-General of the Technology Resource Center. The Technology Resource Center, under the direction and supervision of the Director-General, shall provide management, administrative, clerical and other staff support to the Committee.

2. The National Cartography and Photogrammetry Committee shall be responsible for formulating and implementing through the Technology Resource Center an effective nationwide program on aerial photography and cartography which will establish technical standards, coordinate, and complement the efforts and activities of government offices and agencies engaged in this field.

3. To enable it to carry out its functions, duties, and responsibilities under this Letter of Instructions and in addition to such personnel which it may directly hire or contract for, the Technology Resource Center is hereby authorized to form and constitute a pool of highly technical and other personnel from any and all offices and agencies of the government for detail or assignment to the Technology Resource Center and/or the National Cartography and Photogrammetry Committee, such personnel are authorized to receive honoraria compensation or other incentives as the Committee or the Director-General may prescribe.

4. The National Cartography and Photogrammetry Committee is authorized to purchase by importation or otherwise a specially designed Universal Survey Aircraft and related equipment which in its judgment are technically and operationally adequate for its purposes. Photogrammetric and cartographic materials, equipment, spare parts, supplies, and related computer facilities imported or purchased locally by the Technology Resource Center and the National Cartography and Photogrammetry Committee shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by the Republic of the Philippines or any of its political subdivisions.

5. All technical personnel of the National Cartography and Photogrammetry Committee and the Technology Resource Center shall be authorized to handle the equipment, facilities, instruments and materials, supplies, records, papers, negatives, prints, documents and other properties and information of any form involved in the program and activities on aerial photogrammetry and cartography in accordance with such system as may be devised by the Technology Resource Center in coordination with the National Intelligence and Security Authority.

6. The Budget Commissioner shall release a lump sum of five million pesos for 1977 from the Special Activities Fund as contained in Item XXIX-G of Presidential Decree 1050 and shall consolidate the funds of relevant government agencies into a pooled budget for the operation and maintenance of the program for Fiscal Year 1978. Thereafter the necessary appropriations for the operation and maintenance of the program shall be included in the Annual General Appropriations Decree.

7. The Technology Resource Center and the Committee may call upon any department, office, agency or instrumentality of the government or any of its political subdivisions for such assistance as it may need in carrying out these directives and its duties, responsibilities and functions.

8. All orders, issuances, memoranda, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia