MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 30

TO : The Secretary of National Defense The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources The Secretary of Social Welfare The Commissioner, Agricultural Productivity Commission The Administrator, Agricultural Credit Administration The Presidential Assistant on Community Development The Chairman-General Manager, Mindanao Development Authority The Director, Bureau of Plant Industry

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, and in order to bring about the early settlement and rehabilitation of Christians and Muslims in Mindanao who evacuated from their homes in recent years because of peace and order conditions obtaining in their communities, you are hereby directed to undertake immediately a Special Program of Assistance for the Rehabilitation of Evacuees (SPARE) in accordance with the Memorandum of Agreement entered into and executed by you on May 10, 1972, and with the following modifications and/or supplementary instructions.

1. This Program, is to be known as SPARE for short, shall cover the provinces of Lanao del Norte, Lanao del Sur, Zamboanga del Sur, and Sulu.

2. Brig. Gen. Teodorico Almuete (Ret.) of the Department of National Defense shall be the General Coordinator of SPARE.

3. The Mindanao Development Authority shall exercise field supervision over the implementation of SPARE.

4. Squatters who are farming in localities covered by SPARE shall not be relocated until they shall have harvested their crops.

5. The Department of Social Welfare shall provide 500 “Bahay Sagip” housing kits for use in SPARE. These shall be turned over to the General Coordinator.

6. The Coordinating Committee created under the aforementioned Memorandum of Agreement is hereby authorized to issue Certificates of Occupancy to evacuees it may deem qualified therefor. These Certificates of Occupancy shall be treated as a sufficient substitute for land titles for the purpose of granting production (or crop) loans.

7. The Agricultural Credit Administration shall be the source of loans to evacuees, which shall be on concessional terms.

8. Mr. Ramon Cardenas shall monitor and coordinate SPARE activities for the Office of the President and shall be assisted in this respect by the Development Management Staff.

Done in the City of Manila this 20th day of October in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia