MALACAÑANG MANILA

December 7, 1972

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 48

WHEREAS, I have decreed and ordered that there shall be free debate and discussion on the proposed Constitution in order that our people can vote on it intelligently on January 15, 1973, when it is submitted for ratification;

WHEREAS, the Secretary of Justice has ruled that public officials and employees may discuss, debate and otherwise express their views on the proposed Constitution, and even campaign, without violating the Constitution and existing laws and civil service rules and regulations, since such “active participation in the discussion of the merits and defects of the new Constitution so that the people can intelligently vote for its ratification or rejection, apart from voting in the forthcoming plebiscite, cannot conceivably be a ‘partisan political activity’ xxxx.”

WHEREAS, discussions of the proposed Constitution in classrooms by teachers and students/pupils will greatly enhance our present endeavors to inform and enlighten our people about the basic law, which is very vital to their welfare and our country.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, do hereby direct the Secretary of Education, the Director of Public Schools, and the Director of Private Schools, to encourage if not require discussion of the Constitution in all universities, colleges and other schools at all levels during class periods for current events or other subjects where such discussion would be relevant, especially between now and January 15, 1973.

The purpose of such discussion should be to enlighten our people on the proposed Constitution and as earlier stated, in order to enable them to vote intelligently on January 15, 1973.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia