MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1186

WHEREAS, in order to provide for integrated basis for infrastructure planning and development and the formulation of policies and priorities, it is necessary to have a comprehensive knowledge of all the infrastructure programs and projects of the Government;

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 601 dated 20 September 1977 created, among others, the NEDA Committee on Infrastructure to review and formulate government policies, programs and projects concerning infrastructure development and to monitor and coordinate the activities of government agencies and instrumentalities relating thereto;

WHEREAS, the Annual Infrastructure Program only incorporates the programs and projects of the Ministry of Public Works and Highways (MPWH) and the Ministry of Transportation and Communications (MOTC), and the corporations and agencies attached thereto, so that said Program does not truly reflect the entire capital investment of the Government; and

WHEREAS, there are still other ministries, agencies and government corporations which are planning, programming and implementing their own infrastructure programs and projects which can appropriately be integrated into the overall infrastructure program of the Government.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. The Infrastructure Program shall include all projects of all the Ministries of Government, those of offices and agencies under their supervision and those of corporations and institutions attached to them, excluding the Ministry of National Defense. For this purpose, infrastructure projects shall mean construction , improvement and rehabilitation of roads, and bridges, railways, airports, seaports, communication facilities, irrigation, flood control and drainage, water supply and sewerage systems, shore protection, power facilities, national buildings, school buildings, hospital buildings, and other related construction projects that form part of the government capital investment.

2. All ministries, offices, agencies and corporations involved shall submit on call to the NEDA Committee on Infrastructure (herein referred to as the “Committee”), their respective annual infrastructure programs, and the 5-year up-dated program.

3. The Committee shall evaluate, coordinate and/or consolidate the infrastructure programs and integrate these programs in a National Infrastructure Program.

4. The Committee shall monitor any activity or development related to the infrastructure plans, programs and projects of the ministries, offices, agencies and government corporations, and shall render periodic reports to the Prime Minister and the President on the implementation thereof.

All concerned ministries, offices, agencies and government corporations are hereby directed to lend their full assistance to, and to cooperate with, the Committee.

The provisions of this Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of January, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia