MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

SECRET

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION 642

FOR: The Secretary of Foreign Affairs Manila

A four-man Egyptian delegation headed by Dr. Tefwik OWEIDA, Secretary General of the Supreme Council for Islamic Affairs of Egypt, visited Manila from December 15 to 17, 1977, for the purpose of transmitting the desire of the newly installed leaders of the so-called MNLF to meet with Philippine Government representatives in Cairo on 11 January 1978, to explore the feasibility of holding cooperations in Manila to restore peace and order in Mindanao.

According to Dr. Oweida, the MNLF members met in Cairo last November to select new leaders in the light of irrefutable documentary evidence that Misuari is a Communist working for secession from the Philippines. In that meeting, Nur Misuari was denounced as a Communist and deposed from leadership position; Hashim Salainat of Cotobato, a Maguindanao, and previously number two in the MNLF Panels that met with Philippine representatives in Jeddah (1975) and Tripoli (1976-77), was installed as the new leader to replace Misuari. Hashim Salainat has been recognized by officials of Saudi Arabia and Egypt as the MNLF leader and the Rabitat Al Islamia based in Mecca (conservative World Muslim League) had given Salamat one million Saudi rials to assist him consolidate his leadership.

In that capacity, Hashim Salamat, apparently with the endorsement of Saudi Arabia and the Rabitat had requested the Egyptian Government to host a preliminary meeting with Philippine Government officials in Cairo with a view to exploring the feasibility of holding cooperation in Manila on the basis of the following principles:

1) Direct face to face meeting of MNLF leaders with Philippine officials without foreign intermediaries to underscore the character of the conflict as a purely internal affair of the Republic of the Philippines;

2) Full respect of the ceasefire through an effective mechanism;

3) Mindanao, Basilan, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi are integral and indivisible parts of the national territory of the Republic of the Philippines;

4) Since the negotiations will be between citizens of the Philippines without foreign intermediaries, the President of the Philippines, as the leader of the entire Filipino nation, will designate the time and place of, and representatives to, the forthcoming negotiations;

5) Hashim Salamat will submit his concept of autonomy for the Muslim communities and work for wider participation of Muslims in all levels of the national government; and,

6) Egypt as host, will not participate in the discussions nor sign any document that may be subsequently adopted by the parties. Furthermore, Egypt gave assurances that full diplomatic immunities and courtesies will be accorded Philippine Government representatives and shall insure an atmosphere conducive to an early friendly understanding between the parties.

Since the foregoing information is confirmed by our own diplomatic sources, I have agreed, after consultations with the National Security to a secret meeting in Cairo with the new MNLF leaders on the basis of the afore stated principles to which the MNLF have committed themselves and upon which the Egyptian Government had agreed to host this preliminary and exploratory meeting.

On the basis of their experience, prudence and discretion, I have designated Arnbassadors Pacifico A. CASTRO, Jose V. CRUZ and Liningding PANGANDAMAN, as members of the Panel to undertake this preliminary contact with Hashim Salamat and his group, under the following guidelines:

1) That the Cairo meeting shall be held in strict secrecy, without any publicity whatsoever.

2) As an initial meeting with a new leadership, the Panel shall assess and report on leading personalities, the nature and sources of their support (political, moral, financial, materiel; governments, groups, organizations or institutions); capabilities to abide by agreements particularly enforcement of ceasefire; sincerity; concept and structure of autonomy.

3) Subject to my prior authorization by cable, to invite Hashim Salamat and his men to come to Manila an March – April 1978, to work out an understanding to restore peace and order in the South.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Manila, 21 December 1977

Source: Malacañang Records Office