MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1495

WHEREAS, it is imperative that lake resources, considered as among the most valuable resources of the country, are judiciously managed, properly utilized, conserved, rehabilitated and developed for sustained ecological balance and economic viability.

WHEREAS, the government, with its continuing concern to accelerate the country’s developing economy, recognizes the need to develop Taal Lake resources to enhance self-sufficiency in food and meet increasing demand of the growing population particularly the municipalities surrounding the Taal Lake and adjacent areas.

WHEREAS, there is a need to improve the socio-economic life of Taal Lake communities and maintain ecological balance through a zoning and management plan, adoption of measures to prevent social problems, and establishment of livelihood projects through packages of institutional, financial and technical assistance to fishermen’s cooperatives.

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Human Settlements, (MHS), the Ministry of Agriculture and Food (MAF), the Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR), Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI), Ministry of Public Works and Highways (MPWH), the National Council on Integrated Area Development (NACIAD), and the Farm Systems Development Corporation (FSDC) are directly involved in integrated programs for socio-economic and natural resource development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Program Implementation

1. The MHS, MAF, MNR, MTI, MPWH, NACIAD and FSDC shall jointly provide the policy guidelines and technical assistance for plan and program formulation and implementation for the long term development of Taal Lake.

2. The NACIAD shall provide assistance in integrating all development efforts related to the Taal Lake development and establish effective linkages with concerned agencies and effected communities/beneficiaries in consonance with the IAD approach.

3. The FSDC shall be the executing agency of the Taal Lake Development Program. It shall implement the components of the program within the framework set by the Taal Lake Program Committee.

SECTION 2. Program Organization and Management

1. The Taal Lake Development Program Office (TLDPO) shall be created under the Farm Systems Development Corporation (FSDC) to oversee the implementation of the program components.

2. The Taal Lake Program Coordinating Committee shall be created with the Minister of Human Settlements as Chairman, and the Minister of Agriculture and Food as Vice Chairman. The members of the Committee shall be the Ministers of Natural Resources, Public Works and Highways, Trade and Industry, the Executive Director of NACIAD and the Administrator of the Farm Systems Development Corporation. The Program Director shall serve as Secretary of the Coordinating Committee.

3. The Coordinating Committee shall designate a Program Director who shall have the equivalent rank and compensation of an Assistant Administrator of FSDC.

SECTION 3. Funding

1. The initial budgetary requirements of the Program shall be covered by the appropriation of P4.5 M for FSDC in 1986 specifically for the Taal Lake Development Program and the same to be drawn from the Corporate Equity Investment Fund (KBI 1.1.1.). Subsequent annual budgetary requirements shall be included in the General Appropriations measure specially in the Corporate Equity Investment Fund or any other appropriate source subject to pertinent provisions of P.D. 1177.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of December, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia