MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 542-A

Supplementing Letter of Instructions No. 542 Entitled “Defining the Functions, Powers, Duties and Responsibilities of the Chairman of the Regional Development Council”.

In order to enhance the operational viability of the Regional Development Council as the chief planning body in the region and coordinator of regional development, and the necessity of strengthening the capacity of the Chairman of the Council, it is hereby directed that the Chairman of the Regional Development Council shall have and exercise the following functions, powers, duties and responsibilities for and in behalf of the Council:

1. Direct the formulation of an integrated regional development plan to include plans of national government agencies, regional development bodies and local governments in the regions.

2. Coordinate the implementation of development programs and projects in the region and establish a monitoring system therefor.

3. Recommend to the NEDA and the Budget Commission a system of priorities in the allocation of budgetary resources for programs and projects of national government offices in the region in accordance with the regional plan.

4. Administer the share of the region from the Regional Development Fund provided under the National Budget decree, and such other funds as may be provided by the national government and/or local governments for regional projects.

5. Coordinate local planning activities in the region to ensure the consistency of local plans with development plans for the region.

6. Call on any agency or instrumentality of the government and on private entities and organizations in the region for cooperation and assistance in the performance of the council of its functions.

7. Course through the NEDA Director-General all regional plans, programs, reports and other developmental matters for submission to the NEDA Board and the President.

The Chairman of the Council shall also serve in the region in such capacities and exercise such other additional functions, powers, duties and responsibilities as the President may determine.

The NEDA Regional Office (NRO) shall remain the sole technical staff of the RDC and the Executive Committee, and the RDC Chairman in the exercise of his functions, powers, duties and responsibilities hereunder.

The RDC and the Executive Committee shall continue to exercise their functions under Presidential Decree No. 1 as implemented by Letter of Implementation No. 22 and in accordance with guidelines issued by the NEDA Director-General.

The RDC Chairman may, upon recommendation of the NRO and with the concurrence of the RDC, create such ad – hoc committees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the RDC, and such committees shall cease to exist upon completion of their assignments.

The budget for the operating expenses of the RDC shall be approved by the RDC on the basis of a budget proposed by the NRO and disbursements therefrom shall be administered by the NEDA Regional Executive Director.

The RDC shall establish its office in the regional center prescribed in Presidential Decree No. 1, as amended.

The Director-General of NEDA is hereby authorized to issue guidelines as he may deem necessary for the effective implementation of Letter of Implementation No. 22, Letter of Instructions No. 542, and these instructions.

All instructions, rules, regulations and resolutions which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of August , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1978). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 481 – 590]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.