MALACANANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 483

In line with the government’s program to develop housing for low-salaried government employees in the Metro Manila area, and considering that the Government Service Insurance System possesses a 60-hectare land situated in Barrio Kamias, Antipolo, Rizal reserved for that purpose, and considering further that the development of such low-cost housing project shall provide the government, particularly agencies involved in urban development planning, opportunities to apply and adapt ecological system to community living, you are hereby directed to implement the following:

1. The Government Service Insurance System shall make available its 60-hectare land situated in Barrio Kamias, Antipolo, Rizal for the development of low-cost housing for government employees of Metro Manila. For this purpose, the Government Service Insurance System shall make available funds for the construction of housing units in the project, and shall advance to participating government agencies their fund requirements to undertake specific tasks until such funds can be made available to these agencies by means of their respective yearly budgets;

2. The Department of Public Highways shall undertake the land development and road construction within the proposed project, including landscaping and the conversion of the lagoon and other areas into parks and recreational facilities. For this purpose, it shall provide funds in its yearly budget;

3. The Department of Public Works, Transportation & Communications shall construct all basic community amenities such as schools, clinics, and multi-purpose administrative building, and develop wells in springs. For this purpose, it shall provide funds in its yearly budget;

4. The Metropolitan Water & Sewerage System shall construct the water system and sanitary sewerage systems that will lead to the development of a bio-gas system. For this purpose, it shall provide funds in its yearly budget;

5. The National Housing Authority shall cause the construction of housing units of different designs to be financed by the Government Service Insurance System;

6. The above-named agencies shall constitute a committee to be known as, “Bagong Nayon Project Committee” which shall be under the direct supervision of the government of Metro Manila. The General Manager of the National Housing Authority shall act as Project Administrator; and

7. The Committee shall plan and develop the housing project as an experimental project for the application of ecological systems in community living. The Committee is authorized to employ professional services such as consultants and project managers in the prosecution of the project.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : CDAsia