Malacanang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1425

REDUCING AND ALLEVIATING DELAYS IN THE PAYMENT OF THE SALARIES OF NEW SCHOOL TEACHERS

WHEREAS, delays in the processing of appointment papers and compensation papers of newly appointed schoolteachers result in unreasonable and prolonged delays in the remittance of their initial paychecks;

WHEREAS, the delays in the receipt of the initial paychecks prepared centrally in Manila by the IBM Office, force the newly appointed schoolteachers to resort to money-lenders and thus fall prey to usurious practices;

WHEREAS, the government should do everything in its power to ease the difficulties of schoolteachers and other government employees;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Law, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, the Minister of the Budget and the Chairman, Civil Service Commission, shall review existing procedures and rules pertaining to the processing of the appointments of schoolteachers and the preparation of their initial paychecks, with the aim of eliminating all unnecessary steps and expediting the preparation and release of the initial paychecks of new appointees;

2. The School Superintendents and school heads concerned shall make interest-free advances of the take home pay of new schoolteachers, beginning the first payday after they assume office, for which purpose they may utilize cash available from their respective personal service and maintenance and operating allotments. If these are insufficient, the Minister of the Budget shall make the corresponding changes in its fund release mechanism so as to allow the funds/cash intended for the salary of these schoolteachers to be made as advances, even while their regular paychecks are being prepared;

3. The backpay received by the schoolteacher corresponding to the advances given them shall be used to pay the school or Division that made the advances.

4. The agencies concerned shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement these Instructions.

Done, in the City of Manila, this 10th day of September, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia