MALACAÑANG Manila

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1453

WHEREAS, under Section 13 of Presidential Decree No. 1832, the National Kidney Foundation of the Philippines is exempt from all income and other internal revenue taxes, tariff and customs duties and all other kinds of taxes, fees, charges and assessments levied by the Government and its political subdivisions, agencies and instrumentalities;

WHEREAS, the Foundation is not a profit-oriented institution, such that at present around ninety-five percent (95%) of its patients are ingredients to whom hospital services are given free of charge;

WHEREAS, the Foundation is still in its organizational stage, and its main hospital building is still under construction;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the Government to support the Foundation in pursuance of the State policy to secure the well-being of the Filipino people by providing them with specialized health and medical services such as those being rendered by the Foundation;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1931 withdrew all tax exemptions in favor of government-owned or controlled corporations, including their subsidiaries;

WHEREAS, there is a need to clarify the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1931 in that it was not intended to hamper the activities of service-oriented government institutions like the Foundation:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, do hereby direct:

1. The National Kidney Foundation of the Philippines shall not be covered by the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1931, and shall continue to be exempt from all income and other internal revenue taxes, tariff and customs duties, and all other kinds of taxes, fees charges and assessments levied by the Government and its political subdivisions, instrumentalities and agencies.

2. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of April in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia