Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 554

The Secretary Department of Education and Culture

The Secretary Department of Public Highways

The General Manager National Housing Authority

The Director Bureau of Public Works

WHEREAS, it is recognized that sports and youth development is an expressed priority program of the government;

WHEREAS, it is recognized that such sports and youth development program should encompass the youth in new communities being developed by the government;

WHEREAS, the construction of a sports complex in Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan is in keeping with the objective to build a self-contained community; allow the implementation of the sports and youth development program of the government and specifically provide the venue for the holding of inter-scholastic athlete’s meets among schools and similar athletic competitions;

WHEREAS, the development of a sports and youth program for Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan calls for a comprehensive approach involving various government agencies;

It is, therefore, directed that the development of a sports complex in Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan be undertaken as follows:

a. The Department of Education and Culture shall furnish the National Housing Authority its requirements for a sports complex that can be used for inter-scholastic meets of schools and similar athletic activities and cause such activities to be undertaken in the sports complex upon its completion.

b. The Department of Youth and Sports Development shall provide the necessary program of activities for the youth of Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan, designed to meet the end goal’s of the present government in making the young physically and mentally fit in the service of society; it shall likewise provide the necessary manpower requirements to assure the implementation of the program.

c. The Department of Public Highways shall provide funds and undertake land development and the construction of athletic field facilities such as a track and field oval, baseball fields, basketball court, etc. including major circulation roads leading to the sports complex.

d. The Bureau of Public Works shall provide funds and undertake the construction of vertical structures for the sports complex such as  an administrative building, a swimming pool, covered bleachers, etc.

e. The National Housing Authority shall identify a specific land area in Dasmariñas Bagong Bayan upon which the sports complex shall be built; it shall design the master plan and execute detailed architectural and engineering drawings for the project.

Done in Dasmariñas, Cavite, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia