MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1347

WHEREAS, the price of coconut products in the world market is more than double that of other edible oils, principally soybean oil and palm oil;

WHEREAS, unless corrective measures are immediately adopted and expeditiously implemented, the prices of coconut-based consumer products such as cooking oil and laundry soaps will rapidly rise to levels that are beyond the financial capacity of most of the citizenry;

WHEREAS, it is to the interest of the country that it maximizes its foreign exchange earnings from the exportation of coconut products;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that measures be adopted to insure that the country shall have continuous and adequate supply of consumer products such as cooking oil at reasonable prices within the guidelines prescribed by the Government;

WHEREAS, considering that the prices of substitute vegetable oils like palm oil and soybean oil are less than half that of coconut oil, it is to the public interest that coconut oil for domestic consumption, be substituted in whole or in part by such substitute oils;

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines do hereby order that the following be implemented:

Section 1. The United Coconut Oil Mills, Inc. is hereby directed and constituted as the sole importer of substitute vegetable oils which shall be sold to refiners and manufacturers of consumer products such as cooking oil and shortening.

Section 2. The importation of such substitute vegetable oils by the United Coconut Oil Mills, Inc. shall be exempt from all applicable taxes and duties until further orders by the President of the Philippines.

Section 3. The Central Bank of the Philippines shall make available to the United Coconut Oil Mills, Inc. the requisite foreign exchange to effect the mandated importation of substitute vegetable oils.

Section 4. The Philippine Coconut Authority shall coordinate with the different government agencies concerned for the full and prompt implementation of the provisions of this Letter of Instructions.

DONE in the City of Manila this 22nd day of July Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1983). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1325 – 1424]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.