MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 972

In order to expedite the organization of and immediately make operational the Overseas Buying and Trading Agency established by Executive Order No. 572, the following rules and regulations are hereby promulgated:

1. The Overseas Buying and Trading Agency (PHIL-BAI International Pty. Ltd.) shall initially cover all kinds of livestock, meat and meat by-products including canned goods importations from Oceania, i.e. Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, etc.

2. Within the first fifteen (15) days of every calendar year, duly accredited livestock and meat users (livestock raisers, processors, hotels, restaurants, etc.) shall submit to PHIL-BAI International Pty. Ltd., thru the Bureau of Animal Industry, Ministry of Agriculture, their imported livestock and meat requirements and other data that the Agency may require.

3. The Central Bank shall not allow or authorize all cases of livestock and meat importations from Oceania whether or not covered by foreign exchange allocation except and unless the beneficiary is the PHIL-BAI International Pty. Ltd., thru the Bureau of Animal Industry, Ministry of Agriculture. Consignments and all modes of bringing in livestock and meat products into the country shall similarly be covered by this rule.

4. The Bureau of Customs:

a. Shall not allow any livestock, meat and meat products from Oceanis to be brought into or to enter the Philippines unless the shipper is the Government Buying and Trading Agency and the consignee-beneficiary is the Philippine Government or any of its authorized agencies.

b. Shall furnish the Buying and Trading Agency, thru the Bureau of Animal Industry, Ministry of Agriculture quarterly inventory of imported meat kept in any of its bonded warehouses/cold storage one week from the end of the corresponding quarter.

5. The National Meat Inspection Commission shall periodically and regularly inspect all bonded cold stores and meat processing plants to determine their compliance of existing rules, decrees, rules and regulations.

6. The Governor, Central Bank of the Philippines, the Commissioner, Bureau of Customs and the Director, Bureau of Animal Industry shall submit to the Office of the President, a detailed quarterly report of all livestock, meat and meat by-product importations from Oceania, specifically stating the following:

a) Type, quantity and value of importations b) Ultimate end-users

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of December, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia