MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 386

TO : All Concerned

WHEREAS, the following representatives of the private sector, through the PHILCOMAN, have manifested their willingness to join the Civil Service Commission in conducting a government-wide performance evaluation of the officials and employees of the different departments and agencies of the government;

WHEREAS, this gesture is a healthy indication of the private sector’s concern and desire to help in improving efficiency, integrity and morale in the government service;

WHEREAS, the Civil Service Commission, which is undertaking the government-wide performance evaluation in accordance with my instructions, has recommended the acceptance of the offer of the PHILCOMAN;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby welcome these representatives of the private sector, and hereby designate each of the members of the different Performance Evaluation Committees earlier created:

1. Sabina Balcon, Governor, Philippine Council of Management — Department of Agriculture

2. Jose L. Papa, Dean, College of Commerce, Adamson University — Department of Agrarian Reform

3. Felipe M. Buencamino, President, Sierra Madre Development Corporation — Budget Commission

4. Rev. Fr. Emmanuel Balcruz, OSB, Rector, San Beda University — Department of Education and Culture

5. Eligio J. Tavanlar, Governor, Philippine Council of Management — Department of Finance

6. Clarita T. Sanchez, President Women’s Management Association — Department of Foreign Affairs

7. Mariano M. Goce, President, Margo Trading Corporation — Department of Health

8. Sabas Isaguirre, Management Director, United Laboratories, Inc. — Department of Industry

9. Jose Isidoro, Vice Dean, College of Business Administration, U.E. — Department of Local Government and Community Development

10. Oscar L.S. Sarte, General Manager, Corporate Planners and Managers, Inc. — Department of National Defense

11. Pascual A. Guerzon, Graduate School of Business Administration, De La Salle University — Department of Natural Resources

12. Francis Ablan, Director, Corporate Relations, Caltex (Philippines), Inc. — National Science Development Board

13. Herminia Fajardo, U.P. ISSI — National Economic and Development Authority

14. Sotero S. Lopez, Vice-President for Academic Affairs, National College of Business and Arts — Department of Public Information

15. Pablo P. Gabriel, President, Manila Metal Container Corporation — Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications

16. Oscar I. Ilustre, Delegate, Philippine Council of Management — Department of Public Highways

17. Jose D. Baltazar, Jose Rizal College — Department of Social Welfare

18. Roger K. Davis, President, AMAFE — Department of Tourism

19. Carolina Prada, Chairman, Department of Management, College of Commerce, U.S.T. — Department of Trade

20. Ernesto Roceles, President, Philippine Marketing Association — Department of Justice

21. Bienvenido S. Magnaye, Corporate Relations Manager, Jardin Davies, Inc. — Department of Labor

22. Isayas G. Peneyra, President, Central Batac Procoma, Inc. — Central Bank of the Philippines

23. Concepcion Blaylock, President Commercial Credit Corporation of Quezon City — Land Bank of the Philippines

24. Armando Centeno, Vice-President, Philippine Center for Professional Management MEDICARE

25. Cleotilde Protomartir, Dean, College of Commerce, Centro Escolar University — Social Security System

26. Augusto Acoymo, Partner, Carlos J. Valdez and Company — Philippine National Railways

27. Luis C. Diaz, Partner, L.C. Diaz and Company — National Power Corporation

28. Rene Cristobal, Delegate, AMAFE — Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System

29. Teodoro Henares, President, Friday Associates — National Irrigation Administration

30. Alejandro Gorospe, Joaquin Cunanan & Company — Development Bank of the Philippines

The Chairman of the different Performance Evaluation Committees shall see to it that the new members are properly oriented regarding the work of the Committee.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia