LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 754

DIRECTING THE CREATION OF A TRAINING COORDINATION COMMITTEE TO REVIEW GOVERNMENT TRAINING ACTIVITIES FOR PURPOSES OF FOSTERING GREATER EFFICIENCY, ECONOMY, AND EFFECTIVENESS

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 728 directed a comprehensive review of government activities for purposes of enhancing economy and effectiveness in government operations;

WHEREAS, one of the major areas of government participation is training;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to evaluate on a comprehensive basis various training programs of the government in the light of making these responsive to the organizational needs of government agencies, and relevant to the manpower requirements of the industrial and agricultural sector as outlined in the Philippine Development Plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. A Training Coordination Committee is hereby created to review the training activities of various government agencies with the aims of (a) identifying the various training activities undertaken by government agencies; (b) identifying possible areas of duplication with regard to these training activities; (c) evaluating these training activities in the light of organizational needs of various government agencies, and the manpower requirements as specified in the Philippine Development Plan; (d) establishing guidelines for coordinated and integrated implementation on training activities and (e) assigning principal government agencies to coordinate training activities in the following areas:

a. General manpower development training (In-service training within government agencies).

b. Non-formal training and skills development.

2. The Committee is specifically instructed to study the budgets allotted by agencies for their training activities and shall therefore recommend measures necessary to reduce expenditures of government by assigning principal agencies to coordinate and undertake training activities.

3. The Committee shall submit its recommendations in the form of a Framework Plan for Government Training Activities specifying herein the general objectives of the training activities undertaken, the targets and objectives of these training activities, the agencies responsible, and the operational guidelines.

4. The Committee shall be headed by the Chairman, Civil Service Commission, with the Minister of the Budget, the Minister of Education and Culture, and the Minister of Economic Planning as members. The Committee shall be supported in its work by a technical staff composed of personnel from the Civil Service Commission, the Ministry of the Budget, the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the National Economic Development Authority. Minimum necessary costs for the study, not to exceed P150 , 000 may be charged to the Special Activities Fund.

5. The Committee shall submit a preliminary report on or before November 30, 1978.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia