MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 668

SUBJECT: Strengthening Existing laws, Presidential Decrees and Directives on the Prevention of Squatting Particularly on Land Reserved for Lungsod Silangan

In order to strengthen existing laws, presidential decrees and directives on the prevention of squatting, and render more effective their implementation particularly in areas reserved for Lungsod Silangan as defined in Proclamation No. 1637 dated April 18, 1977 you are hereby directed as follows:

1. The Secretary of Justice shall cause the preparation of a decree that will make punishable acts of organizations or individuals that lead people to believe or lead people to hope that they will own a piece of land upon payment of certain dues when said organizations or individuals do not actually own or have legal claim on any land.

2. The Solicitor General shall take measures to declare as illegal those organizations operating as representatives, agents, administrators, heirs or successors of the Estate of Don Mariano San Pedro y Esteban and similar groups on the ground that their activities are intended to deceive people and defraud them.

3. The Secretary of Local Governments and Community Development shall issue the necessary instructions to Barangay Captains, Barangay Officers and Barangay Tanods that they are to be held administratively liable for their respective areas and likewise to hold Mayors administratively liable in case of their failure to act on such reports of the Barangays.

4. The Director General of the Integrated National Police shall issue necessary instructions to Chiefs of Police of cities and municipalities that are to be held administratively liable in case of their failure to act on reports of or request for assistance by the Barangay Officials on matters relating to new squatting activities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia