MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 546

Our Nation’s losses to typhoons severely hamper our economic development. During the last five years (1972-1976) our country sustained a total damage to property due to typhoons and floods estimated at P1.65 B or an annual average of P330 M. This damage in the last five years does not include the staggering losses to lives and the countless injuries suffered by our people in the affected areas, not to mention indirect economic losses such as disruption of industry.

The annual damage suffered by the Philippines on account of adverse weather will continue to be a severe constraint on the socio-economic development of the country. It becomes imperative that typhoon moderation and flood forecasting should now be seriously looked into as a development strategy for socio-economic growth by our government.

Pursuant to PD. No. 78 as amended by PD 1149 it is hereby directed that:

1. The Department of National Defense implement, through the PAGASA, a Typhoon Moderation Program in the Philippines. The Secretary of National Defense shall oversee and coordinate the activities in this project of participating government agencies and instrumentalities. The Philippine Air Force shall give support to the project in air operations as necessary.

2. The National Economic and Development Authority shall make arrangements for foreign exchange requirements and technical assistance from external sources which may be needed for the Typhoon Moderation and Flood Forecasting projects.

3. The Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, through its Bureau of Public Works, shall continue to collaborate with PAGASA in the establishment and operation of the expanded flood forecasting and warning service. Through the Civil Aeronautics Administration, the Department shall provide control of, and reserve appropriate air space over experimental areas during the conduct of weather modification experiments. Through the Telecommunications Control Bureau, the Department shall allocate radio frequencies needed for the projects.

4. The Department of Local Government and Community Development, through its local government entities, especially the barangays, shall provide support to the projects in matters related to the conduct of surveys, reporting/disseminating of information on weather modification activities, on local flood situations and in community preparedness.

5. The Budget Commission shall assist PAGASA in the organization of the new units providing funds therefor and taking into consideration the need to establish positions at such levels that would minimize the high rate of turnover of highly trained technical personnel. It shall initially release Four Million pesos (P4,000,000.00) for the support of these projects in FY 1977 and shall incorporate in the budget for subsequent years the funds necessary for the continuance of these projects.

6. The Commission on Audit shall facilitate the procurement of equipment and technical supplies necessary in carrying out the objectives of the projects, and, if necessary, to waive those requirements which may be considered to be too restrictive without prejudice to wise expenditure of government funds. In this connection equipment for these projects, certified to as urgently necessary by the Director-General of PAGASA, are hereby exempted from the ban on procurement of equipment.

Done in the City of Manila this 2nd day of June, Nineteen Hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia