MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1074

WHEREAS, the primary concern of the Bureau of Posts is to provide and maintain a fast, safe, reliable and efficient postal service;

WHEREAS, a functional postal organization is necessary in order to realize objectives ;

WHEREAS, the postal regions, as presently structured, have compositions which differ from the nationwide regionalization scheme;

WHEREAS, the postal system in Metro Manila requires a considerable amount of administrative, budgetary , financial and operational supervision;

WHEREAS, this concentrated supervision, essential to efficient postal operations, is not possible at present because regional supervision covers not only the Metro Manila area, but also the rest of Rizal, Bulacan, Cavite, Romblon and Palawan;

WHEREAS, the creation of a National Capital Region for the Bureau of Posts will result in a more viable area of supervision for the regional office;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

1. Any existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the regionalization of the Bureau of Posts is herewith reorganized. The province of Bulacan is hereby returned to Region 3, except the town of Valenzuela, and Regions IV and IV-A are hereby reorganized as follows:

a. Region IV, which is hereby declared and established as the National Capital Region, shall be composed of the four (4) cities of Manila, Quezon, Caloocan, and Pasay, and the municipalities of Makati, San Juan, Mandaluyong, Las Piñas, Malabon, Navotas, Pasig, Pateros, Parañaque, Marikina, Muntinlupa and Taguig in the province of Rizal; and the municipality of Valenzuela, province of Bulacan, with Manila as the regional center.

b. Region IV-A, which is hereby declared and established as Region IV, shall be composed of the provinces of Cavite, Palawan, Batangas, Laguna, Quezon, Aurora, Oriental Mindoro, Occidental Mindoro, Romblon, and Marinduque; the cities of Tagaytay, Trece Martires, Batangas, Lipa, Lucena, San Pablo, and Puerto Princesa; and the remaining fourteen (14) towns of Rizal which are not included in the National Capital Region, with San Pablo City as the regional center.

2. The necessary arrangements shall be made for the effective implementation of this Order, which will include the transfer of personnel, finances and documents, to the affected regions.

3. All Executive Orders, Letters of Instructions, Rules and Regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of these Instructions, are hereby deemed superseded and/or modified accordingly.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20thday of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia