MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 151-A

Pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 151 and in order to implement the decision to have one airline in both the international (Scheduled or non-scheduled) and domestic operations as soon as possible but not later than January 2, 1974, it is hereby directed forwith that the following actions be taken:

1. The CAB shall authorize PAL to immediately absorb the AMI and FOA employees to the extent necessary or possible, by directing PAL to initiate such necessary steps toward their eventual employment by PAL.

2. The CAB shall require PAL to submit as soon as possible, but not later than December 20, 1973, its proposed new domestic schedules effective as soon as practicable but not later than December 31, 1973, which shall include the routes and points currently served by AMI and FOA and expansion of services, to the extent possible, consistent with the fuel situation. The CAB shall immediately act on such schedules as soon as the same is submitted by PAL.

3. The CAB and the CAA shall suspend the operations of AMI and FOA as soon as the new PAL domestic schedules become effective but not later than December 31, 1973 so that by January 2, 1974 only PAL shall be allowed to operate scheduled domestic services.

4. The PNB to take immediate steps, such as foreclosure of mortgages, etc., to take over the assets of AMI and FOA, in the most expeditious manner legally possible.

5. The PNB to sell to PAL such of the assets taken over as PAL may need, under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, and with respect to the assets not purchased by PAL, to place them under the complete management and control of PAL for operation in its domestic services. The net income derived from the operation of the assets of AMI and FOA not purchased by PAL shall be turned over to NIDC.

6. PAL shall be allowed to continue to operate the assets of AMI and FOA not purchased for PAL’s domestic operations for as long as may be necessary or practicable, after which the PNB and NIDC shall negotiate or consult with PAL as to the best means of disposing them.

Pending the actual implementation of the above, AMI and FOA shall not, without the prior approval of the CAB or PNB, as the case may be:

(a) Incur any further capital expenditure, negotiate or enter into any contract for the acquisition of lease of flight and ground equipment, facilities, office equipment, furniture and fixtures, terminal buildings, offices or stations.

(b) Create new positions or fill up vacant positions, increase salaries, wages, allowances or bonuses and other existing fringe benefits.

(c) Incur new loans and other types of financing arrangements for any purpose.

(d) Dispose, sell, encumber, assign or otherwise transfer any type of assets, properties and rights,

(e) Amend or modify existing domestic flight schedules.

(f) Operate any regional and international flights, whether schedules or unschedules.

(g) Pay any obligation or liability, contractual or otherwise, without specific written approval of the NIDC or PNB.

(h) Enter into any contract, arrangement or commitment of any type involving an obligation or liability of whatever kind and nature.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Manila, December 12, 1973.

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1973). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1 – 237A]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.