Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1063

WHEREAS, Section 6 paragraph “b” of Presidential Decree No. 1193, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1394, categorically states the persons entitled to the benefits thereunder, as follows:

“Passengers of international flights or sea voyages, arriving from or departing for foreign countries in accordance with rules, regulations and procedures promulgated by the Bureau of Customs and/or Central Bank of the Philippines;”

WHEREAS, Sec. 2, paragraph “c” of Letter of Instructions No. 595 implementing the above provision, does not specifically provide the conditions under which all the persons reasonably entitled to the said benefits may avail thereof, resulting in uncertainty and confusion which are sometimes embarrassing to foreign visitors, and there is, therefore, an urgent need to clarify said provision.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION I. – Section 2, paragraph “c” of Letter of Instructions No. 595 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“c) Bonafide tourists, temporary visitors and non-residents upon presentation of passport and confirmed ticket for departure from the country; provided that,

“(1) tourists, temporary visitors and non-residents who are members of special airline chartered groups and whose passports are required to be deposited upon arrival, under existing procedures, with the Commission on Immigration and Deportation, may present instead their Official Certificate of Identification, or the Airline Passengers Manifest both issued by the Commission on Immigration and Deportation, and the Boarding Pass issued by the airline;

“(2) Passengers of ocean liners whose passports, under existing procedure, are required to be kept with the vessel, may make purchases only at pre-assigned duty-free outlets, upon presentation of the Vessel Passengers Manifest issued by the Commission on Immigration and Deportation, and the Boarding Pass issued by the vessel; and,

“(3) Temporary visitors and non-residents who arrived as crew-members of ocean-going liners, and who are not required to hold passports, may present instead their Seaman’s Certificates and the Boarding Pass issued by the vessel.”

SECTION 2. – Section 2, paragraph “d” of Letter of Instructions No. 595 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“d) Foreign delegates, participants and/or observers to government accredited international conferences/conventions at the Philippine International Convention Center, provided a list of such delegates, participants and/or observers duly certified by the Philippines International Convention Center General Manager shall be submitted to the Collector of Customs; And provided further, that for international conferences/conventions registered with the Philippine Convention Bureau but held outside the PICC, such list of delegates shall be issued by the Philippine Convention Bureau.”

Done in the City of Manila, on this 2nd day of Sept. in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia