MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 896

TO: The Southern Philippines Development Administration The Autonomous Regions in Regions IX and XII The Presidential Commission on Reorganization All the Agencies Concerned

WHEREAS, there is need to provide more effective coordination of policies and programs between the Southern Philippines Development Administration and the Autonomous Regions IX and XII, to make them more responsive to the unique development requirements of each of the Autonomous Regions;

WHEREAS, the Southern Philippines Development Administration implements development projects of corporate economic nature and performs social services and development functions including those earlier performed by the Commission on National Integration, the Special Program for Assistance for the Rehabilitation of Evacuees and the Presidential Task Force for Reconstruction and Development of Mindanao which functions are essentially within the immediate concerns of existing line agencies of the national government and performed in close collaboration with these agencies; and

WHEREAS, there is need to align the geographical coverage of the Southern Philippines Development Administration with the four regions comprising Mindanao and Sulu.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby direct as follows:

1. Without prejudice to the possible subsequent creation of distinct regional development entities for each of the Autonomous Regions, the Southern Philippines Development Administration shall establish and implement separate and distinct programs and projects for each of Regions IX and XII. There shall be a specific allocation of resources, financial and physical, for each of Regions IX and XII to support such programs and projects.

2. The Southern Philippines Development Administration shall undertake essentially developmental and economically viable ventures. Its social development functions and non-corporate projects shall be transferred to the appropriate agencies of the government to be determined jointly by Southern Philippines Development Administration, the Presidential Commission on Reorganization and the agencies concerned, provided that where such functions and projects are undertaken within Regions IX and XII, the Lupong Tagapagpaganap ng Pook for each of the two Autonomous Regions shall also be involved in such determination.

3. The Chairmen of the Lupong Tagapagpaganap ng Pook of each of the Autonomous Regions shall sit as ex-officio members of the Southern Philippines Development Administration Governing Board, in lieu of two appointive members as provided in Presidential Decree No. 690.

4. The territorial boundaries of Southern Philippines Development Administration operations, programs and projects shall be limited to the geographical coverage of Regions IX, X, XI and XII.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia