MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1499

ESTABLISHING THE PROJECT SUPPORT STAFF FOR THE AURORA INTEGRATED AREA DEVELOPMENT PROJECT AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, under the Updated National Development Plan and as reiterated in the Development Plan of Region IV, the major thrust is to increase productivity particularly in underdeveloped but resource rich areas of the country;

WHEREAS, the province of Aurora is among the underdeveloped areas with high potentials for growth considering its rich natural resources;

WHEREAS, the integrated area development (IAD) approach can provide the appropriate framework for the rationalization of land use, generation of employment opportunities and the upliftment of the conditions of the poor;

WHEREAS, the National Council on Integrated Area Development (NACIAD) was created by virtue of Executive Order No. 835 to assist in the formulation of integrated development plans to guide the development of areas with serious socio-economic problems;

WHEREAS, the NACIAD has completed the Master Plan for the Aurora Integrated Area Development Projects which is currently being appraised by the European Economic Commission (EEC) for grant assistance in 1987;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and ordain the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of Project Support Staff for the Aurora IAD Project . – The NACIAD shall organize Project Support Staff (PSS) to be headed by a Project Director for the Aurora Integrated Area Development Project. The PSS shall be tasked to coordinate the implementation of the IAD Programs and small scale high impact projects and prepare project feasibility studies for the development of the province.

SECTION 2. Creation, Composition and Function of the Project Coordinating Committee . – A Project Coordinating Committee (PCC) is hereby created to serve as a forum in providing and ensuring technical coordination among agencies and offices concerned in the Project area and for the purpose of providing operating policies and guidelines for the day-to-day operation of the Project. The PCC shall be chaired by the NACIAD Executive Director and shall be composed of the following members: Provincial Governor, Assemblyman, RDC Chairman, Project Director, Regional Directors of key implementing agencies and representatives from the private sector.

SECTION 3. Participation of Provincial Government . The Provincial Government through the Provincial Planning and Development Office shall provide staff support and work closely with the PSS in the exercise of its assigned tasks. The NACIAD and the Provincial Government shall coordinate closely with the different line agencies and the private sector and encourage their active participation in the over-all development process.

SECTION 4. Support and Endorsement of the Regional Development Council (RDC) . The Regional Development Council (RDC) of the Southern Tagalog provinces shall extend policy support and endorsement to the programs and projects included in the Aurora IAD Project.

SECTION 5. Provision of Technical Assistance and Support of the Line Agencies . The following line agencies through their regional and provincial representatives shall provide technical assistance and necessary support services in plan preparation and project implementation: Ministry of Agriculture and Food (MAF), Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI), Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR), Ministry of Agrarian Reform (MAR), Ministry of Public Works and Highways (MPWH), Ministry of Social Services and Development (MSSD), Ministry of Health (MOH), Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports (MECS), Ministry of Labor and Employment (MOLE), Ministry of Human Settlements (MHS), Ministry of National Defense (MND), Ministry of Finance (MOF), National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), National Irrigation Administration (NIA) and the Office of Budget and Management (OBM). The head of ministries/agencies involved in the implementation of the IAD projects are hereby authorized to identify, source and provide from their available or discretionary resources the funds necessary to carry out the identified projects.

SECTION 6. Funding . The NACIAD shall submit to the OBM a special budget that will cover the funding requirement for the establishment of the Aurora IAD Project Support Staff and for initial project implementation. The OBM shall include the said budget in the National Priorities Support Fund or in any other source which the OBM may deem appropriate. Thereafter, funds necessary to fully carry out the objectives of the Project shall be appropriated every fiscal year in the General Appropriations Act.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 18th day of December, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia