MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 438

In view of the reported resurgence of subversive activities in our educational institutions with its consequent dangers to public order and national security, there is an imperative need to regulate the organization of fraternities, sororities and other like student associations in colleges and universities. The existence of such associations for legitimate purposes are of course to be encouraged; however, experience has shown that some such student associations are being infiltrated and availed of by subversive elements as fronts for illegal purposes. In the interest a national security therefore, the activities of such student organizations must be regulated or controlled.

Accordingly, the following guidelines should be observed:

1. The organization of fraternities, sororities or like student associations in colleges and universities shall be authorized upon the grant of permits therefor by the proper school authorities. Such permits shall be subject to yearly revalidations and shall be granted only upon compliance of the applicant with such rules and regulations to be jointly promulgated by you designated to ensure the legitimacy of purpose for organizing such student associations and the continuous adherence by such student organizations, all its activities, to such legal purpose. In this connection, you shall require the applicant to submit, among others, the constitution and by-laws of the organization and a list of its officers and members.

2. Such associations shall be required to channel their activities to more productive endeavors that will benefit society through economic, social or cultural activities which are to be prescribed or approved by the proper school authorities.

3. Involvement of members in subversive activities, or in any form of violence or criminal offense carried out as a corporate act, rather than through the individual’s initiative, in pursuance of objectives of such student associations, shall constitute sufficient cause for the cancellation of the permit of the erring student association.

The Secretary of National Defense, in such capacity and as Chairman of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council of the New Society, is hereby directed to cause the evolvement of measures needful for the intensification of efforts to monitor and counteract any and all subversive or other illegal activities of such student organizations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd of July, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia