MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 211

In view of the extensive damage to agriculture wrought by the recent floods in the provinces of Bataan, Rizal, Tarlac, Pampanga, Bulacan, Zambales, Laguna, Cavite, Nueva Ecija, Quezon, Pangasinan, Benguet and Aurora sub-province, and in order to speed up the replanting and rehabilitation of all damaged areas, I hereby issue the following instructions:

1. The Central Bank, the Philippine National Bank, and the Agricultural Credit Administration are directed to consolidate all past-due obligations of farmers in the calamity-stricken areas and restructure these over a maximum period of three years. I further order that the maximum limit for Masagana 99 loans be raised from the present P1,200 ceiling up to P1,500 per hectare on a case-to-case basis as may be certified by the production technician and/or the Provincial Program Officer involved.

2. The National Irrigation Administration (NIA) is hereby instructed to immediately service and repair all irrigation pumps which were submerged by flood waters, and to hire or contract for this purpose additional personnel as may be needed for the duration of the emergency. The Department of Agriculture, through the National Food and Agriculture Council, is likewise directed to allocate such amount from its program adjustment fund as may be required by the NIA for such purposes to supplement NIA funds.

3. The Department of Public Highways shall give top priority to the repair of all damaged roads, bridges and highways under its jurisdiction.

4. The Department of Public Works shall give top priority to the immediate repair of all damaged dikes and flood control systems, giving special attention to the following: the Francis dike and floodgate, the Pasig-Potrero dike, and the Kitangil-Abacan River Dike.

5. The Department of Agriculture, through the Bureau of Plant Industry (BPI), is ordered to immediately procure at prevailing prices and make available to farmers the required rice seeds at half-price, if necessary payable after the next harvest in cash or in kind. The BPI and the Department of Agriculture are hereby authorized to utilize the Seed Procurement Fund or any other funds for this purpose.

6. The Department of Agriculture, through the Bureau of Agricultural Extension and the Bureau of Plant Industry; is hereby authorized to hire as production technicians, agricultural high school graduates, if necessary and in the absence of agriculture college graduates, all provisions of the civil service rules and regulations to the contrary notwithstanding.

7. The Fertilizer Industry Authority shall allocate the fertilizer requirements of the areas to be replanted, as determined by the National Food and Agriculture Council.

8. The National Grains Authority shall make available to farmers in the affected areas the required rice dryers to salvage rice crops.

9. The Budget Commission is hereby ordered to release the first and second quarter appropriations Fiscal Year 1974-75 of all the above-cited government agencies.

10. All the above-cited government agencies directly involved in the rehabilitation drive are hereby authorized to allow their personnel to render overtime work for the duration of the emergency for the projects of repair referred to in the foregoing paragraphs in the calamity areas.

All provisions of other Letters of Instructions inconsistent with these orders are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of August, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia