MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1287

WHEREAS, there is now a need to implement a nationwide energy conservation program aimed at reducing the country’s dependence on imported oil and tapping alternative sources of energy;

WHEREAS, there have been various Executive Orders enjoining the promotion and widespread application of gasifier equipment;

WHEREAS, incentives must be given in order to encourage the use of gasifier equipment;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct:

1. Any person, whether natural or juridical, who leases, purchases, acquires, utilizes and employs gasifier equipment and accessories produced, manufactured or sold by the Philippine Dendro Gasifier Corporation or through any of its marketing arms, shall be given priority in their respective applications for any franchise, permit or certificate of public convenience: PROVIDED, That, such gasifier equipment are utilized and employed in each and every vehicle, machinery or appliance operated by virtue of the franchise, permit or certificate of public convenience applied for.

2. The Philippine National Bank, the Land Bank of the Philippines and the Development Bank of the Philippines are hereby enjoined to set aside TEN MILLION PESOS (P10,000,000.00) each for the purpose of funding either directly or through the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK) the requirements of any person, natural or juridical, who desires and qualifies to lease, purchase or otherwise acquire any and all kinds of gasifier or equipment produced or manufactured by the Philippine Dendro Gasifier Corporation.

3. The lending policies that shall be adopted by said Government Banks for the acquisition of gasifier equipment shall follow the lending terms of the Farm Systems Development Corporation (FSDC) and the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK). Same terms shall however apply to individual borrowers inasmuch as lending terms of said organizations were designed for group or cooperative loans.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia