MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 393

In view of our major policy of intensifying our relations with the member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and particularly our numerous and increasing commitments in the region, in the form of regional cooperative programs and projects within the framework of the said organization, there is a need to insure our capabilities and institutional preparedness to meet these commitments and activities. For this purpose the Secretary of Foreign Affairs is hereby instructed to accomplish the following:

1. To review inventory and assess all programs and activities vis-a-vis the ASEAN in which the Philippines is participating and/or expected to actively participate in within the next two (2) to three (3) years and to determine the current and expected needs (in terms of institutional, manpower, program needs and resources) to enable the Philippines to participate in a competent and adequate manner.

2. To reorganize, improve and expand the institutional, manpower, financial, program planning and logistical capabilities and resources of the present ASEAN National Secretariat of the Philippines as provided for in the original ASEAN (Bangkok) Declaration of 1967. In view of the expanded activities of the Association brought about by the Kuala Lumpur Declaration of 1971 and the Declaration of ASEAN Concord, the ASEAN National Secretariat of the Philippines has to be transformed and elevated into a full-fledged national coordinating machinery in the Department of Foreign Affairs.

3. The present ASEAN National Secretariat in that Department is therefore instructed to prepare within sixty (60) days such plans and requirements as may be needed for this purpose and to submit to the Office of the President the said integrated plan within the period specified, including recommendations for the appropriate mandate for the purpose of institutionalizing the development plan.

4. For the drawing up of the said plan, the present National Secretariat may seek assistance and cooperation from other government agencies and offices as it may deem necessary.

5. All other departments, government agencies and instrumentalities are hereby instructed to extend all possible assistance to the present National Secretariat in the Department of Foreign Affairs and to lend the necessary cooperation as may be requested in the preparation of such a plan.

6. In the meantime, all Philippine departments and agencies involved in ASEAN activities are directed to coordinate with the present ASEAN National Secretariat of the Philippines all their position papers and documents on all ASEAN conferences and projects to ensure that the Secretariat is fully involved in these activities here and abroad, and to enable said Secretariat to service effectively all ASEAN conferences.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of April 1976.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia