Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1454

DIRECTING THE CONDUCT AND COMPLETION OF STUDIES TO IMPROVE AND RATIONALIZE THE GOVERNMENT CORPORATE SECTOR

WHEREAS, the growth of the government corporate sector, especially in terms of the attendant claims on scarce government and national resources, and the proliferation of subsidiaries, has become a matter of serious concern;

WHEREAS, the President had directed in December 1984 that those government corporations which are losing money and which are not essentially service-oriented should be dismantled; and

WHEREAS, the ongoing studies on the government corporate sector, including the formulation and adoption of appropriate measures to rationalize the further development of this sector, must now be completed;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. The Special Presidential Reorganization Committee (SPRC) shall conduct and complete its studies on the government corporate sector, including the evaluation of all the individual government-owned or controlled corporations and their subsidiaries, and shall submit its recommendations for the appropriate action on each corporation, which action would indicate the specific nature of the proposed disposition thereof, including but not limited to retention, merger or consolidation, divestiture, or abolition;

SECTION 2. The SPRC shall prepare and implement a work program for the conduct of the study, including the nature and scope of the studies to be undertaken, and the human resources required. The study and recommendations on the individual corporations, together with such associated studies and tentative programs for implementation of the recommendations, shall be submitted to this Office not later than June 1, 1985.

SECTION 3. The SPRC is authorized to call upon any agency of instrumentality of the government for such assistance as may be necessary to accomplish the above objectives, including the detail or assignment of personnel as needed, and the hiring of consultants and contractual personnel, provisions of existing rules and regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. Such expenses as may be necessary for the prompt completion of the work are hereby authorized, and the necessary funds shall be made available to defray all such expenses from applicable appropriations items in the General Appropriations Act for 1985. The SPRC shall work closely with other appropriate bodies and committees, including the Government Corporate Monitoring Committee.

SECTION 4. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of April, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia