MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 552

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Internal Revenue, despite adverse world and domestic economic conditions, has achieved an overall collection improvement in the last calendar year by collecting P8.270 billion representing an increase of P1.382 billion or 20.07% over the preceding calendar year, and during the first four months of the current year, it has already reached a collection of P3.721 billion as against P3,084.5 million during the same period last year, representing an increase of P686.5 million or 22.62%;

WHEREAS, the officers and employees of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, being outside of WAPCO, have not received any salary increase or cost of living allowance although other government officers and employees have twice been granted salary adjustment/cost of living allowance of 10% each during the last two years or a total of 20%;

WHEREAS, there is a need to raise the salary levels of the officers and employees of the Bureau to enable them to cope with increasing costs of living and give them commensurate incentives in the performance of their vital task of collecting taxes due the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct:

1. A twenty percent (20%) salary increase for the personnel of the Bureau of Internal Revenue based on their actual salaries at present effective 1 May 1977, except Career Executive Service Officials whose salary adjustment is already covered by LOI No. 533.

2. The Commissioner of the Budget to utilize the savings that may be generated in the approved expenditure program of the Bureau for the current calendar year for the payment of salary adjustment authorized herein. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary to implement this Letter of Instructions shall be included in the General Appropriations Decree.

3. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia