MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 825

WHEREAS, the petroleum supply situation continues to be precarious due to disruptions in the traditional sources of supply and there is no immediate relief in sight;

WHEREAS, the price of crude oil and petroleum products continues to increase;

WHEREAS, the government wishes to minimize the adverse impact of the supply and price situation on the country’s essential economic activities;

WHEREAS, in view of the foregoing events and conditions, it is imperative that the government and the private sector take all necessary measures to conserve energy and promote efficient utilization thereof.

NOW, THEREFORE, it is hereby directed that we implement the measures under contingency Oil Plan “A” as well as the following:

1. All departments, bureaus, and agencies of the government, including all government-owned and/or controlled corporations, shall institute energy conservation programs and measures to reduce oil and power consumption by at least 10%, except only in those cases where reduction would prejudice national security.

2. The Ministry of Energy shall require all industrial plants, factories, and commercial establishments consuming at least P3,000,000 worth of fuel and power per annum to submit within one (1) month an energy conservation program and quarterly energy consumption reports thereafter for monitoring purposes by the Ministry.

3. The Ministry of Trade shall require all lighted advertising signs to be put off no later than 10:00 o’clock in the evening.

4. The Ministry of Local Government and Community Development shall direct all national, provincial/city, municipality and Barangay Executives to develop and implement energy conservation programs in their respective areas.

5. The Ministry of Finance shall review and recommend tax disincentives against use of high energy consuming vehicles and appliances, and propose on the other hand, tax credit incentives for the use of energy conservation devices and measures.

6. The Land Transportation Commission, Police, Philippine Constabulary, and the Integrated National Police shall intensify traffic flow improvement efforts to minimize energy waste due to traffic problems.

7. The Ministry of National Defense shall make available resources of its office to assure that the various measures herein directed are complied with.

8. The Ministry of Public Information and Ministry of Education shall develop and implement comprehensive nationwide information and educational campaign on energy conservation.

9. The Ministry of Energy shall monitor and coordinate implementation of the foregoing measures. It shall also direct the taking of such other measures as may be necessary from time to time to in accordance with plans and programs approved by the President of the Philippines.

All other government agencies and corporations are hereby enjoined to cooperate in this effort.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia