MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 953

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL ACTION COMMITTEE ON FOOD

WHEREAS, an adequate supply of food at reasonable prices is essential to the well-being of the Filipino people, particularly in these times of rapid inflation;

WHEREAS, the normal production and marketing processes have been distorted by successive increases in the price of crude oil;

WHEREAS, the government is committed to pursue its task of ensuring a sufficient supply of food at prices that our people can afford;

WHEREAS, the above objectives can only be attained through an integrated program of production, marketing and credit participated in by both the private sector and the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. The creation of a Presidential Action Committee on food which shall ensure unified action by all government agencies and the private sector, supervise and monitor the implementation of programs aimed at stabilizing food supply and prices throughout the country, with priority given to fish, vegetables and fruits sold in the Metropolitan Manila area.

2. That the Presidential Action Committee on Food shall be initially composed of the following:

a. The Minister of Agriculture as Chairman and Presidential Action Officer b. The Minister of Natural Resources c. The Minister of the Budget d. The Minister of Trade e. The Governor of the Central Bank f. The Deputy Minister of Human Settlements g. The Deputy Minister of Cooperative Development of the Ministry of Local Governments and Community Development h. The Chairman of the Development Bank of the Philippines i. The President of the Philippine National Bank j. The President of the Land Bank of the Philippines k. The Administrator of the National Grains Authority l. The Chairman of the Food Terminal, Inc. m. The General Manager of the Philippine Fish Marketing Authority n. The Assistant to the Governor and Chairman of the Metro Manila Commission

The above officials may be represented in the Presidential Action Committee on Food by their duly designated representatives.

3. The Presidential Action Committee on Food is empowered:

a. to determine the strategies necessary to attain its objectives;

b. to prepare the necessary plans and programs to effectively implement the strategies arrived at;

c. to determine the duties and responsibilities of, and establish guidelines for all ministries and government agencies involved in the good industry;

d. to supervise, coordinate and monitor the activities of all government ministries and agencies involved in food supply and prices;

e. to create appropriate sub-committees on various commodities if found, and for as long as necessary;

f. to call on the resources of all government ministries and agencies necessary to implement the strategies arrived at; and

g. to utilize any transport and storage facilities from the government and private sectors.

All provisions of other Letter of Instructions inconsistent with this order are hereby repealed and/or amended accordingly.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of October, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia