MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 175

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and in connection with the nation’s expanded food production program, the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, through the National Food and Agriculture Council, shall intensify the production of white corn and feedgrains to make our country self-sufficient in these cereals. The program shall be implemented in collaboration with the other government agencies and the private sector, and will be called “Masaganang Maisan”.

NOW, THEREFORE, to insure the successful implementation of “Masaganang Maisan”, I hereby issue the following orders:

1. The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, through the National Food and Agriculture Council (NFAC), shall oversee and coordinate the activities of all participating government agencies and instrumentalities, as well as the private sector.

2. The DLGCD, through its Governors and Mayors, shall spearhead the Program in the selected priority provinces and municipalities. The Provincial Governors shall assume the responsibility as Chairman of their respective Provincial Action Committees and the Mayors as Chairmen of the Municipal Action Teams.

3. The PNB, through its President, the Central Bank-Department of Rural Banks, through the Governor, and the ACA, through its Administrator, shall support this program through their respective offices and subordinates by extending financial assistance to the farmer cooperators at the rate of P550/ha. for corn and sorghum and P650/ha. for soybeans.

4. The National Grains Authority (NGA) through its Administrator, shall implement a support price of P0.62/kilo for white and yellow corn and sorghum and P2.20/kilo for soybeans.

5. The Secretary of Agriculture shall, preferably thru the Philippine Association of Feed Millers, Inc. and its member companies and their instrumentalities, develop an efficient marketing scheme by establishing buying stations to absorb the produce of small farmers, especially soybeans and sorghum.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia