MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 262

TO: ALL HEADS OF DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES AND OFFICES OF THE GOVERNMENT AND OTHERS CONCERNED.

SUBJECT: Submission by Public Officers of Statement of Assets, Liabilities and Net Worth as of December 31, 1974.

In pursuance of the program of reform in the Government under the New Society which was, among others, overwhelmingly endorsed by the people in the referendum held on February 27, 1975, and consistent with the guarantees provided in the different tax amnesty decrees, it is thereby directed that –

1. Every public officer shall prepare and file, in the prescribed form (Annex “A”) a sworn statement of assets, liabilities and net worth as of December 31, 1974, which shall include the assets, liabilities and net worth of the spouse and unmarried children below twenty-one years of age as of that date; Provided, That every public officer who is –

a. A chief of Section or above; or

b. Occupying a position allocated to range 51 or above, whether chief of section or not; or

c. olding the rank of sergeant or above, in case of the military; or

d. an officer or member of a law enforcement agency of the government.

shall prepare and file, in the prescribed form (Annex “B”), a sworn comparative statement of assets, liabilities and net worth, as provided in Paragraph 2 hereof, which shall also include the assets, liabilities and net worth of the spouse and unmarried children below twenty-one years of age.

2. The comparative statement required in Paragraph 1 hereof shall consist of:

a. A statement of assets, liabilities and net worth as of December 31, 1974; and

b. A statement of assets, liabilities and net worth as of December 31, 1965, or as of the date the public officer entered the government service, whichever date is later; Provided, That in case the public officer had availed of tax amnesty, the statement of assets, liabilities and net worth shall be as of –

1) December 31, 1971, if the public officer availed of tax amnesty under Presidential Decree No. 23 only; or

2) December 31, 1972, if the public officer availed of the tax amnesty under Presidential Decree Nos. 23 and 157, and/or Presidential Decree Nos. 213 and 370; or

3) December 31, 1973, if the public officer availed of the tax amnesty under Presidential Decree No. 631.

3. The comparative statement of assets, liabilities and net worth shall be accompanied by a statement, also under oath, showing and explaining any increase in net worth for the period covered by the comparative statement.

4. The statement of assets, liabilities, and net worth shall be filed on or before May 30, 1975, with the Office of the corresponding Department Head, or in the case of a Head of Department or Chief of an independent office, with the Office of the President.

5. The following terms as used herein shall be defined as follows:

a. “Government” includes the national government, the local governments, the government-owned and government-controlled corporations, and all other instrumentalities or agencies of the Republic of the Philippines and their branches.

b. “Public Officer” includes elective and appointive officials, including barangay heads, and employees, permanent or temporary, whether in the classified or unclassified or exempt service receiving compensation, even nominal, from the government as defined in the preceding subparagraph.

c. “Assets” include any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whenever situated, to the extent of the cost or interest therein of the public officer, his spouse and unmarried children below twenty-one years of age.

d. “Liabilities” are legitimate and enforceable obligations reducible in terms of money and existing as of the date of the statement of assets, liabilities and net worth required herein.

e. “Net Worth” is the difference between the total assets and the total liabilities.

6. Any public official who fails to file the statement required by this Letter of Instructions shall be subject to the penalties provided for in Section 9(b) of Republic Act No. 3019, otherwise known as the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Reference: Annex “A”

Source : CDAsia