Malacañang Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1383

GUIDING THE DEVELOPMENT OF TEACHER’S CAMP IN BAGUIO CITY

Whereas, orderly physical planning is necessary for ensuring the maintenance of the beauty and sylvan setting of Baguio City;

Whereas, Teacher’s Camp is one of the large remaining forested areas in Baguio City, further construction within which will lead to deterioration in its ecological balance, adversely affecting not only the Camp but also the City of Baguio;

Whereas, the objective of government is to make Teacher’s Camp into a center for continuing teacher education and educational research and innovation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby Order and Instruct the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, with the assistance of the Minister of Human Settlements to prepare and implement a physical development plan of Teacher’s Camp, under the following guidelines:

1. The Camp shall be used exclusively by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports, for continuing teacher education and educational research and innovation;

2. The built-up area within the Camp shall not be further expanded and wherever possible, existing structures shall be removed or relocated to be consistent with a physical plan that maximizes open or forested area;

3. No new structures shall be erected nor shall existing structures be expanded except in accordance with the physical development plan prepared under this Letter;

4. The aesthetics of the Camp shall be improved with the removal of illegal or unnecessary structures that detract from its natural beauty, including discordant gates and markers, fences and the like. The architecture of the Camp shall be its traditionally simple but harmonious style, consistent with the forested surroundings;

5. Illegal structures in the Camp and in adjoining public lands administered by the Bureau of Forestry or other agencies, shall be removed and squatters shall relocated;

6. A tree planting program for the Camp and for the adjoining lands administered by the Bureau of Forestry or other agencies shall be designed and implemented as part of the reforestation program of government; and

7. The boundaries of the Camp shall be properly defined and safeguarded. The Bureau of Lands shall assist in conducting the necessary land survey.

Done,, in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February, nineteen hundred and eighty four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia