MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 614

WHEREAS, I have the greatest faith in the capability of the young people of this country to contribute to our present efforts to achieve national development;

WHEREAS, these young people have been given every opportunity in the New Society to actively involve themselves in pursuits that energize and reinforce governmental programs;

WHEREAS, to effectively perform this new role, the youth must concurrently be provided with opportunities for personal growth and development;

WHEREAS, this is particularly critical for those who are in the government service and who comprise a significant sector of the total population of the Civil Service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. The Civil Service Commission shall establish and implement a Future Leaders Program that will serve to attract young and competent people into the government service and prepare them to assume higher and more responsible positions.

2. To launch this program, the Commission and the National Defense College of the Philippines shall draw up a training course for the young people presently employed in the government who have organized themselves into a “Buklod ng Kabataang Kawani.”

The training program shall serve to imbibe among the trainees pride in being a Pilipino and in being active participants in the building of our nation. It should also expose them to concepts and techniques of management.

3. To assure that training participants have the potential and attributes for future leadership, the Commission shall likewise institute a rigid screening process without, however, precluding regional representation.

4. All departments and agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations shall provide support and assistance to this program by authorizing and supporting the attendance of those employees who have been selected for the training program.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia