MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 467

The members of various barangay organizations around the country, through their leaders in the Katipunan Ng Mga Sanggunian, the Pambansang Katipunan Ng Mga Barangay and the Pambansang Katipunan Ng Mga Kabataang Barangay, have expressed a common desire to conduct public discussions through the barangays and subsequently hold a nationwide referendum on important matters of current interest among the people.

Specifically, the barangays, represented by their leaders in a petition submitted to the President, desire to obtain a national vote on the question of a legislative body, either in the form of the Interim National Assembly provided for in the new Constitution or of another body which they may determine. They have also expressed a desire, should the people choose to organize a new legislative body and for this purpose amend the Constitution, to confront the related questions of: (a) whether such a body should possess full, limited, or advisory powers; (b) whether to amend the Constitution through such legislative body or through a Constitutional convention; and (c) how the members of such legislative body shall be elected.

I have approved the request of the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian, the Pambansang Katipunan ng mga Barangay and the Pambansang Katipunan ng mga Kabataang Barangay to undertake the above-mentioned discussions and referendum, which shall be held and conducted under the supervision of the Commission on Elections with the barangays devising their own ballots, tally sheets and other necessary forms and utilizing their own resources to underwrite the expenses for the referendum and discussions. I have likewise approved the proposal that a Barangay Referendum Committee shall be organized in each barangay to supervise under the Commission on Elections such referendum and to canvass the results.

The referendum shall be conducted by secret ballot, except in very small barangays, where the residents may, if they choose, gather in one assembly and adopt the method of a roll call vote.

To ensure maximum participation by the citizenry as well as orderly discussions and balloting, you are hereby directed to support this desire of the members and leaders of the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian, the Pambansang Katipunan ng mga Barangay and the Pambansang Katipunan ng mga Kabataang Barangay to discuss vital and current issues and obtain a national vote on them. You shall before and during the period of consultations and the subsequent referendum lend to the barangays in your respective jurisdictions all possible assistance to facilitate free and full expression of opinion, maintain peace and order and obtain as large a turnout as possible at the discussions and the balloting.

You shall likewise provide such support and assistance as are necessary to enable the Barangay Referendum Committees to forward with maximum dispatch to the Sangguniang Panlungsod or Sangguniang Pambayan the results of their canvass, which shall in turn be forwarded to the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian through the Steering Committee of the Lupong Tagapagpaganap.

In lending encouragement, support and assistance as may be necessary to the above-mentioned undertakings, you shall be guided by the policy of participatory democracy, which seeks to afford a wider base for public discussion and opinion that was over attempted before the New Society.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia