MALACAÑANG

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 697

WHEREAS, the National Grains Authority, in accordance with the provisions of P.D. 4, is directly entrusted with the responsibility to introduce more efficient ways, systems and facilities for shortage, processing and post harvest handling of rice, corn and other grains and their by-products;

WHEREAS, the NGA under its five-year program is undertaking the installation and construction of modern and efficient post-harvest facilities such as terminal silos, bulk handling equipment like conveyors, containerized mobile vans and pneumatic loading and unloading devices;

WHEREAS, these post-harvest facilities, particularly the establishment of terminal silos in strategic ports, are very vital in the efficient storage of our national buffer and security stocks;

WHEREAS, in anticipation of its grains export potentials, the country shall be in need of transshipment points in various strategic port areas of the country to facilitate loading and unloading operations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines in order to facilitate the implementation of the five-year program of the NGA particularly its grains infrastructure projects, do hereby direct:

1. That the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communication in full cooperation with the Philippine Ports Authority shall allocate the necessary land requirement for the conventional and bulk storage and processing facilities of the NGA in strategic existing ports and/or port areas being developed by said agencies, particularly at the Manila International Port Terminal;

2. That the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communication shall assist the NGA in the land development of such areas for its post-harvest facilities;

3. That the Philippine Ports Authority shall include in its port development plan the storage facility requirements of the National Grains Authority;

4. That the National Economic Development Authority and the National Budget Commission shall respectively program and appropriate funds for the grain infrastructure projects of the National Grains Authority;

5. That the Department of Finance and Government Financial institutions shall assist the National Grains Authority in financing and guaranteeing its foreign loan obligations relative to its five-year program particularly its terminal silo projects; and

6. That the National Grains Authority shall immediately implement its five-year program in accordance with its desired goals and objectives.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA this 24th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy eight.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia