MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1061

DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF FISHPOND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS FOR DISLOCATED FAMILIES AND REBEL-RETURNEES IN SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES

TO: The Minister, Ministry of the Budget

The Minister, Ministry of Natural Resources/Director, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources

The Officer-in-Charge, Southern Philippines Development Authority

The Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines

The Acting President, Mindanao State University

All Heads of Ministries, Bureaus, or Agencies; Government Owned or Controlled Corporations; and Local Government Units.

WHEREAS, it is the Government’s policy to hasten the economic development of depressed areas in Southern Philippines and generate new sources of livelihood, particularly for dislocated families and rebel-returnees/former dissidents now working with the Government;

WHEREAS, it is the Government’s desire to involve the foregoing segments of society in economic activities designed to’ promote their own well-being and self-sufficiency and thereby expedite their integration, into the national body politic;

WHEREAS, the Southern Philippines Development Authority (SPDA) has been tasked as the specific government agency under presidential Decree No. 1703, to institute and implement economic development projects in Southern Philippines;

WHEREAS, the SPDA has identified, among others, viable economic projects that will utilize and harness the fisheries resources in Southern Philippines and enhance national efforts in food production while tapping sources of foreign exchange;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and instruct the following:

1. In coordination with the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) and other government agencies, the SPDA as lead agency, shall undertake the planning, development and management of the following income-producing, self-sustaining fisheries projects in Southern Philippines:

a. Bagong Lipunan Fishpond Estate I (Vitali, Zamboanga City, which will convert 1200 hectares of public land into family-size fishponds to be distributed to dislocated families and rebel-returnees in Region IX, for the production of prawn milkfish, crabs and other aquatic animals;

b. Gintong Biyaya Fish Cage Culture project (Lake Buluan, Sultan Kudarat, which will undertake production of tilapia, particularly red tilapia (Gintong Biyaya), in 1500 cages, to be distributed also to low-income family groups and rebel-returnees as well as implement related economic activities;

c. Basilan Prawn Farm Project (Panigayan, Isabela, Basilan), which will involve the development of a 112-hectare pilot project for the polyculture of prawn and milkfish;

d. Bagong Lipunan Regional Prawn Hatchery Project (Naawan, Misamis Oriental), which will undertake commercial production of sugpo fry for distribution to fishpond operators engaged in prawn culture in Mindanao and maximize production of quality prawns for export;

e. Liguasan Marsh Freshwater Fisheries Project (Cotabato), which will undertake pilot projects in fresh-water fish production in pens, cages and water impoundments, and related economic activities; and

f. Lake Lanao Fish Cage Culture Project (Lanao del Sur) , which will undertake production of carp, tila,pia,catfish, snakehead (dalag), milkfish and other freshwater fish species in pens and cages.

2. The Ministry of the Budget is hereby directed to effect the immediate release of Thirty Five Million pesos (P35M) out of the Special Activities Fund in the Office of the President as equity contribution to the SPDA to underwrite the pre-operating and planning costs and part of the initial development costs of the foregoing projects;

3. The Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) is hereby directed to extend such loans to the SPDA as may be needed to underwrite part of the development cost upon presentation of the appropriate detailed project feasibility and viability studies in accordance with the policies and programs of that Bank;

4. The SPDA is hereby directed to secure funding assistance from external sources to underwrite the remaining cost of the projects;

5. The management of the prawn hatchery and support facilities of the Mindanao State University at Naawan, Misamis Oriental, is hereby transferred to the SPDA, which is hereby directed to utilize the said facilities for commercial production of sugpo fry for distribution to fishpond operators in Southern Philippines

6. All ministries, bureaus, offices, agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations and local government units are hereby directed to extend their assistance to expedite implementation of the foregoing projects as may be requested by the SPDA.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of September, in the Year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: Malacañang Records Office