MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 871

TO: All Concerned

SUBJECT: Suspension of the Implementation of Section 1310 of P.D. 1464 amending the Revised Tariff and Customs Code of the Philippines.

WHEREAS, under Section 1310 of Presidential Decree No. 1464, the minimum dutiable value of all imported articles whereby consular documentation is required has been raised from P3 , 000 to P10 , 000 would reduce by an estimated 40% the consular invoice collection of the Philippine government which presently amounts to about US$6 million and which goes to the general fund;

WHEREAS, under Section 1310 of Presidential Decree No. 1464, importations of all government agencies and instrumentalities are exempted from consular invoice documentations, and such exemption from consular invoice requirements would have great implications on the implementation of Presidential Decree No. 1466, otherwise known as “A Decree Amending Presidential Decree No. 894”, which govern the cargo preference requirements of the Philippine government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct the following:

Section 1. Implementation of Section 1310 of Presidential Decree No. 1464, amending Section 1310 of the Tariff and Customs Code, which took effect on March 1, 1979 is hereby suspended immediately until such time that an alternative solution has been found.

Section 2. All government agencies and instrumentalities involved in the formulation of rules and regulations on Tariff and Customs requirements should formulate a viable solution to these two aforementioned matters and shall review periodically its effectiveness and make such recommendations and reports to the President of the Philippines, as the need arises.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia