MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 908

The Board of Trustees Philippine Center for Advanced Studies Quezon City

The Executive Director The President’s Center for Special Studies Quezon City

The Board of Regents University of the Philippines System Quezon City

To ensure prompt and judicious implementation of Executive Order No. 543, dated July 9, 1979, constituting the President’s Center for Special Studies (PCSS) out of the Philippine Center for Advanced Studies (PCAS) and transferring the PCAS academic programs to the University of the Philippines System, the following instructions are issued for the guidance of the Board of Trustees of PCAS, the Executive Director of the PCSS and the Board of Regents of U.P.

I. The Board of Trustees of the PCAS is instructed:

A) To transfer not later than August 15, 1979 all funds, properties, records, studies, equipment, including those of the PCAS Museum, and the custody of the present PCAS building to the President’s Center for Special Studies;

B) To transfer immediately to the PCSS the management of all PCAS on-going programs, except the academic programs of the degree granting Institutes of PCAS which shall be transferred to the University of the Philippines not later than October 1, 1979.

C) To expedite the inventory of all assets and liabilities of PCAS for liquidation; which liquidation should be accomplished not later than December 31, 1979;

D) And, in general, to lend full cooperation to the PCSS to enable it to pursue the objectives for which it is established.

II. The Executive Director of the President’s Center for Special Studies is instructed:

A) To take over not later than August 15, 1979 the management of all funds, properties, records, facilities, equipment owned by and assigned to PCAS, including the custody of the PCAS building which shall be transferred to the University of the Philippines in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order No. 543; and to commit the funds as may be necessary to manage the PCSS affairs;

B) Except for the academic programs of degree granting Institutes of PCAS, immediately to take over the management of all on-going programs of PCAS, and to determine which of these programs will continue, be modified or abandoned.

C) To determine, on the basis of the Center’s needs and qualifications criteria, who among the present PCAS personnel may be transferred to form the staff of the Center;

D) To transfer to the University of the Philippines funds actually needed for the salaries and wages of academic and administrative support personnel as absorbed by the University of the Philippines;

E) To take possession of all funds, properties, equipment, studies, records, and the PCAS building, not later than August 15, 1979.

F) To maintain the library holdings of PCAS and with exception of materials in the nature of processed data, to transfer these holdings to the University of the Philippines keeping in mind other pertinent provisions of Executive Order No. 543.

G) To assist PCAS personnel who are not absorbed either by the Center or by the University of the Philippines in drawing their entitlements in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations covering separation from service;

H) The Executive Director of the Center is hereby empowered to organize the staff of the PCSS and to assign corresponding salaries in accordance with the schedule of the defunct PCAS and to create such positions as exigencies of the service may require.

III. The Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines is instructed:

A) To take over the management of the academic programs of the degree granting Institutes of PCAS, and thereafter, to determine on the basis of its policies, rules and regulations, which of these programs will continue, be modified, or abandoned;

B) To take over the management of funds actually needed for the salaries and wages of PCAS personnel to be absorbed by the University;

C) To take over the building of PCAS as soon as the President’s Center for Special Studies moves to its own quarters observing the pertinent provisions of the Executive Order No. 543;

D) To continue to extend the same rights and privileges to PCAS personnel absorbed by the PCSS as accorded to U.P. personnel .

This order will take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 9th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia