MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 577

RELATIVE TO THE GRANT OF EMERGENCY INCENTIVE ALLOWANCE TO REGULAR PERSONNEL OF THE BUREAU OF FOREST DEVELOPMENT UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1120

You are hereby directed to implement the emergency incentive allowance authorized for regular personnel of the Bureau of Forest Development (BFD) as authorized under Presidential Decree No. 1120, in accordance with the following guidelines:

1. Regular technical as well as support personnel whose positions are authorized and are actually assigned in the Regional Offices of the BFD shall be paid the following rates of emergency incentive allowances:

Rate of Monthly Emergency Incentive Allowance

2. Regular technical as well as support personnel of the BFD who are assigned in the Central Office (Bureau Proper) shall be paid monthly emergency incentive allowance based on the position grouping under No. 1 hereof, at the rate of fifty percent (50%) of the corresponding monthly rate provided for regional office personnel.

3. The allowance authorized herein shall supersede all previously authorized allowances being enjoyed by BFD personnel, except where such previously authorized allowances in the aggregate are higher than the corresponding rate authorized herein, in which case the employee shall continue to enjoy only the higher rate of allowance.

4. BFD personnel whose positions are embraced in the Career Executive Service (CES) shall continue to enjoy whatever allowances they are entitled to receive under the CES simultaneously with the allowance they are entitled herein.

5. The emergency incentive allowance provided herein shall be effective May 1, 1977.

6. The Commissioner of the Budget, the Acting Chairman, Commission on Audit, and the Director, Bureau of Forest Development are hereby directed to insure that payment of the emergency incentive allowance for BFD personnel conform with the rates as prescribed under this Letter of Instructions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia