MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1037

EXPEDITING THE PAYMENT OF ALL RIGHT-OF-WAY CLAIMS

TO: ALL CONCERNED

WHEREAS, one of the main causes in the delay of the execution of infrastructure projects is the right-of-way problem;

WHEREAS, the accumulated unpaid claims have reached the staggering amount of hundreds of million pesos; and

WHEREAS, it is imperative to solve the right-of-way problems in order not to prejudice the infrastructure programs of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and issue the following instructions to all concerned:

1. For all ministries, agencies and offices concerned, especially those tasked with the preparation of programs for project construction to always include provisions for fund for right-of-way acquisition and decentralize the payment through the regional directors.

2. For the Ministry of the Budget to facilitate and expedite the revalidation or renewal of expired cash- disbursement-ceilings.

3. For the Commission on Audit to empower the different regional auditors to review and approve the right-of-way claims filed within their respective jurisdictions amounting to less than P100,000.00. Otherwise, if the amount involved is P100,000.00 or more, the claim should also be reviewed and approved by the COA in Quezon City; and

4. For all offices concerned to extend to all claimants the necessary assistance to secure the necessary documents for and to expedite the payment of their claims.

5. All claims for right-of-way payment must be paid within one year from the date of filing, provided that the claim papers are in order.

Any other instructions, directives, orders, rules and regulations which are in conflict with the provisions of this Letter of Instructions are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia