MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1411

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 640-A, the Cultural Cantor of the Philippines has been designated to implement the declared policy of the State to provide support and assistance to the motion picture industry, with the objective of making said industry a truly dynamic and vigorous instrument for national cultural growth and development and a vital social institution which will enhance the artistic and scientific heritage of the nation;

WHEREAS, under Section 6 of the aforesaid Executive Order, the \ Cultural Center of the Philippines  has been mandated “to establish, construct, administer, and maintain within the Cultural Center Complex a Film Center x x x to service the requirements of the motion picture-industry”;

WHEREAS, the Manila Film Center was constructed through the join’ efforts and contributions of various agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government;

WHEREAS, to realize the above-stated policy and objectives of the State-enunciated in Executive Order No. 640-A, it is necessary to vest upon the Cultural Center of the Philippines the full ownership of the Manila Film Center;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, hereby order:

1. The title and ownership of the land together with the building andother improvements comprising the Manila Film Center shall be vested in the Cultural Center of the Philippines. Towards this end, the concerned ministries and agencies of the National Government shall execute the necessary documents and/or papers.

2. All transfers of funds from whatever source used in connection with the construction of the Manila Film Center building are hereby authorized, ratified and confirmed. Disbursements made by the ministries and agencies of the National Government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, for the said construction project shall be considered contributions to the Cultural Center of the Philippines.

3. The Public Estates Authority shall assign in favor of the Cultural Center of the Philippine the parcel of land consisting of approximately 99,473 square meters on which the Manila Film Center is constructed. The assignment shall be considered as partial payment for the obligations of the Public Estate Authority to the National Government and as contribution of the National Government to the Cultural Center of the Philippines.

4. All officials concerned are hereby authorized to sign/enter into such agreement(s) with the Cultural Center of the Philippines as may be necessary or proper for the implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

5. This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of May in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : Presidential Management Staff