MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 576

INTENSIFYING DEVELOPMENT OF AND CREATING A DEVELOPMENT COORDINATING COUNCIL FOR LEYTE AND SAMAR

WHEREAS, recent developments in Leyte and Samar indicate a deteriorating peace and order condition which adversely affects national security;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to contain the spread of insurgency in the area by building up, through joint security/development efforts, an action plan designed to provide security in affected areas and the conduct of massive long-range infrastructure development in unaffected areas; and

WHEREAS, the active cooperation and participation of various government agencies require close coordination and integration of their efforts for maximum result;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

1. That a massive, coordinated and sustained inter-agency development program for Leyte and Samar be immediately undertaken;

2. That construction of infrastructure projects be initiated and/or accelerated like roads and bridges, airports, ports and harbors, school houses, hydro-electric plants and such other development projects geared toward enhancing socio-economic uplift of the people in the area;

3.  That income generating NACIDA-type and fishpond projects be initiated with the assistance of the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) and other lending institutions in terms of loans;

4.  That in order to insure concerted and sustained efforts of participating and co-operating agencies, a Development Coordinating Council charged with policy, planning and implementation is hereby created composed of the following members:

5. The Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) shall serve as the focal coordinating point for those who wish to setup their own NACIDA-type, self-help projects. In this regard, the DBP shall promulgate rules and regulations in the granting of loans and may call upon the resources of other financing institutions.

6. The Armed Forces of the Philippines shall maintain security operations and shall undertake, in coordination with the Office for Civil Defense, civic action and other special projects to solve urgent socio-economic problems.

7. The Department of Public Information shall intensify information activities in the area to promote the acceptance of development projects and enhance civic involvement.

8. The agencies enumerated above shall work within the limits of their programmed resources. However, in recognition of the added financial and operational burden they are authorized to call upon any department, bureau or instrumentality of government for any assistance that may be required and, after due assessment of the situation, may submit additional financial requirements to the Office of the President for possible funding support.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia