Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 845

TO: The Minister, Ministry of Energy

The Minister, MPWTC and Administrator, NIA

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1515, jurisdiction, control and regulation over all watershed areas and reservations proclaimed by the President of the Philippines are now vested to the Ministry of Energy;

WHEREAS, it is the primary concern of the state that watershed areas be rehabilitated and conserved to protect the existing and proposed irrigation works and hydro-electric power plants within the area;

WHEREAS, it is my desire that immediate protection, development, management and rehabilitation of the watershed areas of the Pantabangan Dam in Nueva Ecija and Magat Dam in Isabela be undertaken by the government to conserve and prolong the life-span of the two (2) major infrastructures as well as maintain ecological and flood control programs in these watershed areas;

WHEREAS, the National Irrigation Administration (NIA), the implementing agency for the two (2) projects above-mentioned is ready and technically equipped to do the aforestated functions;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Sections 2 and 3 of Presidential Decree No. 1515, the Ministry of Energy may exercise its functions and responsibilities over watershed areas and reservation through any government agency or instrumentality;

NOW, THEREFORE, to insure the immediate and successful implementation of the project, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the constitution, do hereby issue the following orders:

1. Any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Ministry of Energy shall have jurisdiction, control and regulation over all watershed areas and reservations proclaimed or hereafter proclaimed as such by the President of the Philippines.

2. The National Irrigation Administration in coordination with the Ministry of Energy, shall promulgate, adopt and issue rules and regulations governing the implementation of the herein granted functions and prescribe penalties in violation thereof in accordance with existing laws subject to the approval of the President.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE IN THE CITY OF MANILA, this 16th day of April, in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Seventy Nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia