MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 643

DIRECTING THE PREPARATION OF COMPREHENSIVE WORK PROGRAMS IN SIGNIFICANT AREAS OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENT OPERATION

WHEREAS, the regionalization of national government operations has been directed by the Integrated Reorganization Plan and implemented with the adoption of regional organization, planning and budgeting approaches;

WHEREAS, the diversity of government operations requires an integrated approach among agencies operating in specific regions in the country;

WHEREAS, coordinated action among government agencies with respect to specific locations will lead to greater economy.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby issue to the following instructions:

1. The agencies concerned shall prepare annual integrated work and financial plans for the following activities of the government as basis for budgetary release:

a. Barangay road construction. The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development and the Secretary of Public Highways shall prepare an annual barrio/barangay/feeder road construction program, indicating the target length and cost per municipality/city/barangay.

b. Repair of roads and bridges. The Secretary of Public Highways shall prepare an annual program indicating by region/province/city/municipality the national and local roads scheduled for repair and maintenance with national support, indicating the amounts per quarter.

c. School building construction. The Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communications shall prepare an annual school building construction program, including prefabricated schoolbuilding construction/erection, indicating the region/province/city/municipality/school which are scheduled for schoolbuilding allocation.

d. Aid to Local schools. The Department of Education and Culture shall prepare an annual program for the allocation of funds budgeted as assistance to local schools, including barrio high schools and community colleges, indicating amounts per province/city/municipality/school.

e. Distribution of drugs and medicines. The Secretary of Health shall prepare a national program for the distribution of drugs and medicines funded by the National government, identifying by region/province/city the various types of drugs, including approximate cost per quarter, intended for distribution during the year.

f. Establishment of new government hospitals and upgrading of existing ones specially the national hospitals in Manila. The Secretary of Health shall prepare an annual program indicating the utilization of funds budgeted for the creation of new hospitals, indicating the location, size, amount, and timing for each new hospital as well as upgrading of existing ones specially the national hospitals in Manila.

g. Reforestation. The Secretary of National Resources shall prepare an annual reforestation program, indicating the various reforestation activities intended for implementation in a given year, identified as to province/city/municipality, and describing the extent of local government participation in each case.

h. Repair and maintenance of national buildings. The Secretary of General Services shall prepare an annual program for the utilization of funds earmarked for the repair and maintenance of public buildings, identified by province/city/municipality.

2. The various work programs described herein shall be prepared by the agencies concerned and submitted to the Commissioner of the Budget no later than January 31 of each year. The various programs submitted shall be reviewed by the Budget Commission with the assistance of the Department of Local Government and Community Development, the Department of Finance and the Presidential Management Staff, and then transmitted to the President for approval. The Budget Commission shall release the funds for the abovementioned activities in accordance with the approved comprehensive work and financial programs.

3. These instructions shall take effect beginning with the work and budgetary programs of agencies for CY 1978.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia