MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 368

To: The Secretary of Labor The Secretary of National Defense The Secretary of Justice The Solicitor General

Listing vital industries or companies or firms for purposes of PD 823 as amended.

For the guidance of workers and employers, some of whom have been led into filing notices of strikes and lockouts even in vital industries, you are hereby instructed to consider the following as vital industries and companies or firms under PD 823 as amended:

1. Public Utilities:

A. Transportation:

1) All land, air and water companies or firms engaged in passenger, freight or tourist transport;

2) All brokerage, arrastre, warehousing companies or firms;

B. Communications:

1) Wire or wireless telecommunications such as telephone, telegraph, telex, and cable companies or firms;

2) Radio and television companies or firms;

3) Print Media companies;

4) Postal and messengerial service companies;

C. Companies engaged in electric, light, gas, steam and water power generation and distribution and sanitary service companies;

D. Other Public Utilities:

1) Ice and Refrigeration plants

2. Companies or firms engaged in the manufacture or processing of the following essential commodities:

A. Animal feeds

B. Cement

C. Chemicals and fertilizers

D. Drugs and medicines

E. Flour

F. Products which are classified as essential commodities in the list of National Economic and Development Authority except the following: rice, corn, some basic cuts of meat, cooking oil, laundry soap, lumber and plywood, galvanized iron sheets, writing pads and notebooks.

G. Iron, steel, copper, tin plates and other basic mineral products.

H. Milk

I. Newsprint

J. Tires

K. Sugar

L. Textile and garments

4. Companies engaged in the production and processing of products for export which are holders of Central Bank or Board of Investment Certificate of Export Orientation, including hotels and restaurants classified as three (3), four (4) or five (5) star by the Department of Tourism;

5. Companies engaged in exploration, development, mining, smelting or refining of coal, oil, iron, copper, gold, and other minerals;

6. Companies or firms engaged in banking, including:

A. Commercial Banks

B. Saving Banks

C. Development Banks

D. Investment Banks

E. Rural Banks

F. Savings and Loans Associations

G. Cooperative Banks

H. Credit Unions

7. Companies or firms which are actually engaged in government infrastructure projects and in activities covered by Defense contracts;

8. Hospitals as defined in Section 2, Rule 1-A, Book III of the Rules and Regulations Implementing the Labor Code of the Philippines;

9. Schools and Colleges duly recognized by the Government.

The Secretary of Labor may include and/or exclude from the above list any industry, firm, or company as the national interest, national security, or general welfare may require.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia