MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 708

In line with the objectives of the approved Five-Year Philippine Development Plan, to provide an efficient and practical transportation system for the urban commuters, and in order to implement the mass transportation program for Metropolitan Manila, particularly the Light Rail Transit System, which has been recommended by the Metropolitan Manila Transport, Land Use and Development Planning Project undertaken in 1977, I hereby direct the creation of a Light Rail Transit Committee composed of the Secretary of Public Works as Chairman, and the Secretaries of Finance, Public Highways and Economic Planning. The General Manager of the Philippine National Railways, and the Executive Secretary of the Metropolitan Manila Commission as Members, to undertake the following:

1. Preparation of a feasibility study for the Light Rail Transit (LRT) System in Metro Manila giving primary emphasis to the LRT Line No. 1, which extends from the Bonifacio Monument in Caloocan, thru Sta, Cruz in Manila, and to the vicinity of the Manila International Airport in Pasay City;

2. Establishment of technical parameters which will serve as the basis for the submission of offers/proposals by local and foreign concerns in constructing supplying, installing and financing the LRT Project.

3. Evaluation of offers/proposals that may be submitted to the Government within a certain period to be determined by the Committee itself, and recommendations to the President, on the award of the LRT project either in whole or by components.

The Committee shall be assisted by a technical steering group and a working group composed of duly designated representatives from the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, the Department of Public Highways, the Department of Finance, the National Economic and Development Authority, the Philippine National Railways, and the Metropolitan Manila Commission.

The Committee may call upon any government entity, or employ any person whose expertise may be required in pursuing its work as herein stated.

The Committee shall submit regular progress reports to the Office of the President.

The Committee may draw from available funds of the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, the Philippine National Railways, the Metropolitan Manila Commission, and the National Economic and Development Authority to support the requirements of the Committee.

Reimbursement of actual transportation and representation expenses is hereby authorized to be granted to members of the Committee, the steering group and the working group.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia