MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 593

REQUIRING ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN SERVICES FOR NATIONAL BUILDINGS TO BE DONE BY THE BUREAU OF PUBLIC WORKS

WHEREAS, the most effective utilization of the limited funds available for building construction calls for economy in the all phases of construction;

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Public Works is assigned the task, among others, of undertaking the architectural and engineering design work of national buildings;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and instruct:

1. The architectural and engineering design work of national government buildings, including those financed from loans, shall be done by the Bureau of Public Works, except as may be otherwise approved by the President and except for minor projects where the implementing agency is able to do the necessary architectural and engineering services work.

2. Buildings constructed by government owned or controlled corporations payable from accumulated operating earnings shall not be covered by these Instructions.

3. The design of buildings shall observe accepted standards of Philippine architecture as may be approved by the head of the agency which will use the proposed building: Provided, That building designs as a rule shall be prepared on the assumption that no air conditioning shall be used and Provided, Further, That Standard and replaceable designs shall be adopted whenever practicable in order to save time and effort in design work.

4. The Bureau of Public Works shall directly undertake the work assigned to it under these Instructions and may not sub-contract the work to outsiders except as may be otherwise approved by the President: Provided, That the Bureau may hire individual consultants to assist in the design work at such standard rates as may be approved by the Commissioner of the Budget upon recommendation of the Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communication.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia