MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1365

EXEMPTING THE ENTRY OF MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT, SPARE PARTS, SUPPLIES AND MODELS OR SAMPLES AND REPLICAS THEREOF FOR USE IN THE 8TH WORLD CONGRESS OF ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS

The 8th World Congress of Anaesthesiologists will be held in Manila on January 22-27, 1984. This will involve as part of the congress an exhibition and presentation of machinery, equipment, spare parts, supplies and models or samples and replicas thereof and will require the entry of these articles into the country together with the foreign delegates.

In view thereof, you are hereby directed to allow and authorize the entry of machinery, equipment, spare parts, supplies and models or samples and replicas thereof the type, free and exempt from the payment of customs duties, taxes and all other assessments, provided a certificate of the President of the Congress and Chairman of the Organizing Committee is presented stating that such items are 1) necessary 2) of reasonable quantities and 3) to be used exclusively in presentations/exhibits on the occasion of, and in connection with, 8th World Congress of Anaesthesiologists.

In the event that any such imported machinery, equipment, spare parts, supplies and models or samples and replicas thereof are sold or otherwise disposed of to any person or entity other than a tax-exempt individual or entity, all customs duties, taxes and other assessments due thereon computed as at the date of the importation shall be levied, collected and paid. Disposition, by sale or otherwise, of such machinery, equipment, spare parts, supplies and models or samples and replicas thereof should be made through the 8th World Congress of Anaesthesiologists.

Foreign exhibitors who sell or otherwise dispose of any machinery, equipment, spare parts, supplies and models or samples and replicas thereof imported pursuant to this Letter of Instructions shall be entitled to repatriate the proceeds of the sale or other disposition, minus customs duties, taxes, and other assessments due thereon, at the prevailing rate of exchange. Provided, that the amount to be repatriated shall not exceed the ceiling prescribed by the Central Bank.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia