MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 541

TO: The Director-General National Economic and Development Authority

All Heads of Departments and Agencies Concerned

WHEREAS, development planning has been recognized by the Government as a necessary instrument to promote the optimum utilization of available resources in the economy;

WHEREAS, the National Economic and Development Authority, as the central planning body, was created as mandated in the Constitution to formulate integrated comprehensive social and economic development plans for the country;

WHEREAS, the capability for national, regional and local level planning are simultaneously and continuously being developed through the creation of new planning institutions and strengthening of existing ones at all government levels;

WHEREAS, there is need to clearly delineate local, regional and national planning activities to rationalize development planning endeavors and make them promotive of national growth and development;

NOW, THEREFORE, in order to avert the duplication of planning functions among existing planning bodies and effect the horizontal and vertical integration of planning efforts, you are hereby directed to undertake the following measures:

1. Study the existing distribution of planning functions among various government agencies and recommend such measures as may be necessary to eliminate duplication of planning activities among existing agencies.

2. Develop a planning code which will embody planning goals and approaches for national, regional and local development and define the responsibilities of existing government agencies, regional authorities and local government units in formulating plans for specific subject matter areas.

For this purpose, all government agencies and instrumentalities concerned are directed to extend cooperation and assistance to the NEDA.

The Director-General of the NEDA shall submit the proposed planning code to the President for his approval within six months from the promulgation of this order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia