MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 502

RELATIVE TO THE COMPENSATION OF PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS

TO: The Secretary of Education and Culture The Acting Commissioner of the Budget The Chairman, Civil Service Commission

WHEREAS, there are 259,618 public school teachers, active participants in major government programs not only in teaching but also in population education, “Operation Timbang”, “Alay-Tanim”, referenda, and other activities requiring mass effort;

WHEREAS, the compensation of teachers have lagged behind cost of living and private sector compensation;

WHEREAS, the Calendar Year 1977 budget provides for some salary adjustment funds;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct:

1. The upgrading by one salary range, or 5%, of salaries of all classes of positions under the Teachers Preparation Pay Schedule, effective January 1, 1977 and as exemplified in the attached listing.

2. The implementation in full of the policy of automatically upgrading salary of teachers with advanced academic preparation and teaching or equivalent experience, as embodied in their respective Equivalent Record Forms (ERF), effective January 1, 1977.

3. The development and implementation of a system of one-step merit increases to be given to teachers showing exemplary performance during the past 2 1/2 years, as reflected in Performance Rating Sheets and other means of evaluation, effective the time of approval.

4. The development and implementation of a two-pronged compensation plan for teachers and administrators, with the aim of (a) adopting the Teachers Preparation Pay Schedule for the teaching, supervision/planning and administrative groups, and (b) providing allowances and other forms of additional compensation to personnel covered by the Teachers Preparation Pay Schedule and who are assigned supervision/planning and administration responsibilities, effective the time of determination and circularization.

5. The amount of P157 million to be set aside within the CY 1977 budget appropriated under P.D. No. 1050, for the implementation of the compensation package for teachers, to be ear-marked as follows: (a) P86 million — range upgrading, and ERF implementation, (b) P64 million for the entire year — selective merit increases, and (c) P7 million for the entire year — two-pronged compensation program for teachers and administrators.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Reference: Teachers Preparation Pay Schedule Salary Range Increase as of January 1, 1977 Examples (Amounts per Annum)

Source: CDAsia