MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1187

TO: The President The University of the Philippines

WHEREAS, pursuant to an Agreement entered into between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Government of Japan dated July 16, 1981, the latter had agreed to extend a grant of up to 1.3 billion yen to finance the Philippine Social Science Center. Project which involves the establishment of a center building and the provision of facilities thereat for the use of the Philippine Social Science Council (PSSC);

WHEREAS, the University of the Philippines has agreed to provide a specific area within its campus in Diliman, Quezon City where the abovementioned Center shall be constructed.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby designate the University of the Philippines as the government implementing entity to take charge of the execution of the abovementioned project in accordance with the following guidelines and instructions:

1. As the designated implementing organization, the University shall assume the responsibilities of the Philippine government under Paragraphs 4, 5, and 6 of the Exchange of Notes between the Philippine and Japanese governments, dated July 16, 1981, covering the aforementioned grant assistance, provided , that all expenses, other than those to be financed under the grant, which are necessary for the establishment of the Center, shall be borne by the PSSC.

2. The construction of the Center and the installation of facilities and equipment thereat shall be in accordance with the standards of the University.

3. All products and services to be supplied by Japanese and other foreign nationals for the construction of the Center and its facilities pursuant to the above-mentioned Exchange of Notes, shall be exempt from all customs duties, internal taxes and other fiscal levies.

4. The Center, as well as the facilities and equipment to be provided under the grant, shall be used by the PSSC for its programs and activities for as long as PSSC exists but ownership thereof shall vest with the University of the Philippines System. In the event the PSSC ceases to exist or should it no longer have need for the Center and the facilities and equipment thereat, the same shall be turned-over to the University of the Philippines System which shall use it solely for educational purposes.

5. The University shall submit a report to the President through the National Economic and Development Authority, upon completion of the abovementioned project.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 13th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: Malacañang Records Office