Office of the President Malacañang, Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 840

DIRECTING THE STUDY OF SALARY PLANS FOR THE JUDICIARY, OF CERTAIN AGENCIES OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH, AND OF THE COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS

TO : The Minister of the Budget

Whereas, the Constitution provides for the adoption of a single compensation plan for all agencies of government;

Whereas, P.D. No. 985 and other Decrees have been issued to implement the Constitutional mandate;

Whereas, increases in the cost of living call for increased salaries of government personnel;

Whereas, the previous exemption of certain agencies of the government from the coverage of the national compensation and classification plan calls for a specific study of their compensation plans preparatory to the adoption of measures to increase salary.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, wishing to ensure a fully rational compensation system in the Government, do hereby Order and Instruct:

1. The Minister of the Budget shall study the existing compensation plans (a) Judiciary personnel, (b) the foreign service including service attaches, and (c) the uniformed personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Integrated National Police, with the purpose of recommending on salary increase measures consistent with the policy of Government to achieve a uniform salary plans for all agencies.

2. In addition to the increase authorized under Letter of Implementation No. 82, the Minister of the Budget shall further study the compensation plan of the Commission on Elections, for the purpose of proposing a schedule of implementation of the salary scale indicated in the staffing pattern of the Comelec earlier approved in principle by the President.

3. In his study, the Minister of the Budget shall closely coordinate with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Minister of National Defense, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Chairman of the Commission on Elections, and other officials concerned.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of March, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia