MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 824

WHEREAS, the proper enforcement and effective execution of the laws of the land should be the duty and responsibility of the national government;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 337, dated November 17, 1975, Police Advisory Councils, composed of local civil officials, civic spirited citizens and/or representatives of sectoral organizations, were created to advise the Integrated National Police on matters pertaining to peace and order and public safety, assist in community relations and public information, and enhance or promote citizens’ involvement in the said programs;

WHEREAS, the nationwide upsurge of criminality perpetrated by organized/syndicated groups, some with connections in foreign countries, is causing tremendous losses to the economy and undermining public confidence in the Government, necessitating additional measures to safeguard the country from such criminal and terroristic acts;

WHEREAS, to provide a cohesive, coordinated and centralized direction of national on-going programs on the prevention, suppression and eradication of crimes committed by syndicates, gangs and other groups organized for the purpose of violating the laws of the land, it is imperative to create a committee to handle this pressing problem;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND, E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. A National Committee on Anti-Organized Crime is hereby established and constituted with the Minister of National Defense as Chairman and with the following as members: the Minister of Human Settlements, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Education and Culture, the Minister of Local Government and Community Development, the Minister of Trade, the Minister of Public Information, the Minister of Public Works, Transportation and Communication, the Chairman, National Police Commission, the Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Director General, National Intelligence and Security Authority, the Chief of Constabulary/Director General, Integrated National Police, the Director, National Bureau of Investigation, the Director, Bureau of Prisons and the Administrator, Civil Aeronautics Administration.

2. The Committee shall be responsible for the formulation and implementation of plans and policies and the supervision, coordination, direction and control of all activities relative to the integration of the five-pillar approach to the national criminal justice system, particularly on organized crimes.

3. The Committee, likewise, shall provide for the development of a national crime information system, establishment of a national crime research body and the organization of appropriate anti-organized units at all levels of the government.

4. The Committee members shall provide the necessary staff and administrative support as the need arises.

5. The Committee is authorized to call directly on other ministries, bureaus, offices and other instrumentalities or agencies of the government and to encourage active participation and involvement of the private sectors in the accomplishment of the above tasks.

6. In the implementation of this Letter of Instructions, the Committee may issue appropriate rules and regulations under the signature of its Chairman.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia