MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 568

TO:

The Acting Commissioner of Budget The Members of the Board, Philippine Aerospace Development Corporation The General Manager, Government Service Insurance System

WHEREAS, seventy-four per cent of the scheduled route miles of the rural air service program of the Philippine Aerospace Development Corporation is in the island of Mindanao;

WHEREAS, government officials and employees travel through the rural air service on official business and on unofficial times to visit thier families from their official station of work and return;

WHEREAS, to encourage assignments of government officials and employees in the Mindanao area and by way of an incentive for them to stay, there is a need to reduce the air fare for the benefit of government agencies concerned and the officials and employees when they travel unofficial through the rural air service.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

1. The Acting Commissioner of the Budget is hereby directed to release the amount of P1,800,000.00 yearly to the Philippine Aerospace Development Corporation as the additional equity contribution of the National Government to the authorized capital stock;

2. The Philippine Aerospace Development Corporation is hereby directed to give 50% discount on official and unofficial travel to government officials and employees on any of the rural air service upon presentation of the GSIS ID cards;

3. The General Manager of the Government Service Insurance System is hereby instructed to give preference and expedite the issuance of the GSIS Identification Cards to government officials and employees who are assigned in the Mindanao area, as certified by the office concerned.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia