MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1309

To: The Minister of Human Settlements

RECONSTITUTING AND STRENGTHENING THE TONDO FORESHORE AND DAGAT-DAGATAN SHELTER-CUM-LIVELIHOOD COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, the National Housing Authority (NHA) by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 757 was vested with the function to develop and implement comprehensive and integrated urban renewal programs for the Tondo Foreshore-land and the Dagat-dagatan lagoon;

WHEREAS, in pursuance of the above mandate, and in the implementation of programs and projects in the Dagat-dagatan area, including those financed by the World Bank, and other international institutions, NHA and other concerned offices need the total support and cooperation-of all agencies involved in shelter and livelihood.

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Human Settlements (MHS), created by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 1396 in 1978 has subsequently developed the total shelter system in the prosecution of the Government’s National Shelter Program, rationalizing and integrating the basic components of housing namely: regulation, production and finance, as well as laid down the financial infrastructure for the livelihood program under the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK).

WHEREAS, the success of the National Shelter Program depends largely on the active involvement and participation of the private sector, and that the viability of the Dagat-dagatan Project, both for the Government and the resident beneficiaries would be significantly enhanced by the availability of long-term finance through the Pag-IBIG Home Lending Program and the Secondary Mortgage Market System;

WHEREAS, the guiding principle in the prosecution of projects should be the viability of the Project and recovery of Government’s investments and borrowings;

WHEREAS, for various reasons there have been delays and cost escalations in the implementation of the project;

WHEREAS, Dagat-dagatan has been included as Area for Priority Development and Urban Land Reform Zone; and

WHEREAS, the MHS, in order to ensure successful implementation of the Project and assure the viability of the same in the light of covenants entered into with the World Bank and other international institutions and thus, ultimately achieve the objective of providing livelihood opportunities and decent dwelling units to the residents thereat, has created a Tondo Foreshore and Dagat-dagatan Shelter-Cum-Livelihood Coordinating Committee to oversee the implementation of housing and livelihood related projects in the Dagat-dagatan Project area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby direct the Minister of Human Settlements to immediately activate and operationalize the Tondo Foreshore and Dagat-dagatan Shelter-Cum-Livelihood Coordinating Committee which is hereby institutionalized and strengthened with the grant of the powers and functions herein provided.

SECTION 1. Composition of the Committee . The Tondo Foreshore and Dagat-dagatan Shelter-Cum-Livelihood Committee created by the MHS is hereby reconstituted and expanded as follows

Chairman

Minister of Human Settlements

Vice Chairman

Deputy Minister of Human Settlements

Members

Minister of Public Works and Highways or duly authorized representative

Administrator, National Food Authority or duly authorized representative

Vice Governor, Metropolitan Manila Commission

General Manager, National Housing Authority

President, Home Financing Corporation

Commissioner, Human Settlements Regulatory Commission

Chief Executive Officer Home Development Mutual Fund

Executive Vice President National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation

Action Officer for Infrastructure Development, Metropolitan Manila Commission

Sr. Deputy General Manager Human Settlements Development Corporation

Assistant Minister for Livelihood Livelihood Development Group, MHS

General Manager, Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System

A representative of the Philippine Long Distance Company (PLDT)

A representative of Manila Electric Company (MERALCO)

SECTION 2. Powers and Functions. For the effective and proper accomplishment of its purposes and objectives, the Committee shall have the following powers and functions:

a) Review status of land documentation on the Project which is the key to active private sector participation;

b) Prepare an action program to accelerate implementation of the Project;

c) Coordinate with the World Bank and other international institutions to ensure viability of the programs and projects being implemented in conformity with the covenants entered into with the aforesaid bank and/or institutions;

d) Review, evaluate and approve the Shelter-Cum-Livelihood Program plans and projects taking into consideration current income levels of intended beneficiaries;

e) Coordinate the operations of the Tondo Foreshore and Dagat-dagatan Shelter-Cum-Livelihood Program;

f) Act as policy and decision-making body of the Tondo Foreshore and Dagat-dagatan Shelter-Cum-Livelihood Program;

g) Authorize implementation of housing and livelihood projects in the said area;

h) Review affordability criteria of intended beneficiaries under the project within the context of current income levels and the Pag-IBIG Home Lending Program;

i) Design flexihome models adaptable to the various lot sizes developed in the area and within the affordability level of the target beneficiaries;

j) Develop buyer selection plan based on affordable options for each market segment as well as prepare marketing plan and buyer prequalification/application system;

k) Prepare marketing strategies for commercial/ industrial land covered by the project;

l) Develop revised financial plan compatible with applicable loan covenants and project feasibility;

m) Design project implementation organization and assign agency responsibilities;

n) Approve and authorize recruitment and hiring of personnel needed to support operations; and

o) Perform such other functions which are implied from or incident to the foregoing as may be provided by the Minister of Human Settlements.

SECTION 3. Coordination with the World Bank and other International Institutions. The Minister of Human Settlements is hereby directed to constitute a Sub-Committee from among the committee members to be chaired by the MHS Deputy Minister to (a) coordinate with the World Bank and other international institutions for the proper implementation of foreign assisted programs and projects for the Dagat-Dagatan Area to ensure their viability, (b) review status of project implementation and (c) negotiate, if necessary, with the said bank or institutions for amendments of existing covenants in order that projects and programs under the same may qualify under the shelter finance sub-system, particularly, the Pag-IBIG Home Lending Program and the Secondary Mortgage Market System.

SECTION 4. Expropriation. The Minister of Human Settlements, as Chairman of the Urban Land Reform Coordinating Council, through the Human Settlements Development Corporation, is hereby directed to initiate expropriation proceedings or negotiate for the acquisition of lands within the Dagat-dagatan area using available funds under LOI 932 in pursuance of the provisions of P.D. 1517.

SECTION 5. Livelihood Projects under Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK). The Minister of Human Settlements, as Chairman of the Committee herein reconstituted, is further directed to take over any appropriate commercial/industrial area in Dagat-dagatan for the establishment of Livelihood projects under the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK).

SECTION 6. General Provision. The Minister of Human Settlements is hereby directed to do all acts necessary for the committee’s proper exercise of its functions including the constitution of interagency working groups or committees consisting of representatives of agencies involved in shelter and livelihood including those from other ministries, bureaus or offices, in addition to the provisions for administrative, secretariat and financial support as provided in Ministry of Human Settlements Order No. 0010-3M, series of 1983, which is made an integral part of this Letter of Instruction by reference.

Ministries, bureaus, offices and agencies concerned are hereby directed to extend their utmost assistance and cooperation for the immediate and proper implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

SECTION 7. Effectivity . This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Makati, this 13th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Letter of Instruction No. 1309, April 13, 1983