MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1172

PROVIDING FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF SAN JUAN BAÑO AND ITS VICINITY INTO A TOURIST SPOT AND THE ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT, CONTROL AND SUPERVISION THEREOF.

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 597 was issued to bolster the development of Mount Arayat and its environs that it may serve as a shining memorial to the struggles and sacrifices of the inhabitants, more particularly the peasantry, in their quest for a modest and respectable place in society;

WHEREAS, ensconced in the slopes of Mount Arayat is San Juan Baño Resort, a recreation area that possesses potentials which, if fully explored, expanded and developed, will fill an urgent and long-felt need of the people of Pampanga for a recreation center that is not only accessible but within their means;

WHEREAS, it has become a policy of the government to boost tourism by establishing tourist spots all over the archipelago;

WHEREAS, the development of San Juan Baño Resort is also in line with the above stated policy;

WHEREAS, considering that San Juan Baño Resort lies within the territorial boundaries of the Province of Pampanga, the provincial government of Pampanga is in a much better position to oversee the improvement, beautification, expansion, and development thereof into a tourist spot and to administer, manage and supervise its operation.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct:

1. The authority and responsibility for the development, operation and administration of the San Juan Baño Resort is hereby transferred from the Bureau of Forest Development to the Province of Pampanga which shall act in coordination with the Ministry of Natural Resources and Ministry of Tourism. For this purpose, the Governor of Pampanga, as chairman; the Minister of Tourism and the Minister of Natural Resources, as members, or their representatives, shall constitute a council which shall lay down the policies, plans and programs of development and administration of the San Juan Baño Resort. The council shall meet as the need arises at such time and place that its chairman may designate.

2. The Governor of Pampanga or his representative shall be responsible for implementation of the policies, plans and programs laid down by the council and the administration of the San Juan Baño Resort. In the performance of this function, the Governor of Pampanga or his representative, may call on government ministries, offices or instrumentalities, particularly the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Natural Resources, for financial, material, or other forms of assistance, including but not limited to the provision of funds and personnel.

3. The council may expand the San Juan Baño Resort from its present area of six (6) hectares to ten (10) hectares from the surrounding areas of Mount Arayat National Park.

4. The Province of Pampanga may impose and collect fees from persons or entities entering the San Juan Baño Resort or making use of its facilities, and may accept contributions, donations or aids intended for the resort. All funds that may be derived from the operation of the resort shall be administered by the Province and utilized for the operation of the resort and the implementation of the policies, plans and programs laid down by the council for the development and administration of the resort.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-one.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia