MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 235

To expedite the rehabilitation of destroyed/damaged fish pens in Laguna Lake which has been unduly delayed because of constraints imposed by existing policies, rules and regulations, and to stop the proliferation of unlicensed fish pens in said lake, the following instructions are issued for the guidance of all concerned:

1. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources shall, subject to guidelines, rules and regulations which the Secretary of Natural Resources shall promulgate, grant a temporary license for a period of three (3) years to existing fish pens operators who have heretofore been operating without a license from the Bureau, to enable said operators to avail themselves of financial assistance from the Development Bank of the Philippines or any government financial institution, and to restructure their fish pens to conform with rules and regulations governing the size and location of fish pens: Provided , That no temporary license shall be issued if the fish pen or any portion thereof is inside a sea lane or a fish sanctuary.

It shall be a condition to the issuance of the temporary license that the fish pens be restructured not later than December 31, 1977.

2. The Development Bank of the Philippines or any government financial institution shall extend to fish pen operators duly licensed by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources such financial assistance as may be necessary to rehabilitate and bring to productive operation such fish pens: Provided , That the period of repayment shall not exceed two (2) years: Provided , Further , That in case of failure of the operator-borrower to pay the loan, the creditor-agency may, subject to the approval of the Secretary of Natural Resources upon recommendation of the Director of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, negotiate for the transfer of the rights/interests of the operator-borrower to a duly qualified person or entity: Provided , Finally, That the transferee shall not be entitled to any extension of the period of repayment of the loan.

3. No license, permit or authorization of any kind whatsoever shall be issued by municipal authorities to allow the construction and operation of fish pens in Laguna Lake unless a license to operate such fish pens is first secured from the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources. The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development shall enforce strictly this instruction. Fish pens constructed in violation hereof shall be demolished and the assistance, if necessary, of the Philippine Constabulary shall be secured to effect compliance therewith.

Letters of Instructions, Executive Orders, Circulars, Rules, Regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Letter of Instructions are hereby revoked or modified accordingly.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia