MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO.

CREATING THE PERFORMANCE AUDIT TEAM ON LOCAL ELECTIVE OFFICIALS.

WHEREAS, in the national referendum held on February 27 and 28, 1975, the Filipino people have expressed their overwhelming support to the manner in which the incumbent administration is carrying out and discharging its tasks and functions, have given me their vote of confidence and the authority to appoint local elective officials after the expiration of their terms of office on December 31, 1975;

WHEREAS, to enable me to make an intelligent choice of the local elective officials whom to retain, there is a need for specific report to guide me in the assessment and evaluation of the performance of incumbent local elective officials; and

WHEREAS, to attain this aim, it is imperative that a performance audit team on local elective officials be created for the purpose;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby create a Performance Audit Team on local elective officials to be composed of the following:

1. The Performance Audit Team shall assess, evaluate and report on the performance of all local elective officials in the Philippines, except barangay officials.

2. In carrying out its tasks under this letter of instructions, the Presidential Audit Team shall be guided by the following audit criteria, among others:

a. Development projects implemented. b. Efforts exerted to improve the quality of life of the common citizen, particularly the poor and underprivileged. c. Peace and order situation. d. Integrity of local officials.

3. The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development, as Chairman of the Performance Audit Team, shall divide the country into several audit regions and assign regional audit teams thereto.

4. The Chairman of the Performance Audit Team shall determine additional audit criteria as may be deemed proper, work out and prescribe specific procedures to be uniformly observed by the audit teams, develop and reproduce audit forms to be used by the teams, brief the audit teams to ensure uniformity of instructions, conduct a public information program that would fully explain the criteria and procedures of the audit, and do such other acts as are inherently necessary in carrying out the provisions of this letter of instructions.

5. The Performance Audit Team shall submit its complete report to me directly, through my Presidential Assistants, not later than May 31, 1975.

These instructions shall be implemented immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia