MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 745

SUBJECT: CREATION OF THE PHILIPPINE COMMISSION ON THE PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF SPORTS SCUBA DIVING

WHEREAS, the Philippines is a country renowned for aquatic resources;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Marine Resources can be a source of livelihood and recreation for a large segment;

WHEREAS, there has been a substantial increase in the number of scuba diving enthusiasts and is, therefore, necessary to formulate safety standards to safeguard human lives and to ensure the orderly conduct of underwater activities;

WHEREAS, it has been determined that scuba diving and related activities had already contributed to the development of tourism and is currently the second largest special interest tourist activity;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to establish a regulatory board to ensure the continued development of SPORTS SCUBA DIVING.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President-Prime Minister, do hereby direct the following:

1. That there be created a Philippine Commission on promotion and development of Sports Scuba Diving

That the Commission shall be composed of the Minister of Tourism as Chairman, one member from the Ministry of National Defense, one member from the Ministry of Natural Resources, and five other members from the diving communities and industries to be appointed by the Chairman.

2. That the function of the Commission shall be as follows:

A. To promulgate program and projects geared to the development of the country as a premier diving area in Asia.

B. To formulate rules, regulations, safety standards and operating procedures to implement the development of Sports Scuba Diving.

C. The Commission shall undertake studies, researches and surveys for possible incentives to the private sector who may wish to undertake projects and programs beneficial to the development of Scuba Diving Tourism within the framework of related Presidential Decrees.

D. The Commission is expressly directed to formulate and implement programs on marine conservation, particularly those areas of high touristic value.

3. That this Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia