MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 677

In connection with the Twelfth International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environment which will be held in Manila on 20 to 26 April 1978, the following instructions are hereby issued:

1. Importation of equipment, goods and articles which will be used exclusively in presentations/exhibits to be shown on the occasion of, and connected with, the Twelfth International Symposium on Remote Sensing of Environmental shall, upon certification by the Secretary of Natural Resources and recommendation of the Executive Director, National Environmental Protection Council, be exempt from the payment of customs duties, taxes and other assessments: Provided , That importation of such equipment, goods and articles is not prohibited under existing laws: Provided , further , That such equipment, goods and articles are re-exported within thirty (30) days after termination of the Symposium: Provided , finally , That the Secretary of Natural Resources may, in meritorious cases, grant an extension of not exceeding thirty (30) days to effect said re-exportation.

2. In the event that any such imported equipment, goods and article is sold or otherwise disposed of to any person or entity other than a tax-exempt individual or entity, all customs duties, taxes and other assessments due thereon shall be levied, collected and paid. Disposition, by sale or otherwise, of such equipment, goods and articles shall be made through the Department of Natural Resources.

3. Foreign exhibitors who sell or otherwise dispose of any equipment, goods and article imported pursuant to this Letter of Instructions shall be entitled to repatriate the proceeds of the sale or other disposition, minus customs duties, taxes and other assessments due thereon, at the prevailing rate of exchange: Provided , That the amount to be repatriated, shall not at any time, exceed the ceiling prescribed by the Central Bank.

4. Any person or entity who desires to participate in and/or put up exhibits on the occasion of, and connected with, the Symposium shall register with, and pay the fee to, the Department of Natural Resources. Said fee shall be payable in US dollars which shall, upon termination of the Symposium, be remitted to the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan (ERIM).

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia