MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1409

WHEREAS, majority of the people living in Zamboanga del Sur depend upon barter trading as their principal means of livelihood;

WHEREAS, barter trading in the area was suspended in April 1983 resulting in the loss of livelihood and economic difficulties among the people;

WHEREAS, the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK) is developing the self-help program and promoting exportation of products produced in the region;

WHEREAS, there is a pressing need for imported raw materials and supplies needed by export-oriented and essential domestic industries; and

WHEREAS, to restore the people’s primary means of livelihood and assist export-oriented and essential domestic industries in procuring imported raw materials and supplies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

1. The barter trading in the Zamboanga area shall be reopened to members of KKK accredited associations of barter traders subject to the following condition:

(a) Barter trading may be undertaken only for purposes of exporting products of KKK producers and accredited companies, as well as importing critical basic consumer items and raw materials and supplies needed by export-oriented and essential domestic industries certified by the KKK-Processing Center Authority. The importations shall constitute seventy percent (70%) raw materials and thirty percent (30%) finished goods;

(b) The KKK accredited association may designate one major vessel a month to carry its barter trade goods subject to approval/clearance of and upon compliance with such requirements a may be imposed by, the KKK-Processing Center Authority.

2. The KKK-Processing Center Authority is hereby authorized to issue such guidelines and establish such working relationships for the implementation of this program.

3. The rules and regulations promulgated to implement Presidential Decree No. 93 which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this LOI, shall continue to be enforced.

4. This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of May, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eightyfour.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia