Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1224

In the implementation of the Government’s initiative in the intensification of research to accelerate food production and develop viable alternative energy resources, there was established at the University of the Philippines System at Los Baños, the National Institutes of Biotechnology and Applied Microbiology (BIOTECH) as a research and development facility to provide technical support for the establishment and improvement of microbially-based industries especially in the production of fuel alcohol, chemical feedstocks from biomass, fermented food products, antibiotics and microbially-based fertilizer substitutes.

The construction of the BIOTECH Building has been ongoing and is expected to be completed and inaugurated in June, 1982. The building, to be fully operational, needs the furnishing and installation of mechanical works, specialized laboratory equipment and utility systems.

To finance these needed mechanical works, specialized laboratory equipment and utility systems for the BIOTECH Building, the National Treasurer is hereby directed to set aside for immediate release to the President of the Philippine National Oil Company the sum of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5,000,000.00) out of the Special Fund created under Section 8 of Presidential Decree No. 910, as amended by Presidential Decree Nos. 1206 and 1573.

The Philippine National Oil Company shall coordinate with and extend direct assistance to BIOTECH in the procurement, bids, awards and purchase of these mechanical, laboratory and utility equipment.

The foregoing amount shall be used exclusively for this purpose and may not be diverted for other projects or other requirements of BIOTECH and of the University of the Philippines System.

The utilization of the amount released under this Letter of Instruction shall be in exception to Letter of Instruction No. 1198 dated February 24, 1982.

The President of the Philippine National Oil Company and the Executive Director of BIOTECH shall render a joint report to the President no later than December 31, 1982, an accounting for all disbursements from the amount so released pursuant to this Letter of Instruction.

This Letter of Instruction shall be effective immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 14th day of April, 1982.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia