MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 724

WHEREAS, the Philippines has been invited to host a world conference being organized by the International Congress on New Enterprise (Project ICONE) which is supported by the World Bank, the United States Agency for International Development, the United States Department of Commerce, the Control Data Corporation and the Entrepreneurship Institute;

WHEREAS, Project ICONE’s objective is to mobilize managerial and technical resources of successful small firms in the industrialized countries to assist the establishment and growth of viable small and medium scale enterprises in developing countries, which is in accord with our national efforts towards small and medium scale industry development;

WHEREAS, I have authorized the acceptance of the offer to host the ICONE World Conference to be held in May or June, 1979 in view of the many benefits the country stands to gain in terms of greater possibilities for joint ventures in small and medium scale industry with attendant transfer of capital, appropriate technology and entrepreneurial development opportunities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, hereby direct that

1. A Steering Committee shall be established to plan, direct, coordinate and/or itself pursue the work to set up the systems and procedures and to obtain whatever resources are deemed necessary for the successful holding of the ICONE World Conference.

The Steering Committee shall be under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Industry with the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Central Bank as co-chairman. The Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Economic Planning, Trade, Tourism and Public Information, and the Chairman of the Development Bank of the Philippines, shall be its members.

2. All government ministries, corporations and agencies shall extend their assistance to the Steering Committee in its work. They are hereby authorized to make contributions in terms of funds, equipment, personnel and other resources deemed necessary for the Conference.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia