MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1484

Pursuant to the government mandate to fully utilize all proceeds of the Economic Support Fund (ESF) and in order to optimize such utilization, the following instructions are hereby given:

1. The following policies and guidelines for the disbursements of ESF proceeds are hereby established:

a) Joint Circular No. 1-85 dated September 19, 1985 of the Commission on Audit and the ESF Secretariat, prescribing procedures on the release and utilization of the funds as administered by the ESF Council and the ESF Secretariat, including the accounting treatment thereof, pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 1379 dated February 5, 1984, including subsequent amendments or issuances related thereto, shall be strictly complied with.

b) The interest earnings of ESF proceeds in a Special Account of the Bureau of Treasury shall be utilized as follows: (1) Sixty (60%) percent of the total interest earnings to additionally fund the implementation of ESF projects, including newly identified projects, variation orders and price escalations, in accordance with such criteria as may be approved by the ESF Council, provided that such projects shall be approved by the President prior to their implementation; (2) Forty (40%) percent to support the operations of the ESF Secretariat, including personnel maintenance and operating expeditures insurance premiums and other contingency requirements of completed ESF projects.

c) The National Treasurer of the Philippines shall submit to the President, through the ESF Secretariat, a periodic report on all ESF remittances, including the total amount representing the actual interest earnings of ESF proceeds.

2. All laws, executive orders, administrative orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any provision of this order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

3. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 21st day of November in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1985). [Letter of Instruction Nos.: 1425 – 1525]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.