MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 831

TO : The Minister of the Budget The Director of Animal Industry The President, Food Terminal Incorporated (FTI) The Assistant to the Governor and Chairman, Metro Manila Commission The Chief, Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police

WHEREAS, it is the primary concern of Government to moderate and stabilize food prices, including meat and meat products for the benefit of the consumers;

WHEREAS, the continuous world inflationary trends brought about by announced increases in the prices of oil, raw materials for industry and other unpredictable world developments, have rendered it imperative for Government to adopt and implement measures that will stabilize prices particularly of consumer goods;

WHEREAS, it has been proven that the sale of meat in designated places at a prescribed time under close supervision has not only helped to bring down and stabilize prices of meat but has also made it possible to pass on to consumers wholesome and clean meat.

WHEREAS, for the protection and benefit of the public, there is now need to bring farm produce in the most direct way to the end-consumer;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order the following:

1. The Director of Animal Industry shall:

a. in cooperation with accredited processors and livestock associations, develop and implement schemes that would stabilize prices of meat.

b. prepare and implement a program to insure that wholesome and clean meat be available to consumers at reasonable prices.

2. The President, Food Terminal Incorporated, shall make available to the Bureau of Animal Industry, refrigerated vans and extend all other necessary assistance to carry out this order.

3. The Assistant to the Governor and Chairman, Metro Manila Commission, shall make available to livestock and poultry producers, stalls in designated markets in Metro Manila and to render the necessary support thereof.

4. The Minister of the Budget shall immediately release funds authorized by this Office to cover cost of the Program.

5. The Chief, Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police shall extend the necessary support to insure attainment of the objective of this program.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia