MALACANANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 487

WHEREAS, It is the desire of government to tap all alternative energy sources as would result in two primary objectives:

1. energy conservation so as to minimize the use of oil-based sources of energy, and

2. tap energy sources from materials or techniques native or indigenous to the Philippines.

WHEREAS, one of the means to achieve these twin objectives is to exploit bio-gas derivable from solid and liquid wastes collection and disposal systems;

WHEREAS, there is need to place the study, research and implementation of this concept under one body in order to avoid proliferation of efforts and resources;

Accordingly you are hereby directed as follows:

1. Review and determine latest developments so far achieved, locally and abroad, in the field of exploitation of bio-gas for productive purposes.

2. Study the most economic and technologically feasible means by which bio-gas systems can be developed at subdivision/farm/barrio/municipal and/or city levels under varying conditions inherent to each, and

3. Determine the locations where pilot/experimental projects can most effectively be conducted at large enough scale like Vitas in Tondo, Tatalon Estate in Novaliches, the Bagong Nayon Project in Antipolo, the Maharlika Village in Taguig and other such similar places and thereafter conduct experiments as are necessary to achieve the foregoing aims.

To achieve the above directives, you are hereby constituted as an ad-hoc body, under the leadership of the General Manager of MWSS, empowered to:

1. Secure the services of eligible technical personnel from any government agency or hire private persons as consultants to form the Resource Group of Experts to prepare the actual study, research, experimentation and design and supervision of necessary works incidental to this project.

2. To employ or hire other administrative and professional personnel as this ad-hoc body may need in the conduct of your day to day affairs.

3. Grant honoraria/allowances to government personnel and reasonable compensation to private personnel/consultants as you may deem necessary.

4. Secure land or sites for this project from any government property or otherwise compensate private owners or site selected for this project.

You are all directed to contribute funds, personnel and facilities, which you as a body may determine as needed for this project.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia