MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 903

Whereas, due to the recent OPEC increases in the price of crude oil and the severe inflation of the last few years, the government has implemented an integrated package of increased prices and wages to ensure that the economy can withstand these new external pressures;

Whereas, as part of this package, the government has substantially increased minimum wages and allowances to take effect on April 1, 1979 but has exempted temporarily distressed industries, labor-intensive and export-oriented cottage and handicraft industries, labor-intensive export industries and other industries as defined in Letter of Instructions No. 829;

Whereas, the salaries and wages of government employees shall only be adjusted to meet the latest round of price increases beginning on May 1, 1979;

Whereas, the retail ceiling price of milled rice will be increased by the National Grains Authority to P2.45 per kilo effective April 1, 1979, and

Whereas, it is my desire that the above-mentioned groups be given assistance until their salaries and wages are adjusted upward;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ferdinand E. Marcos, President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby authorize, order and direct:

1. The National Grains Authority to establish a system of supplying rice at subsidized prices to the following:

a. All government employees and b. All employees of temporarily distressed industries, labor-intensive and export-oriented cottage and handicraft industries, labor-intensive export industries and other industries as defined in Letter of Instructions No. 829.

2. The National Grains Authority shall sell subsidized rice to the above-mentioned groups at P2.10 per kilo.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect on April 1, 1979 and shall remain in force and effect until the various categories of employees shall receive their wage adjustments.

Done on this 28th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine in the City of Manila.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia