MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1256

In order to hasten the development and to ensure successful completion and implementation of the Kang-Irag Sports Complex and Development Project in Barangays Babag, Malubog, Sibugay and Sirao, Cebu City, undertaken by the Philippine Tourism Authority (PTA), you are hereby directed to perform the following duties and responsibilities, to wit:

I. MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND CULTURE

1. Assist in the identification of educational needs within the project site; set-up formal education systems geared to possible link-up with PTA manpower requirements.

2. Coordinate and establish cultural programs closely related to sports development.

3. Develop sports program to promote sports consciousness within the Visayas region; link-up such programs using the sports facilities of the Kang-Irag Complex; promote sports competition with a view to tapping potential players for national and international competitions.

II. MINISTRY OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

1. Assist in the setting up of family and communal livelihood ventures to especially benefit those affected by the project.

2. Identify, develop, implement and manage medium to large scale livelihood projects using indigenous resources of the area.

3. Assist in the identification of beneficiaries and management of a housing project through the Bliss Program to accommodate some 200 families dislocated by the tourism development; such housing project shall be in conjunction with the aforementioned livelihood venture.

III. MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES through its Bureau of Forest Development

1. Immediately set-up a forest management program; secure and control areas for reforestation; establish nursery sites; reforest denuded areas; maintain and manage existing forest areas within and outside the 808 hectare Recreational Complex site.

2. Plan, develop, implement, and manage aquatic resources in the identified mini-basins and lake in the site.

3. Set-up programs for the continuing management of the ecosystem in the project site.

4. Through its Parks and Wildlife Office, identify, secure and control existing wildlife in the area.

5. Set-up a demonstration area to accommodate rare, exotic and endangered Philippine/Oriental tree species.

IV. MINISTRY OF PUBLIC WORKS AND HIGHWAYS

1. Undertake the road building program for main and access roads to Kang-Irag and the surrounding areas; maintain said roads.

2. Develop, implement and construct physical and social infrastructures in the site notably the public market, bus terminals, health center, and school house.

3. Explore and tap, in coordination with the Local Water Utilities Administration possible underground and other water sources for the Project’s water requirements.

V. MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS

1. Provide, extend the necessary communications network to the area and to facilities therein.

VI. MINISTRY OF AGRARIAN REFORM

1. Exempt the area from Operation Land Transfer.

2. Suspend or cancel the processing of applications for coverage under Land Reform in the area affected by these instructions.

VII. NATIONAL ELECTRIFICATION ADMINISTRATION

1. Provide the necessary electric network to the proposed facilities and existing populated areas within and outside the proposed Sports Complex site.

2. Assist in the exploitation of non-conventional power sources such as dendrothermal energy systems to satisfy the power requirements of domestic users, livelihood projects, and other facilities thereat.

VIII. NATIONAL POWER CORPORATION

1. Service the complex of its electrical power needs.

2. Explore the feasibility of exploiting mini-hydroelectric resources within the area.

These instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 14th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia