MALACAÑANG MANILA

Letter of Instructions No. 1038

Ordering Re-assessment of Procedures and Requirements Governing Claims for Payment on Infrastructure Projects.

To: All Ministries Concerned Commission on Audit

WHEREAS, tedious procedures and requirements governing claims for payment on infrastructure projects undermine the efficiency of government operations;

WHEREAS, contractors of government projects are required to submit numerous documents and clearances which result in an unreasonable delay in the payment;

WHEREAS, there is a need to review the activity flow on claims for payment of infrastructure projects to ensure more efficient and faster service to the public;

WHEREAS, the reduction of delays in the procedure and requirements in payment of infrastructure projects would help not only the contractor but the public as well.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. The Ministries concerned shall review their respective procedures and requirements with the end in view of eliminating delays or reducing processing time required for the approval and payment of claims for infrastructure projects. Towards this end a shorter working deadline shall be set for their respective officials and employees in the processing of documents under pain of administrative penal­ties for non-compliance thereof.

2. A committee composed of the following is hereby organized to formulate the standard guidelines for the processing of claims for payment on government infrastructure projects:

Chairman – Chief, Presidential Management Staff

Members – Minister, Ministry of the Budget Minister, Ministry of Public Highways Minister, Ministry of Public Work Chairman, Commission on Audit Director – General, National Economic and Development Authority

3. The Commission on Audit shall provide more competent technical personnel to supplement the Technical Service Office and work out a scheme for a more efficient system of inspection or to eliminate the inspection and do it on a random basis.

4. The selection of resident engineers should be improved. Roving senior engineers should be assigned to supervise resident engineers of agencies in the area.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of June, in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: Malacañang Records Office