MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1435

DIRECTING ALL CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS TO GET INVOLVED AND PARTICIPATE ACTIVELY IN THE NON-MILITARY ASPECTS OF COUNTERINSURGENCY OPERATIONS

In view of the critical role of civilian officials in counterinsurgency operations, especially in the rural areas where the presence and influence of government are most needed, and in view of the urgency to strengthen and enhance the confidence of the citizenry in the government, all civilian government officials, whether national, regional or local, are hereby directed to get involved and actively participate in the non-military aspects of counterinsurgency operations consistent with their respective functions and capabilities.

This said involvement may be in the nature of the following activities, among others:

1. Providing necessary leadership to the people and inspiring them to resist insurgent incursion to their community;

2. Giving priority attention, in the delivery of services, to critical areas determined in consultation with the military;

3. Maintaining close liaison with military units in said critical areas for the purpose of providing to the latter some technical advice and determining appropriate support to the combined security and development operations;

4. Participating actively in the activities of the Regional Development Council, Presidential Regional Monitoring Office, and Peace and Order Council, particularly as regards combined security and development operations;

5. Conducting periodic visitations to the barangays, especially those in the hinterlands, and holding pulung-pulong or consultation with the people either independently of or jointly with the military;

6. Providing information to the military pertinent to the conduct of combined security and development operations; and

7. Conducting studies, providing technical advices and making surveys pertaining to the problems of the people, particularly those in the remote areas, geared towards the improvement of their social, economic, and political conditions, such as looking for appropriate crop substitutes to be planted in former marijuana plantations.

Relatedly, the Secretariat of the Security Council of the New Society shall prepare a national plan to effect closer relations between the military and civilian sectors and to further integrate security and development efforts of government including, among others, mobilization of resources in times of emergency.

Likewise, the National Economic and Development Authority shall include in the national and regional development plans some portions pertaining to the relationship between security and development.

Respective heads of agencies and local governments shall issue their implementing instructions to insure that their subordinate officials comply with this directive.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia