MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 649-A

TO: All Concerned

WHEREAS, the Reunion for Peace Program (RFP), covered by Letter of Instructions No. 331, dated 29 October 1975, was to have ended on 31 December 1977;

WHEREAS, the RFP program, in its short duration, has successfully encouraged the peaceful and fruitful reunion in the Philippines of veterans and their families from the United States, Japan and Australia;

WHEREAS, the RFP program has projected the heartfelt desire and pursuit of the Filipino nation for world peace, and its appreciation of the contributions of the war veterans of the world towards true international brotherhood;

WHEREAS, the World Veterans Federation will hold its international convention in the Philippines in October 1979;

WHEREAS, there is the need to call the attention of the war veterans of the world to this significant occasion for the promotion of worldwide friendship and understanding;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, declare the extension of the RFP program for the two-year period between 1 January 1978 and 31 December 1979. In connection therewith, the following instructions are hereby issued:

1. The provisions of LOI 331, dated 29 October 1975, shall remain effective during the extension of the RFP program with the following amendments:

a. Paragraph 2 is amended to provide that incentives shall apply to veterans of any and every country in the world whose organizations are affiliated with the WVF, including the veterans immediate families, down to grandchildren, or their immediate survivors down to grandchildren.

b. Paragraph 6 is amended to provide that Philippine Air Lines shall give promotional fare discounts, as well as special group and family fares including charters, between the Philippines and any and all countries with veterans organizations affiliated with the WVF. All foreign airlines operating in the Philippines are wholeheartedly invited to participate in the RFP program.

2. The provisions of LOI No. 394, dated 9 April 1976, covering RFP incentives to Filipino veterans of World War II, and members of their families traveling with them, likewise remain effective during the extension of the RFP program.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia