MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1451

DIRECTING THE MINISTRIES AND AGENCIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND ITS INSTRUMENTALITIES, TO PARTICIPATE IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL CIVIC ACTION PROGRAM.

WHEREAS, it is the basic policy and continuing concern of government to provide essential public services to the people and to improve the social, economic and security conditions throughout the country, especially in depressed and critical areas;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 1004 has been issued to provide for the effective implementation of the National Infrastructure Program undertaken by the Ministry of Public Works and Highways;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that other Ministries and agencies of the National Government and its instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, actively participate in the National Civic Program in collaboration with the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP);

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby and order the following:

1. The various ministries and agencies of the National Government and its instrumentalities, including state universities and colleges and government-owned or controlled corporations, shall evaluate their programs and projects with a view to identifying some of these particularly those in hazardous areas for inclusion in the Civic Action Program thus enabling the assistance and participation of the Armed Forces in their implementation.

2. That accordingly the various ministries and agencies including government-owned and controlled corporations and state colleges and universities in the affected areas, in coordination with the Armed Forces of the Philippines, formulate out of these projects a Civic Action Program for their agency for incorporation in the National Civic Action Program.

3. The Minister of the Budget shall ensure that sufficient funds are provided for the various projects covered by the National Civic Action Program within the approved budget program of the National Government.

4. The heads of the ministries, state universities and colleges and government corporations concerned and the Minister of National Defense, in consultation with the Minister of the Budget and the Chairman of the Commission on Audit, shall prescribe the necessary rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Letter of Instructions.

This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia