MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 819

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Social Services and Development is the principal arm of the Government in providing welfare services and benefits to our people, particularly the poor and underprivileged in our society;

WHEREAS, in line with its functions and responsibilities, the aforesaid Ministry receives, from time to time, donations in the form of food supplies, equipment, and other materials, from foreign sources, such as from foreign governments or states, philanthropic organizations and institutions, voluntary relief agencies and other benevolent donors, which are based in foreign countries;

WHEREAS, such foreign donations which are received by the aforesaid Ministry serve to improve its overall resources and capability and have in fact become a steady support for its program involving relief and rehabilitation work and activities during public disasters and calamities, as well as for its regular program through which it ministers to the needs of the destitute and impoverished people in our society;

WHEREAS, it is deemed to be in the public interest that such foreign donations which are consigned to the Ministry of Social Services and Development shall be exempted from the payment of wharfage dues;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct the following:

1. The Minister of Finance shall grant exemption from the payment of wharfage dues on all foreign donations consigned to the Ministry of Social Services and Development.

2. The Minister of Finance shall issue such rules and regulations and perform such acts as may be necessary or appropriate for the proper implementation of these instructions.

These instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia