MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1062

DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF LIVELIHOOD SETTLEMENT AREA IN NORTH COTABATO AND MAGUINDANAO, REGION XII

TO : The Minister of Agrarian Reform The Minister of Agriculture The Minister of the Budget The Minister of Human Settlements The Minister of Natural Resources The Officer-in-Charge, Southern Philippines Development Authority

The Commanding General, Central Mindanao Command

The Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines

The Chairman, Presidential Committee on the Rehabilitation and Development of Southern Philippines (PCRDSP)

All Heads of Ministries, Bureaus, or Agencies, Government-owned or controlled corporations; and local Government units

WHEREAS, it is the Government’s policy to hasten the economic development of Southern Philippines and generate new sources of livelihood for mustered-out trainees, draftees/ICHDF’s, retired military personnel, MNLF’s, returnees and other persons involved or affected by the conflict in Southern Philippines;

WHEREAS, it is the government’s desire to involve the foregoing segment of society in economic activities designed to promote their own well being and self-sufficiency in their economic existence;

WHEREAS, the Southern Philippines Development Authority (SPDA) has been tasked as the specific government agency, under Presidential Decree No. 1703, to institute and implement economic development projects in Southern Philippines;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and instruct the following:

1. The Southern Philippines Development Authority CSPDA) to organize a plans and program committee composed of representatives from SPDA as Chairman, the Ministry of Agrarian Reform, Bureau of Forest Development, Bureau of Lands and the Bureau of Soils as members, which shall prepare the area development plans, work programs, cost estimates and other technical plans and designs necessary for the total development of settlements and compact/ cooperative farms.

2. The Bureau of Forest Development to undertake the reclassification of all timberland blocks embraced by the accompanying proclamation and to release as alienable and disposable all areas which are suitable for agricultural purposes, particularly areas marked below 18% in slope gradient in the attached Annex Plan “1”.

It shall issue the necessary licenses and/or permits for the gathering of forest products found within areas classified as alienable or disposable lands in the settlement area in accordance with the development plan therefor and existing forestry rules and regulations’*.

3.The Bureau of Land to undertake the boundary, topographic and subdivision surveys of area.

It shall transfer to the Southern Philippines Development Authority all alienable and disposable lands within previously released by them. However in the disposition of the same, vested rights such as land patents or titles and approved applications for issuance of patents filed by public land applicants who have complied with the requirements of the Public Land law, as amended shall be respected.

4. The Bureau of Soils to undertake the soil survey of the area,

5. The SPDA, shall manage, oversee and supervise the implementation of the development plans and programs of the project.

It will issue lease contracts to qualified beneficiaries in accordance with existing rules and regulations.

6. The Ministry of Agriculture shall organize farm cooperatives and provide all necessary inputs for agricultural development and production.

7. The Ministry of Natural Resources shall cancel all logging permits within the area and all pasture permits and pasture lease agreement will not be renewed upon its expiration.

8. The Ministry of Agrarian Reform shall establish the compact farm in accordance with the development plans and shall establish equipment/tractor pool to support the project.

9. The Minister of Human Settlements shall provide the necessary BLISS type housing units and community facilities and the appropriate financial arrangements for livelihood projects,

10. The Commanding General of Central Mindanao and the Chairman of the Regional Committee XII, PRDSP shall recommend mustered-out trainees, draftees/ICHDF’s, retired military personnel and other persons involved or affected by the conflict in Southern Philippines as beneficiaries in this settlement Project.

11. The Minister of the Budget is hereby directed to effect the immediate release of ten (101 million peso out of the special activities fund in the office of the President as equity contribution to the SPDA

to underwrite the pre-operating and planning cost and part of the initial development cost of the foregoing project.

12. The Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP)is hereby directed to extend such loans to the SPDA

as may be needed to underwrite part of the development cost upon presentation of the appropriate detailed project feasibility and viability studies, in accordance with the policies and programs of that Bank.

13. The SPDA is hereby directed to secure funding assistance from external sources to underwrite the remaining cost of the projects,

14. All Ministries, bureaus, offices, agencies, including Government-owned and controlled corporations, local government units are hereby directed to extend their assistance to expedite implementation of the foregoing projects as may be requested by the SPDA.

Done in the City of Manila this 2nd day of September in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: Malacañang Records Office