MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 984

WHEREAS, the Reunion for Peace program (RFP), covered by Letter of Instructions No. 331, dated 29 October 1979, as amended by LOI No. 649-A, dated 1 January 1978, was to have ended on 30 December 1979;

WHEREAS, during the duration of RFP more than 46,000 veterans and their families have participated in the program, establishing ties of sincere friendship among former antagonists, and all gaining a better understanding of the new Philippines;

WHEREAS, the veterans concerned, and their families, have been eagerly recommending the extension of the program;

WHEREAS, one of the major groups of veterans in the world, the American Legion, through the President of the Philippines, has granted RFP its highest award of recognition for helping promote friendship and understanding among nations, further evidence of RFP as a welcome institution;

NOW, THEREFORE, I declare the extension of RFP for the two-year period between 1 January 1980 and 31 December 1981. In connection therewith, the following instructions are hereby issued:

1. The provisions of LOI 331, dated 29 October 1975, and of LOI 649-A, dated 1 January 1978, shall remain effective during the extension of RFP in so far as they are not involved with the following Paragraphs 2 and 3 of this LOI.

2. The Ministry of Tourism, the Civil Aeronautics Board and the Philippine Air Lines shall promulgate guidelines, rules and regulations on the grant of promotional air fares to RFP foreign beneficiaries on the international and domestic routes of the national flag carrier.

3. The provisions of LOI 394, dated 9 April 1976, covering RFP incentives to domestic parties, shall be subject to guidelines, rules and regulations agreed upon by the Veterans Federation of the Philippines, the Ministry of Tourism, the PAL and other transport companies to ensure the valid and legitimate use of the incentives.

I enjoin the people of the Philippines to continue rendering their full support of the RFP program.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia