MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 34

TO : 1. The Secretary Department of Finance Manila

2. The Commissioner Budget Commission Manila

3. The Chairman Reparations Commission Quezon City

4. The General Manager People’s Homesite and Housing Corporation Quezon City

5. The City Mayor Quezon City

In order to facilitate the implementation of the social reform program of the Government designed to improve the economic conditions in our country and the life of our people pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines:

1. The General Manager of the People’s Homesite and Housing Corporation is hereby directed:

a. to make immediate steps towards the acquisition of the Tatalon Estate located in Quezon City, in its entirety or so much thereof as may be necessary for the purposes stated in Republic Act No. 2616, by negotiation with the known and registered owner or owners thereof or, should this be not feasible, by expropriation pursuant to the aforesaid law;

b. to take into consideration in the negotiation, for the purpose of arriving at the reasonable value of the property, the prevailing fair market thereof in or about February, 1961, when the expropriation of the property was first commenced with the filing of the appropriate complaint with the Court of First Instance of Rizal in Quezon City; the present assessed value of the said property and such other factors and conditions as he may consider advantageous to the Government; and to take such other measures and safeguards as he may deem proper and necessary to protect the interest of the government;

c. to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out effectively the subdivision and distribution of the property among the bona fide occupants of the estate according to law after its acquisition;

d. to report to me within the shortest possible time the result of such negotiation and, in case of expropriation, periodically, but not more than one month interval between the last and the following reports, the status of the case and the manner this Letter of Instructions is being implemented.

2. The Secretary of Finance, the Commissioner of the Budget and the Chairman, Reparations Commission are hereby instructed to set aside, certify and/or make available immediately the sum of ten million (P10,000,000.00) as provided for in Republic Act No. 2616 or so much thereof as may be necessary to carry out effectively the objectives herein mentioned; and for the purpose, to devise and employ ways and means of raising the necessary funds, including the use of government bonds as well as of proceeds from reparations payments under the Reparation Law.

3. The City Mayor of Quezon City is hereby ordered to secure the area referred to herein immediately upon receipt hereof and prevent the any person or persons not contemplated as beneficiaries in the aforementioned law and as determined in accordance herewith from entering and occupying any portion of the aforesaid estate, and to render such assistance as may be necessary or as may be requested by the General Manager of the PHHC in connection with the implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

Immediate and strict compliance with this Letter of Instructions is desired.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia