MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS No. 1193

WHEREAS, the KKK is a new national development strategy using livelihood as take-off point for social economic and political development;

WHEREAS, the KKK is a movement premised on human resource development and has developed a training system program to achieve this end;

WHEREAS, the KKK Community Services Group was organized as part of the KKK Secretariat to handle the training system program;

WHEREAS, the strategic components of the training system program requires a mix of services presently being provided by existing training institutions;

WHEREAS, the KKK Community Services Group recognizes the need Tor an implementing agency to activate and coordinate the KKK Training System and Organization Development Program;

NOW THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order and ordain:

1) The University of Life shall be the implementing agency of the KKK Community Services Office charged with the following functions:

a) To develop, package training programs needed by the different KKK participants including the preparation and production of required training materials;

b) To manage the implementation of such training programs either through its internal organization or with the assistance of other training institutions;

c) To act as coordinating center for all training institutions/government agencies affiliated with the KKK Community Services Group.

2) A consortium of state colleges and universities; supporting ministries and government agencies; and other entities involved in the KKK training, organization development, research and evaluation shall be formed to served as regional learning centers.

3) The operating relationship between University of Life and each learning center shall be specified in a Memorandum of Agreement to be entered into, by and between the two institutions involved.

4) The University of Life, in consideration of the specific demands of the training programs, may likewise solicit the assistance of some private institutions. The agreement shall be embodied in a Memorandum of Understanding and the terms of reference contained in a project contract.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: National Library