MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1176

WHEREAS, other Letters of Instructions in implementation of law have been promulgated to safeguard the morality of our society, particularly the youth, against the eroding influence of the operation of certain prohibited and gambling devices;

WHEREAS, the operation and maintenance of video machines, as a prohibited or gambling device or contrivance, tends to corrupt the children and other youth of school age and encourages juvenile delinquency, drug addiction, petty thievery, lying and the gambling instinct which may lead to idleness, economic waste and dislike for work;

WHEREAS, various civic groups, parents, teachers and concerned citizens, in numerous petitions, have requested the Office of the President that because of the insidious and deleterious effects of video machines on school children as well as the adult population, such video machines should be prohibited;

WHEREAS, in LOI No. 9, it is provided that it is necessary to “safeguard the morality of our society, particularly the youth, against the eroding influence of the operation of these devices” referring to jackpot machines “or similar contrivances.”

WHEREAS, I consider video machines within the classification of “similar contrivances”, under LOI No. 9 and “other devices” under PD 519.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby declare jackpot machines, commonly known as “one armed bandits”, pinball machines, slot machines, video machines and similar devices as prohibited and/or gambling devices and contrivances, and do hereby order and direct that you forthwith take over or cause the taking over of the possession of said devices wherever they may be found and to completely destroy or cause the destruction of the same.

All permits or licences for their operation, if any, issued by any office are hereby cancelled and withdrawn. Henceforth, possession and importation of aforesaid prohibited and/or gambling devices are hereby declared unlawful.

You are also directed to devise measures to prevent the entry into the Philippines of any such devices.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia