MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 57

TO: 1. The Secretary Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources Quezon City

2. The Secretary of Trade and Tourism, Concurrently The Chairman Price Control Council Quezon City

3. The Administrator Philippine Coconut Administration Quezon City

4. The Administrator Sugar Quota Administration Quezon City

In order to alleviate the threat of shortages in the necessary inputs for animal feeds in line with the government’s policy of social pricing, you are hereby instructed to take the following steps for domestic use of copra meal and molasses:

1. The Chairman of the Price Control Council is directed to set ceiling price of ₱0.40 per kilo ex Manila for copra meal and ₱0.20 per kilo ex Manila for molasses for animal feed purposes.

2. The Administrator of the Sugar Quota Administration is directed to implement a domestic quota on molasses of 6,100 metric tons per month for feed purposes, to be given only to members of the Philippine Association of Feed Millers, Inc. (PAFMI), Philippine Association of Hog Raisers, Inc. (PAHRI), Philippine Poultry Industry Association, and other bona fide members of swine and poultry raiser’s cooperatives and/or associations.

3. The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Secretary of Trade and Tourism, and the Administrator of the Philippine Coconut Administration are directed to implement a domestic quota on copra meal initially at a volume of 1,700 metric tons per month for feed purposes, to be given only to members of the Philippine Association of Feed Millers, Inc., Philippine Association of Hog Raisers, Inc., Philippine Poultry Industry Association, and other bona fide members of swine and poultry raisers’ cooperatives and/or associations.

Immediate and strict compliance with this Letter of Instruction is desired.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia