MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1011

WHEREAS, simple illegal possession of firearms, hand grenades or other explosives and carrying of firearms, hand grenades or other explosives outside residence without authority, in violation of General Order Nos. 6 and 7, and punishable under Presidential Decree No. 9, have not been included in Letter of Instructions No. 947 as among the crimes triable by military tribunals;

WHEREAS, there is continuing danger from the use of illegally possessed firearms, hand grenades and other explosives in the commission of crimes not only against persons and property, but of other serious crimes such as kidnapping for ransom and other crimes against personal liberty; rape and other crimes against chastity; subversion, rebellion and other crimes against the national security and public order;

WHEREAS, under the rules of civil courts, the suspects in such crimes may easily secure provisional release by filing sufficient bonds; and

WHEREAS, it has always been the firm policy of the government to prosecute these criminal offenders;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and direct that, henceforth, the offense of illegal possession of firearm, hand grenade or other explosive or carrying of firearm, hand grenade or other explosive outside of residence without proper authority, in violation of General Order Nos. 6 and 7, and punishable under Presidential Decree No. 9, including crimes committed with the use of such illegally possessed or illegally carried firearm, hand grenade or other explosive, shall be referred to the military tribunals for trial; that the arrest of the offender shall be by means of an Arrest, Search and Seizure Order (ASSO); that the offender shall not be released pending trial; and that the case against him shall not be “nolle prossed” without my approval.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia