MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 556

The Commissioner Land Registration Commission

The Secretary Department of Finance

The General Manager Government Service Insurance System

The Administrator Social Security System

The President Philippine National Bank

The Chairman Development Bank of the Philippines

The President Philippine Amanah Bank

The President Philippine Veterans Bank Other Concerned Government Agencies

WHEREAS, the availability of suitable land is critical in the planning and implementation of the  National Housing Program;

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide for present and future land requirement for housing low-income families;

WHEREAS, land speculations and hoarding can be minimized if not eliminated through systematic  land acquisition and assembly in areas where  programmed infrastructure projects are to be  undertaken;

NOW, THEREFORE, it is directed that a deliberate program be initiated by the government  for housing and related developments as follows:

1. The National Housing Authority shall, as provided under Presidential Decree No. 757, undertake the systematic program of identification, delineation and acquisition of lands available and suitable for housing.

2. The Bureau of Lands the Land Registration Commission shall provide assistance in identifying and delineating such lands and furnish information relevant to their evaluation as to suitability and  availability for housing and related developments.

3. The Secretary of Finance shall prescribe the manner of funding such land acquisition by the National Housing Authority including but not limited to the use of housing bonds for payment of such acquisitions.

4. The Government Service Insurance System, the Social Security System, the Development Bank of the Philippines, the Philippine National Bank, the Philippine Veterans Bank and the Philippine Amanah Bank and such other government agencies holding real estate suitable for housing shall make such properties available to the National Housing Authority under equitable payment arrangement as may be prescribed by the Secretary of Finance.

Done in DASMARIÑAS, Cavite, this 11th day of June in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia