MALACAÑANG MANILA

November 28, 1973

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 148

To: Secretary Juan Ponce Enrile

Secretary Alejandro Melchor

Chairman Ponciano Mathay

It has been observed that long queues of vehicles waiting for a chance to purchase their gasoline at gasoline stations have caused not only unnecessary loss of time and tempers but has also disturbed the free flow of traffic.

It has also been noted that notwithstanding the patient waiting of some car owners for a chance to secure gasoline, many of them are not served by the gasoline stations not purely on account of the deficient supply of gasoline and other gasoline products but also because the time designated by rules prescribed by local and national agencies have lapsed.

I, therefore, direct that all gasoline stations, and other distributors or dealers of gasoline and other gasoline products to the public, either by retail or wholesale, shall now observe their regular hours of business that existed before the issuance of the order rationing gasoline and other gasoline or oil products. Their hours business shall not be limited to only certain hours of the day, notwithstanding any rules or regulations prescribed by any national or local government authority or government office.

I also direct the oil companies and refineries to distribute regularly to all stations and dealers of gasoline and other fuel products at least one week supply of these products. This is now possible as a result of the steps that we have taken to increase our available gasoline supply notably the conservation measures that we have adopted and the encouragement given to the importation of naphtha and other gasoline products by exempting these products from customs and tariff duties.

Any violation of this Letter of Instructions shall be considered a violation of the order prescribing the rationing of gasoline and other oil fuel products and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of such order.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia