MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 495

WHEREAS, the Department of National Defense pursuant to LOI 406 dated May 26, 1976 is pursuing a program for manpower (skills) training and job placement of trainees, draftees and other military personnel who will be separated from Military Service and is also undertaking massive infrastructure projects in coordination with other government agencies;

WHEREAS, the National Coordinating Committee established by PMO 541 to implement the program under PMO 516 dated June 16, 1975 is coordinating among others, the manpower (skills) training and job placement of the returnees and evacuees in Southern Philippines;

WHEREAS, the Department of Labor Task Force created by PMO 516, is undertaking the manpower (skills) training and job placement of returnees, evacuees and other needy persons adversely affected in the conflict in Southern Philippines;

WHEREAS, the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications and the Department of Public Highways maintain equipment pool, consisting of usable and deadlined construction equipment which can be utilized for training and to supply the requirements for the varied infrastructure projects of national and local governments;

WHEREAS, as a result of the ceasefire agreement starting December 24, 1976, there is an expected influx of returnees who will need specialized training to be qualified for overseas and domestic employment;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the active cooperation and participation of various government agencies in the implementation of the Program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution hereby direct as follows:

The training and placement programs under PMO 516 shall be expanded to accommodate those expected returnees of the Post-Ceasefire (December 24, 1976).

The Department of National Defense shall plan, develop and undertake an expanded program of manpower training on the operation and maintenance of heavy equipment and other technical skills for the returnees, refugees and other affected persons in selected training sites. It shall advance to cooperating agencies the necessary funds to accomplish their assigned tasks.

The Department of Labor Task Force shall plan, develop and undertake a job placement program for overseas and domestic employment and shall assist the Department of National Defense in manpower training.

The Department of Public Works, Transportations and Communications shall immediately make available its facilities, personnel and equipment for use in the training. It shall turn-in to the Regional Commissioner repairable deadlined equipment that will be utilized for training purposes and later for infrastructure projects of the Region.

The Department of Public Highways shall immediately make available its facilities, personnel and equipment for use in the training.

The Department of Education and Culture shall make available its training facilities and personnel.

The Department of Social Services and Development shall provided applicable developmental and productivity thrust social services to trainees and their families, including self-employment assistance, skills training and supplemental feeding for malnourished pre-school children, as well as emergency relief assistance as may be necessary for limited period.

The Regional Commissioners IX and XII shall receive, undertake and arrange for appropriate rehabilitation of repairable deadlined equipment from the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications and Department of Public Highways to be made available to training agencies at designated sites within the Region.

The Development Bank of the Philippines, Philippine National Bank, Philippine Amanah Bank, Government Service Insurance System and Social Security System shall provide appropriate loans for viable projects to enable beneficiaries who shall opt to establish their own business after training and who meet the credit standard. The Development Bank of the Philippines shall coordinate these efforts of the above mentioned financial institutions.

The National Coordinating Committee on PMO 516 shall coordinate the above activities and shall monitor the implementation of all projects of this Program.

All of the above-named agencies shall provide the necessary funds from their appropriations FY 1977. However, in recognition of the added financial and operational requirements to carry out the Program, above agencies shall submit their additional financial requirements to the Office of the President through the National Coordinating Committee on PMO 516 after due assessment and within one week from the issuance of this Instructions, for necessary funding support.

The Budget Commission shall give due course to the request for funds by the participating agencies and to effect the necessary transfer of funds from the cooperating agencies to the Department of National Defense to liquidate the advances made by the Department.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy Seven.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia