MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 19

TO : 1. The Secretary of National Defense 2. The Secretary of Public Works and Communications 3. The Secretary of Social Welfare 4. The Director of Public Works 5. The General Manager, PHHC 6. The Presidential Assistant on Housing Rehabilitation Agency 7. Governors, City Mayors and Municipal Mayors 8. City and District Engineers

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and in my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and in the interest of public health, safety and peace and order, you and the subordinate officials and employees under you are hereby ordered:

1. To remove all illegal constructions including buildings on and along esteros and river banks, those along railroad tracks and those built without permits on public or private property;

2. To relocate, assist in the relocation or return to their home province, and determine relocation sites for squatters and other persons to be displaced or evicted from the cited esteros and places; and

3. To closely coordinate among yourselves and other agencies and assist in the prompt and effective implementation of these instructions.

The PAHRA shall determine the squatter areas.

City Engineers, Mayors and other officials authorized to issue building permits are enjoined to be careful in the issuance of such permits to prevent constructions affecting or encroaching upon properties devoted to public use or service, and they shall be held to strict accountability for authorizing or tolerating illegal constructions.

This Order shall constitute standing instructions to cover present and future illegal constructions, unless otherwise directed by me or by my authorized representative, and shall be executed without regard to any contrary order from any other source or authority.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of October, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia