MALACAÑANG MANILA

Letter of Instructions No. 1119

WHEREAS, it has been noted by the Group of 77, of which the Philippines is an active member, that despite great efforts by many countries, especially the developing countries in international meetings and conferences aimed at establishing the New International Economic Order (NIEO), no substantial progress has been achieved on internationally agreed measures to promote the rapid economic and social development of developing countries;

WHEREAS, such stalemate in multilateral economic negotiations between the developed and developing countries necessitates the calling of new initiatives, strategies and solutions which are concrete, comprehensive and global that will go beyond present limited measures intended to resolve existing economic problems;

WHEREAS, the United Nations General Assembly in its 34th Session adopted Resolutions 34/138 and 34/139, both dated 14 December 1979, which call for the launching of global negotiations relating to international economic cooperation for development;

WHEREAS, such global and sustained negotiations are envisioned to result in steady global economic development through action-oriented, coherent, integrated, concrete, comprehensive and global solutions of major issues based on the principles of the New International Economic Order;

WHEREAS, the Group of 77 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in September 1980 in New York affirmed that the Group of 77 remains prepared to renew and continue efforts to complete preparatory work at the 35th session of the United Nations General Assembly for the new round of global negotiations;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government attaches great importance to the launching of global negotiations as a key strategy of implementing the objectives of the NIEO;

WHEREAS, there is urgent need to formulate the Philippine positions in regard to the major issues in the field of raw materials, energy, trade, development, money and finance to be taken up in the Global Negotiations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

A Cabinet Council on Global Negotiations is hereby created.

The Chairman of the Council shall be the Minister for Foreign Affairs with the Minister of Finance as Co-Chairman, the Minister of Economic Planning as Vice-Chairman and with the Minister of Trade as Co-Vice Chairman. The other members of the Council shall be the following:

1. The Minister of Agriculture 2. The Minister of Natural Resources 3. The Minister of Industry 4. The Minister of Energy 5. The Governor of the Central Bank 6. The Chairman of the National Science Development Board

The Chairman shall be responsible for the formulation and coordination of the Philippine positions on the major issues identified by the United Nations General Assembly and the Group of 77 in the fields of raw materials, energy, trade, development money and finance and for identifying other issues that may be of interest to the Philippines.

An inter-agency technical committee representing the Ministry members of the Council is hereby established to discuss and formulate recommendations on the substantive issues of Global Negotiations.

The Council shall establish a Secretariat to service the Council and the inter-agency technical committee. The Secretariat shall be organized in the Office of United Nations and International Organizations of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Chairman of the Council shall hire additional personnel for the Secretariat whenever the need arises.

The Chairman of the Council shall establish a system of honoraria and allowances for the inter-agency technical committee and the Secretariat.

The Chairman of the Council is hereby empowered to require any agency of the Philippine Government to assist in the discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the Council and designate such personnel, including consultants, it may require for the purpose.

The Budget Commission is hereby directed to immediately appropriate and release the amount of two hundred fifty thousand pesos (P250 , 000) for the financial and operational requirements of the Council the inter-agency committee and the Secretariat for 1981 from the International Commitment Fund or the Special Activities Fund and that such amount be thereafter be included in the annual Appropriation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs beginning CY 1982 until the Global Negotiations are concluded.

The Council shall formulate and adopt its implementing rules and regulations.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty one.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia