MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 544

RELATIVE TO THE ANALYSIS OF EXPENDITURES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

TO: All Heads and Regional Directors of Departments, Offices and Agencies of the National Government Including State Colleges and Universities and Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations All Provincial Governors, City Mayors, and Municipal Mayors The Acting Commissioner of the Budget

WHEREAS, the limited amount of resources available to government must be used with maximum efficiency, effectiveness and economy;

WHEREAS, the analysis of government expenditures can be more thoroughly done with the evaluation of field reports on physical accomplishment;

WHEREAS, field reporting can be most effectively done by persons and organizations in the regions;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct:

1. Provincial Governors, City and Municipal Mayors and other Local District Officials shall independently monitor key national projects in their respective areas and shall report to the President on physical accomplishments in such form and content and following such mechanics as specified under these Instructions.

2. Priority shall be given in monitoring the implementation of the following national government projects: highways construction, repair and maintenance of national roads, barangay roads construction, distribution of drugs and medicines, reforestation, construction of schoolbuildings, hospitals, and other public buildings and irrigation systems.

3. The following highways projects shall be immediately monitored by the Provincial Governors, City and Municipal Mayors concerned:

Sayre Highway Iligan-Cagayan de Oro-Butuan City Road Philippine-Japan Friendship Highway Pilar-Bagac-Morong Road Marikina-Infanta Road Malaybalay-Kalinan Road Davao-Cotabato Road

4. The Budget Commission shall identify other key national projects and shall transmit pertinent details to the local officials concerned for the latter to initiate monitoring activities. Projects shall include those being undertaken by or through national government agencies, including state colleges and universities and government-owned or controlled corporations. Monitoring reports shall be directly transmitted to the President through the Budget Commission and shall be in accordance with such format, content, and timing as may be duly specified.

5. The Budget Commission shall collate the field reports, evaluate these in the light of fund releases, and submit to the President summary reports mentioning specifically: (a) funds actually released, (b) funds received by implementing units at the regional or local level, (c) amount spent, (d) work accomplished, and (e) work remaining for completion. Copies of the basic field reports shall also be submitted to the President.

6. All Heads, Regional Directors, or other officials of Departments, Bureaus, Offices, Agencies of the national government, including state colleges and universities and government-owned and controlled corporations, may be asked by the National Accounting Office of the Budget Commission, to prepare and directly submit pertinent reports on expenditures, receipts and performance, in addition to those asked of local government units. They shall extend full cooperation and make available such information on agency operation, both physical and financial, as may be required.

7. The Commissioner of the Budget is hereby authorized to utilize regular appropriations of the Budget Commission and such additional amounts as may be necessary from the Regional Development Fund, in order to meet the travel and other expenditures including reasonable honoraria in lieu of overtime pay, which are duly approved, for persons called upon to undertake the monitoring and reporting activities called for under these instructions.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia