MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 588

In order to effectively enforce the National Pollution Control Decree and its implementing rules and regulations as they pertain to the requirements for the construction or installation of appropriate and adequate pollution control devices, and to insure their efficient operations as soon as they have been set up, you are hereby directed to implement the following:

1. All local governments, development authorities, government-owned or controlled corporations, industrial, commercial and manufacturing establishments, and all other public and private entities, whose functions involve the discharge or emission of pollutants into the water, air and/or land resources, or the operation, installation or construction of any anti-pollution device, treatment work or facility, sewerage or sewage disposal system, shall each appoint and/or designate a Pollution Control Officer;

2. The said Pollution Control Officer shall be a technical man knowledgeable in pollution control or environmental protection. He shall perform the following duties and responsibilities, in addition to those that may from time to time be prescribed the National Pollution Control Commisison (NPCC):

(1) To attend to the requirements for the construction or installation of anti-pollution device or devices of his establishment or agency;

(2) To supervise the operations of the existing or newly constructed pollution control device or devices of his establishment or agency;

(3) To promptly submit periodic reports to the NPCC on the working conditions of such devices or facilities, and the manner by which they are operated;

(4) To act as a liaison officer with the NPCC to keep himself abreast with the requirements of the NPCC, and the latest technology on the prevention, control and abatement of pollution, and to inform his establishment or agency accordingly; and

(5) To attend the meetings of all pollution control officers as may brom time to time be called by NPCC, and to submit reports of said meetings to his establishment or agency.

3. The National Pollution Control Commission shall promulgate the necessary guidelines for the effective implementation of this Letter of Instructions.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia