MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 786

WHEREAS, the development and promotion of Philippine export is essential to sustain economic growth;

WHEREAS, impediments in the form of delays, unnecessary documentations and faulty communications could discourage exports;

WHEREAS, in order to facilitate the processing of exports, there is a need to designate an Action Officer on Trade Facilitation to resolve export problems;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

1. The Presidential Assistant on Economic and Development Affairs is hereby designated as Presidential Action Officer on Trade Facilitation.

2. The Presidential Action Officer shall exercise, for and on behalf of the President, the following functions and duties:

a. Direct and oversee the implementation and continuing reevaluation of the simplified system of export procedures mandated under the promulgation of Presidential Decree No. 930, inclusive of all phases and requirements for documentation and filing of reports and statements, inspection and application of clearances, and financial assessment and payment of fees and charges;

b. Resolve actual problems and issues involving procedural bottlenecks and processing lags brought to the attention of the Office of the President in a manner that facilitates and expedites the export goods to their market destinations;

c. Call on any office or offices of the government to execute the decisions and orders emanating from his office; and

d. Perform such other functions related to trade facilitation as may be assigned by the President of the Philippines.

In the performance of his functions and the discharge of his duties, the Presidential Action Officer is hereby authorized to act for the President. His instructions on matters not involving material policy changes shall be immediately implemented and complied with by the ministry or office concerned.

3. In the performance of his functions and discharge of his duties, the Presidential Action Officer shall be assisted by a support staff from the following:

Philippine Export Council Ministry of Trade Central Bank Bureau of Internal Revenue Board of Investments Philippine Ports Authority Bureau of Foreign Trade Philippine Bureau of Products Standards NACIDA

4. The operations of the Office may be funded out of appropriations made available to it or from contributions of any participating agency.

5. The Presidential Action Officer shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Letter of Instructions.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia