MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 669

(CREATION OF A COMMITTEE TO FORMULATE AND RECOMMEND GUIDELINES TO ACCELERATE THE EXPLORATION, EXPLOITATION, DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION OF URANIUM AND OTHER NUCLEAR FUEL MINERALS)

The phenomenal increases in the price of imported energy continue to impose an unduly heavy demand on the country’s foreign exchange resources thereby posing a serious hindrance in the country’s economic and industrial growth and development. It is, therefore, imperative that the government pursue actively the exploration, exploitation, and development of indigenous energy resources including strategic radioactive minerals such as uranium, thorium, and other radioactive elements. It is noted that these indigenous nuclear power program have not been sufficiently explored and mined in a manner and to an extent adequate to complement the requirements of said program.

Getty Oil Company has recently submitted a proposal for the exploration, exploitation, and development of uranium and other nuclear fuel minerals. Through a service contract, Getty Oil has offered to furnish the necessary services and technology and provide financing for a uranium mining operation in the Larap/Paracale area.

In view of the above and in order to provide direction and impetus in the country’s uranium exploration and development program, there is hereby constituted a committee to be composed of senior officials from the Department of Energy, Department of Finance, Department of Justice, Department of Natural Resources, and Board of Investments. The Committee shall be under the supervision of the Secretary of Energy, who shall forthwith organize its composition. The above-named departments shall submit to the Secretary of Energy within five (5) days from the date of this letter of Instruction their respective nominees to the Committee.

Specifically, the Committee shall undertake a thorough and comprehensive review of existing legislations with the end in view of formulating and recommending policy guidelines to accelerate the exploration, exploitation, development, and utilization of uranium and other nuclear fuel minerals. Additionally, the Committee shall evaluate the proposal submitted by Getty Oil Company for a service contract and recommend the appropriate vehicle by which the offered work program could properly be carried out. The Committee shall complete the above task and submit to the President through the Secretary of Energy a report of its findings and recommendations within thirty (30) days from the date hereof.

In order to facilitate the performance of its functions, the Committee is hereby authorized to call upon the above-mentioned departments and their respective bureaus and offices for any assistance as it may need in the form of personnel, facilities, and other resources.

This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : CDAsia