Office of the President of the Philippines

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1324

SUBJECT: Delegation of Administrative and Substantive Authorities to the Regional Directors

WHEREAS, in accordance with the decentralization thrust of the Government provided for in the Integrated Reorganization Plan as amended (P.D. No. 1), regional offices have been established;

WHEREAS, for the regional offices to be effective, there should be a corresponding delegation of adequate powers and authorities to the regional offices to act with finality on both administrative and substantive matters; and

WHEREAS, there is therefore need to strengthen the delegation of authorities to the regional offices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order that the following instructions be implemented:

A. Delegation of Administration Authorities

1. Additional administrative authorities, in addition to those already provided for in LOI 448 and LOI 895 the delegation of which are hereby reiterated to be effected if this has not yet been done, are hereby directed to be immediately delegated to the regional directors in accordance with such ministry and/or agency guidelines as may be promulgated by the head of the ministry and/or agency, as follows: cdtai

Under LOI No. 448 as supplemented by LOI 895

a. Exercise appointing authority over the following:

(1) Original and promotional appointments and reinstatements to positions up to the second level which includes supervisory positions below division chief.

(2) Casual Appointments.

b. Approve transfers of personnel within the jurisdiction of the regional office: Provided , That in cases of inter-regional transfers which shall be made by higher authorities, the same shall be done in consultation with the regional directors concerned.

c. Investigate administrative complaints against employees of the region and submit appropriate recommendations to the agency head.

d. Approve sick, vacation and maternity leaves of absence with pay or without pay, for a period not beyond one year.

e. Prepare and submit budget proposals for the region to the central office and administer the budget of the regional office.

f. Authorize disbursements of funds and accordingly approve vouchers for the payment of obligations pursuant to approve financial and work programs.

g. Approve requisitions for supplies, materials and equipment subject to central office approval of a supply procurement program.

h. Approve claims for benefits under Section 699 of the Revised Administrative Code, subject to the availability of funds.

i . Approve requests for overtime services.

j. Approve application of personnel for permission to teach, exercise a profession, or engage in business outside of office hours.

k. Issue travel orders authorizing employees to travel on official business within the region for a period not exceeding thirty days.

l. Approve attendance of personnel in conferences, seminars, and non-degree training programs within the region.

m. Authorize the allocation of funds to provincial/district offices.

n. Accept donations such as duly titled real property and personal property to be used by the office.

Additional Authorities

a. Grant merit increases to deserving employees from funds allocated to regional offices for this purpose.

b. Suspend employees for not more than 30 days for causes provided by law.

c. Approve resignation of personnel in the first and second level positions except for accountable officers and employees.

d. Negotiate contracts for services or for furnishing supplies, materials and equipment involving an amount not in excess to P200 , 000 per quarter, or as may be determined to be appropriate for the individual ministry.

e. Decide and impose penalties on administrative cases involving offenses where the penalty is reprimand, suspension without pay for not more than five (5) days, or a fine equivalent to not more than (5) days’ salary.

f. Enter into agreement with other government and private agencies in the implementation of government program thrusts at the regional level.

g. Promulgate administrative issuances pertaining to the regional level.

h. Engage the services of consultants for specific services requiring expertise on specific fields.

The ministries or agencies concerned are hereby directed to issue in writing the implementing action documents within two (2) months from the issuance of this Letter of Instructions, copy furnished the President, the Prime Minister and the Presidential Commission on Reorganization.

2. In order to further strengthen the administrative capability of the regional offices, it is also directed that measures be taken to gradually effect the direct release to the regional offices of their respective regional budgets for current operating expenditures and for non-infrastructure capital outlays. At the very least, a sub-allotment system of budgetary releases shall be instituted.

B. Delegation of Substantive Authorities

3. The delegation of substantive authorities to the regional directors of certain ministries in Regions IX and XII provided for in Letter of Instructions No. 897 dated July 25, 1979 as are still applicable is hereby directed to be extended to the regional directors of the ministries concerned (or their successor agencies) in all the other regions, as follows:

a. Ministry of Agriculture

(1) Register and license all business engaged in the self and distribution of animal feeds and feedstuffs .

(2) Issue license to feeds and feedstuffs manufacturers, importers and exporters.

(3) Impose a ban on the movement of livestocks within the region as a means of preventing the outbreak or spread of animal diseases.

(4) Enter into memoranda of agreement with other government and/or private institutions in the implementation of joint projects.

(5) Supervise, regulate and control, including the issuance of permits/licenses for, the establishment and operation of all soil laboratories in the region.

(6) Conduct soil survey and classification, and soil characterization through physical analysis.

(7) Enter into memoranda of agreement with other government and/or private institutions in the implementation of joint projects.

b. Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports

(1) Modify school curricula and adopt innovative practices reflective of the culture and traditions of the people in the region.

(2) Grant/withdraw permit to private schools for the operations of third level of instruction for non-board courses.

(3) Grant/withdraw or cancel government recognition for private school courses at the first and second levels of instruction, including short-term vocational/technical courses, and at the third level for non-board courses, including foreign schools.

(4) Restore cancelled or revoked government recognition of private school courses, except board courses, including retention of the same in cases of non-operation, transfer to another site, or change in ownership of the private school.

(5) Approve proposed imposition of expulsion penalty to students.

(6) Conduct examinations, screen, and interview applicants for scholarships and the study-now-pay-later plan including selection of the same.

(7) Approve requests for correction or change of names of private schools.

c. Ministry of Health

(1) Issue and renew license for masseurs.

(2) Renew license for embalmers.

(3) Approve request for increase of bed capacity of private hospitals.

d. Ministry of Public Works and Highways

(1) Conduct traffic studies and other researches geared at improving highway facilities, traffic flow with control and highway safety.

(2) Prepare and conduct economic and technical feasibility studies of road projects except those proposed to be funded out of the proceeds of loans.

(3) Conduct preliminary engineering and identify alternative alignment of road projects except those proposed to be funded out of the proceeds of loans.

(4) Approve right-of-way agreements (Deeds of Absolute Sale for lots needed for right-of-way involving acquisition of lots with an estimated cost not exceeding P100 , 000.00).

(5) Conduct bidding and approve contracts of projects costing up to P500 , 000.00.

(6) Enter into and approve negotiated contract regardless of project category provided the cost is less than P300 , 000.00.

(7) Conduct comprehensive geological investigation and researches on potential waterworks resources.

(8) Prepare plans, designs, specifications and cost estimates on projects pertaining to buildings and artesian wells.

(9) Plan and program wells proposed for drilling.

e. Ministry of Social Services and Development

(1) Implement demonstration and/or pilot testing projects.

(2) Develop progress, projects, and conduct seminars on family planning, civic responsibility, nutrition and child care.

All ministries, bureaus and equivalent agencies authorized to have regional offices are hereby enjoined to delegate as much authority to the regional offices to act on substantive matters. Accordingly, each head of ministry , bureau or agency is hereby directed to draw up a schedule of substantive authorities, both originally or in addition to existing delegations already made, to be delegated to the regional offices which schedule shall be issued in writing in the form of the appropriate agency issuance, copy to be furnished the President, the Prime Minister and Presidential Commission on Reorganization, within 90 days from the issuance of this Letter of Instructions.

The Prime Minister shall, with the assistance of the Presidential Commission on Reorganization, monitor and oversee the implementation of this directive. The PCR is also directed to provide the necessary consultative advice and technical assistance to the various ministries, bureaus and agencies involved in the preparation of their respective sets of substantive authorities to be delegated to the regional offices.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Three.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia