MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 740

WHEREAS, the Pambansang Katipunan Ng Mga Kabataang Barangay and the National Manpower and Youth Council have launched the Batarisan Program for the training of out-of-school youth to develop their skills and promote their employment opportunities;

WHEREAS, the integration of the Batarisan Program into the government’s overall manpower and skill development program would enhance and promote a more successful implementation thereof for the benefit of our out-of-school youth; and

WHEREAS, the cooperation and involvement in this program of the private sector, particularly private companies, firms and entities, are necessary so as to better assure the success of the same;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct the following:

1. It is the policy of the Government to develop training and employment opportunities for out-of-school youth of the country so as to promote their social, moral, and economic well-being. For this purpose, the Kabataang Barangay Batarisan Program is hereby integrated into the manpower and skill development program of the government, and the involvement and participation of all concerned, including the private sector, is hereby enjoined.

2. All private companies, firms and entities which have necessary capabilities and resources as determined by the Director-General of the National Manpower and Youth Council shall provide and make available their resources, facilities and technology for the training of out-of-school youth in technical and related skills.

These private firms shall, among others, grant the needed allowances, stipends, and other material support as may be prescribed by the Director-General of the National Manpower and Youth Council.

3. The Pambansang Katipunan Ng Mga Kabataang Barangay, in coordination with the National Manpower and Youth Council, shall select or determine the out-of-school youths who will undergo training as provided herein.

4. The Director-General of National Manpower and Youth Council shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Order.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia