LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 356

TO : The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development;

All Elective Provincial, City and Municipal Officials

WHEREAS, by December 31, 1975, the term of office of elective provincial, city and municipal officials will expire;

WHEREAS, due to the voluminous records of the administrative cases and accomplishments of said elective local officials, which require careful analysis and evaluation, more time and effort would be necessary;

WHEREAS, with the expiration of their term of office, without their replacements having been finalized, a complete paralyzation of essential municipal and public services would become inevitable, to the damage and prejudice of the people; and

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to avert said impeding paralyzation in that level of government.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby direct:

1. All elective provincial, city and municipal officials, to continue in office even beyond December 31, 1975 until such time their respective successors shall have been duly appointed by me and qualified in accordance with the mandate of the people manifested during the National Referendum last February 27 and 28, 1975, or until otherwise declared by me or my duly authorized representative.

2. To make definite the decision on the replacement or retention of any elective local official, the Secretary of Local Government and Community Development, to submit his definite findings and recommendation on all administrative cases which are still pending with his Department within three (3) months beginning January 1, 1976.

3. Nothing contained in these instructions, however, shall be construed as preventing me or my duly authorized representative, at any time, from accepting, for valid reasons, resignations tendered by elective local officials or from taking dispositive action on administrative complaints against these officials which have been investigated and the report and recommendation thereon, already submitted.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd . ) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source: CDAsia