MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 665

WHEREAS, it was noted that recommendations for promotion to Major and Lt. Col. of AFP officers were received by this Office on the close of Fiscal Year 1977, which promotions were made effective January 1, 1977 and the other promotions for the same fiscal year have not been received to date;

WHEREAS, the allocation of promotional quota among officers of the several services and between the 2 components of the AFP are disproportionate. For instance, in the promotion of Majors to Lt. Col., PC Regular Force, it is observed that this rank has the second largest number of authorized vacancies among the four (4) Major Services, yet it was given the least fill-up percentage. In another instance, the reserve component of a certain technical service was allocated a quota of ten (10) for Colonel, while the same component in a larger technical service was allocated a quota of only two (2) although many of the reserve Lt. Cols. in this technical service were as senior and could be as deserving as, Lt. Cols. in the former technical service. In another case, young Majors in the regular force were promoted to Lt. Col. while Majors in the reserve force in the same branch of service, who are senior by two or more years than the Majors in the regular force, were not promoted.

WHEREFORE, in order to obviate a repetition of the discrepancies noted above it is hereby directed that:

1. Pursuant to RA 291, as amended by PD 360, the SND shall declare vacancies in the respective grades early enough to enable fair and thorough deliberation of the qualifications of all recommendees;

2. The AFP Selection Boards shall be constituted at the start of the Fiscal Year so that their recommendations can be submitted to the Office of the President within the quarter the recommended respective effective dates fall due;

3. The criteria for the allocation of promotional quotas among officers of the reserve and regular forces shall be re-examined with the view of making the quota allocations for the different grades for each of the major services as proportionate and as fair and as equitable as possible; and

4. Temporary promotion for outstanding ability and efficiency is encouraged; however, strict adherence to existing laws and implementing rules and regulations governing the promotions, both temporary and permanent of AFP officers is enjoined.

This instruction shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia