MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 681

TO: ALL CONCERNED

SUBJECT: 5-YEAR INDICATIVE NATIONAL EXPORT STRATEGY FROM 1978 TO 1982

WHEREAS, under Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 941, the Philippine Export Council is required to formulate national export strategy, designed to broaden and enhance the export trade of country;

WHEREAS, in formulating the national export strategy the private business sector, through the Philippine Export Council Permanent Committees, has actively participated by drawing up the indicative export strategies for selected priority product groups for a period of five (5) years from 1978 to 1982;

WHEREAS, an Inter-Agency Committee composed of technical representatives of the various government agencies involved in export development and promotion was created to integrate the individual product strategies, into a national export strategy, as well as to align the national export strategy with the five-year Development Plan of the Philippines for 1978 to 1982;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct the following:

Section 1. The Five (5) Year Indicative National Export Strategy for 1978 to 1982 is hereby approved and adopted.

Section 2. All government agencies involved in export development and promotion are instructed to implement the programs and projects identified in the Indicative National Export Strategy in so far as are applicable to them and shall submit periodic reports as may be required by the Philippine Export Council.

Section 3. The Philippine Export Council is hereby authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations, circulars and orders necessary to effectively implement the Indicative Export Strategy.

Section 4. The implementation of the Indicative National Export Strategy shall be monitored and coordinated by the Philippine Export Council, which shall review periodically its effectiveness and make such recommendations and reports to the President of the Philippines as may be necessary.

Section 5. Businesses, industries and all concerned in the export sector are hereby enjoined to take cognizance of the strategy herein approved, adopted and promulgated and to align and to coordinate their respective activities therewith.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia