Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

Letter of Instruction No. 809

WHEREAS, environmental quality and public health have become matters of vital concern to the Government;

WHEREAS, the production of solid wastes caused by the increasing population and growth in resource consumption is further aggravating the ecological problems in Metropolitan Manila and its environs;

WHEREAS, it is the desire of Government to adopt and implement a totally integrated, comprehensive and truly viable Solid Waste Management Program for Metropolitan Manila so that the collection and disposal of solid wastes generated in the area would result in four (4) primary objectives:

1. To eliminate to the extent possible its danger to public health;

2. To reduce to the minimum its nuisance to the public;

3. To achieve efficient collection and disposal at lowest cost; and

4. To maximize resource recovery from solid waste.

WHEREAS, to achieve these objectives, there is a need to develop and implement a totally integrated and financially feasible Master Plan for solid waste management and resource recovery in Metro Manila.

Accordingly, you are hereby directed to conduct an Integrated Metro Manila Solid Waste Management Study within the framework of the policies and guidelines set by the NEPC under P.D. 1121 and P.D. 1152. For purposes of funding the foreign exchange cost of the study, MWSS shall, upon securing concurrence of the World Bank, make available a portion of its existing World Bank Loan intended for the Metro Manila Sewerage Project (IBRD Loan No. 1415 PH). As the implementing agency, MHS, shall assume and amortize whatever portion of the World Bank Loan to MWSS is utilized for the Study. Local counterpart funds to support the Study shall come from the agencies participating in the Study as hereinafter set forth. The Ministry of Human Settlements and the Metro Manila Commission shall be the recipient of the results of the studies and all reports therefore, shall be submitted to them.

To implement the above Project, you are hereby constituted as an Ad hoc Body with the General Manager of MWSS as the Chairman, and empowered:

1. To collate and review the results and recommendations of all studies already conducted in the past in Metro Manila and on the basis thereto to assess the areas where there is a need for consolidating, updating, revising and completing the studies already done and/or where there is a need to undertake new studies completely;

2. To determine and assign the tasks and responsibilities to be performed by any of the entities which will be involved in the review, study, planning, research, experimentation, design and supervision of necessary works incidental to the project; and eventually, in the actual implementation of the Project itself;

3. To engage the services of local and/or foreign Consultants and to call on the services of eligible technical personnel from any government agency as it may need in the review, study, planning, research, experimentation, and design and supervision of necessary works incidental to the Project;

4. To employ or hire other administrative and professional personnel as the Ad hoc Body may need in the conduct of the Project;

5. To determine the contribution or share of each and all of the participating agencies to the local counterpart fund to be established and which fund shall constitute and be spent for the project and in the operation and maintenance of the Ad hoc Body;

6. Grant honoraria/allowances and reimbursable expenses to members of the Ad hoc Body and to personnel detailed to the Project in connection with the performance of their duties.

All government offices, agencies and instrumentalities whose activities are related to the Project are hereby directed to provide the necessary assistance in the form of personnel, facilities and other resources which the Ad hoc Body may determine as needed for this Project.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of February, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

Source : CDAsia