OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MALACAÑANG

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1018

WHEREAS, the tight and unstable petroleum supply situation necessitates a nationwide effort to conserve energy;

WHEREAS, the Government should lead in this effort by controlling its energy consumption;

WHEREAS, Government offices consume a substantial amount of electricity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and issue the following instructions.

1. The monthly consumption of electricity of all concerned should not exceed 90% of the consumption (in kilowatt-hours) during the corresponding month of 1979.

2. All agencies, offices, bureaus and government owned and/or controlled corporations, including provincial and local governments, shall submit to their respective ministries monthly reports on their electricity consumption, noting also the consumption in the same month during the previous year. All ministries, in turn, shall compile and transmit a summary report every month to the Inter-Agency Committee, composed of the Ministry of Energy, Ministry of General Services and the Office of the President to be represented by The Presidential Management Staff, tasked to monitor the use of light and airconditioning in the government offices.

3. The deputy chiefs of bureaus or offices are hereby designated energy conservation officers for their respective offices. They shall be responsible for the implementation of these instructions, as well as the development and implementation of other energy conservation measures.

4. The Inter-Agency Committee shall submit every month a summary report on the foregoing to the President.

5. Necessary expenses of the Inter-Agency Committee in this regard shall be drawn from the savings of both the Ministries of Energy and General Services.

This Letter of Instruction shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia