MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1122

WHEREAS, it is the policy of government to provide adequate protection to our overseas workers;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide a package of assistance to such workers to afford them proper guidance and inspiration to fulfill their legitimate contractual obligations;

WHEREAS, in view of the increased number of workers deployed overseas there is a need to take appropriate measures that will anticipate and prevent the occurrence of any incidents detrimental to their persons and careers as well as possible breeches in our relations with the host countries;

WHEREAS, it is necessary for government to establish adequate measures and institutional arrangements to ensure the provision of such services at home and in the countries of employment;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, hereby prescribe the following instructions and guidelines:

1. The Minister of Labor and Employment to initiate the establishment of Philippine Labor Centers (PLC’s) in selected areas of contract workers’ concentration to provide flexibility to the government’s objective of responsive and effective welfare and legal assistance to its nationals overseas. The Labor Centers shall be directly tasked with the following concerns:

a) assist the Embassy in providing welfare services to distressed workers and nationals such as providing temporary quarters to needy workers including the assumption of travel and exit responsibilities as may be appropriate;

b) assist in the expeditious and effective implementation of remittance services specially for problem workers and companies;

c) provide legal assistance and government liaison services for workers in coordination and proper consultation with the Embassy. In addition, the Centers shall provide sponsorship, consultancy, credit/contract investigation services to Philippine companies; and

d) undertake cultural, information and social services for Philippine communities in the areas serviced.

2. For maximum flexibility, the Labor Centers shall be wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Welfare Fund for Overseas Workers and as such shall have corporate powers and prerogatives as may be determined by the Board of Trustees of the Fund upon approval by the President. It shall establish its offices, locally and overseas, to adequately implement its functions.

3. The Minister of Labor and Employment may call on any office or instrumentality of government to assist in the proper implementation of these instructions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May 1981.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia