MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 1328

There is an urgent need to improve the standard of living in the rural fishing communities of the country, to protect municipal fishery resources against the heavy exploitation of fish and aquatic resources in the entire marine water areas of all the provinces of the Philippines, to provide municipal and small-scale fishermen a wider areas within which to operate fishing boats at three (3) gross tons or less, and to increase their catch per unit effort.

In view of the above, the operation of fishing gear such as commercial trawl and purse seine is hereby prohibited in the marine water areas within a distance of seven (7) kilometers from the shorelines of all the provinces of the Philippines: Provided , however, that in coastal areas seven (7) fathoms deep or more which are not reached by sustenance fishermen, the operation of commercial trawl and purse seine may be allowed by the Minister of Natural Resources, upon the recommendation of the Director of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, only after such have been defined and designated as such by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources on a yearly seasonal basis.

The Ministry of Natural Resources, the Ministry of National Defense and the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources are hereby ordered to enforce this order strictly so that the prohibition of commercial trawl and purse seine operations in the restricted water areas of all the provinces of the Philippines would be thorough and effective.

The municipal mayors and barangay captains of all the municipalities and barangays of the Philippines, after proper orientation and training shall be deputized by the Minister of Natural Resources to enforce these instructions and all other existing and related fishery laws, decrees, rules and regulations.

The municipal mayors and barangay captains so deputized shall submit monthly reports of accomplishments to the respective Provincial Philippine Constabulary Commands, copy furnished the respective Provincial Fishery Officers and Provincial Governors.

This Letter of Instructions shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-three.

( Sgd .) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia