MALACAÑANG MANILA

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 535-A

TO: Price Stabilization Council (PSC) Metropolitan Command Department of Labor Budget Commission Department of Finance Oil Industry Commission (OIC) Department of Local Government and Community Development Philippine National Oil Company (PNOC) Career Executive Service Board Board of Transportation (BOT) Metro-Manila Transit Corporation All Other Agencies Concerned

In the interest of alleviating the impact of increased prices on the consuming public, it is hereby ordered that the socialized pricing program, complemented by an incomes adjustment policy, be more effectively implemented.

The above-named agencies are therefore directed to intensify efforts in enforcing price regulation measures, to effect income adjustments in their respective sectors, and to ensure strict enforcement of all previous orders of the President, including, but not limited to, the following:

1. the implementation of across-the-board schedules of emergency allowances for private sector, across-the-board 10% salary increases for public sector employees earning no more than P600 per month, to be monitored and implemented by the Department of Labor and the Budget Commission pursuant to PD 1122 and LOI 533;

2. the reduction in tariff rates for tires, tyre threads, inner tubes and tyre flaps (for all wheels, used by aircraft, tractors, earth-moving equipment automobile and trucks) from 50% to 30% ad valorem pursuant to Executive Order 484, series of 1977;

3. the establishment of special transportation fares for students;

4. the implementation of minimal increases in transport fares as authorized by the Board of Transportation and the expansion by the Metro-Manila Transit Corporation of bus fleets that cater to the mass commuting public.

5. the establishment of a 20-centavo special discount per liter of regular gasoline up to a maximum of 500 liters per boat per month used by small fishing boats (below 3 gross tons) belonging to duly registered fishing cooperatives pursuant to LOI 534; and

6. an intensified enforcement of price controls on commodities under the jurisdiction of the Price Stabilization Council.

These agencies are further directed to submit within two weeks a report to this Office, regarding the progress of implementation and to submit suggested supplementary measures to strengthen the enforcement hereof.

For immediate compliance.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia