MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 412

For the purpose of setting up an integrated steel mill, which has long been part of the country’s industrialization plan, at the soonest possible time and at the most economical scale and financing cost, it is hereby directed that:

1. A Commission for the Organization and Construction of an Integrated Steel Mill (COCIS) be created, composed of the representatives of the Secretaries of Finance, National Defense, Industry, and of the Executive Officers of Phividec Industrial Estate, Maritime Industry Authority, National Power Corporation, Metal Industries Research and Development Center, National Steel Corporation, and Luzon Stevedoring Corporation .

2. The Commission shall undertake further studies and develop detailed plans, including the requisite technical information to set up an integrated steel mill in the country. It shall consolidate and update previous studies and investigations made and plan such project in coordination with other government programs, particularly various infrastructure projects affecting establishment of an integrated steel plant.

3. The Secretary of Finance shall look into financing schemes for the project.

4. The Secretary of National Defense shall take care of the security aspects of the plant site and look into the relevance of the project to the Self-Reliance Development Program.

5. The Secretary of Industry and Chairman of the Board of Investments shall look into the ancillary industries needed or which should be prepared for the establishment of an integrated steel mill in the country.

6. The Metal Industries Research and Development Center shall make available its metallurgical engineering expertise, and test and research facilities for the project.

7. The infrastructure facilities, including site, power and transport requirements shall be planned in coordination with and among Phividec Industrial Estate, Maritime Industry Authority, National Steel Corporation and Luzon Stevedoring Corporation.

8. Coordination of the technical and financial requirements of a project shall be effected by the Iron and Steel Authority, to which body the Commission shall report its work. The Authority, in turn, shall submit periodically a progress report on the project to the President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia