MALACAÑANG Manila

LETTER OF INSTRUCTIONS NO. 1285

DIRECTING THE IMMEDIATE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE KKK-MOLE-TRADE UNION LIVELIHOOD PROGRAM

WHEREAS, trade unions are entrusted with the responsibility of promoting and enhancing the welfare and interests of workers;

WHEREAS, the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran program of the Government was established to provide livelihood to the Filipinos through self-reliance;

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Labor and Employment is the agency charged with the task of promoting trade unions and other types of workers’ associations;

WHEREAS, in recognition of the importance of mutual cooperation, assistance and team effort, the trade unions, the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran and the Ministry of Labor and Employment signed a Memorandum of Understanding on 2 May 1982 calling for active participation by the trade unions in the implementation of the KKK projects;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby issue the following directives for the immediate implementation of the KKK-MOLE-Trade Union livelihood program;

1). Organized workers and government employees irrespective of employment status are hereby included in the classification of priority beneficiaries entitled to the Interest-Fund Puhunan Fund and the Low Interest Loan Fund.

2). The KKK is hereby directed to extend its funding support to service-type, income-generating projects to accommodate the special needs and circumstances of workers in Metro Manila as well as the resources and business opportunities available therein.

3). The Ministry of Labor and Employment is hereby authorized to endorse projects proposals of organized workers directly to the KKK Regional Secretariat for approval of such projects.

4). To ensure effective and coordinated implementation of the KKK-MOLE-Trade Union Livelihood program, a joint Coordinating Committee is hereby established to be composed of the following:

One Deputy Minister of Labor

The Deputy Secretary General of the KKK

Three representatives of organized labor

5). In this connection, a project management unit to be headed by an Assistant Minister shall be established within the Ministry of Labor and Employment to assist the KKK Secretariat in the implementation of the program.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of January in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source : CDAsia