MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 151

CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISASTER OPERATIONS

In order to insure effective coordination of operations of the different agencies during disasters caused by typhoons, floods, fires, earthquakes, seismic sea waves (tidal waves), volcanic eruptions, epidemics, major accidents and other similar calamities, a National Committee on Disaster Operations is hereby created to be composed of the following:

Likewise, there shall be designated a National Coordinator to implement the policies, rules and regulations promulgated by the Committee under this Order. He shall be assisted by personnel to be detailed from the implementing agencies of the Committee, to compose the Plans and Operations and the Administrative staffs.

Salaries and other expenses of the personnel detailed by various offices or agencies in accordance with the foregoing provision shall continue to be for the account of their respective offices.

The Committee is hereby authorized to create committees on the provincial, city and municipal levels, which shall function as sub-committees in accordance with the policies set forth under this Order.

I – DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS

The duties and functions of the Committee shall be as follows:

1. To provide policy guidance on disaster operations which shall include:

a. preparedness program b. rescue c. relief d. rehabilitation

2. To determine and evaluate the requirements for major disaster and submit recommendations to the President for the allocation of critical resources.

3. To advise the President on the necessity of declaring the existence of a state of emergency in areas affected by disasters.

Disaster, operations require immediate action to save lives, alleviate sufferings, prevent epidemics, protect rights, maintain law and order, and develop among the victims an attitude of self-reliance and fortitude.

II – AUTHORITY TO CALL UPON OTHER AGENCIES

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon officials of any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as to request or appeal to non-governmental agencies, for such assistance as may he required in the discharge of its duties and functions.

III – RULES AND REGULATIONS

The Committee is hereby authorized to adopt or promulgate such rules and regulations or working procedures and organizational set-up as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of this Order.

IV – REPORTS

The Committee shall render to the President initial and progress reports, and at the completion of each major disaster operation, a final report thereon. At the end of each Fiscal Year, an annual report shall be submitted by the Committee to the President to include recommendations for necessary appropriations to support disaster operations as contemplated herein.

V – REPEALING CLAUSE

This Order supersedes Administrative Order No. 21 dated August 30, 1962 and all orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.