MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 285

CREATING A COTABATO AND AGUSAN RIVER BASINS MULTI-PURPOSE DEVELOPMENT COORDINATING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, there is a necessity of harnessing the Cotabato and Agusan Rivers for hydro-electric power, irrigation, domestic and industrial water supply, flood control, navigation, fish and wildlife preservation purposes;

WHEREAS, the project will hasten the development of the areas within the basins of the two rivers; and

WHEREAS, for maximum utilization of the basins, it is necessary that a master plan for their development should be drawn up;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Cotabato and Agusan River Basins Multi-Purpose Development Coordinating Committee to be composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To compile, collate and assess existing technical and engineering data and information and, on the basis thereof, draw up a program of additional data collection necessary for a comprehensive water resources development plan;

2. To determine sources of funds needed to finance the data collection and in undertaking engineering studies;

3. To draw up a master or comprehensive water resources development plan for the two river basins;

4. To pinpoint responsibility of each participating agency;

5. To allocate costs and uses of the water for each multi-purpose use;

6. To recommend legislation for purposes of confirming the creation of the Coordinating Committee, defining its powers and providing funds for the purpose; and

7. To serve as a clearing house for all information and policy decisions with respect to the development of the projects.

The Committee may create such sub-committees as may be necessary in the performance of its functions.

The Committee may request any department, bureau, office, agency and instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FLORES BAYOT Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Administrative Order Nos. : 264 – 316]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.