MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 11

CREATING A COMMITTEE FOR THE SPECIAL FUND FOR EDUCATION AND RELATED MATTERS

WHEREAS, the Philippines shall be the beneficiary of funds appropriated under the U.S. War Damage Act, as amended, to finance enduring educational projects to promote the general development of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, there is need to facilitate the disposition and utilization of this Fund by the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the Department of Education is the agency best suited to receive and screen project proposals applying for financial support under the Fund;

WHEREAS, the Chairman of the National Economic Council is the most appropriate officer for the overall administration of approved projects under the Fund; and

WHEREAS, there is need to create a committee to establish guidelines and to review project proposals screened by the Department of Education and to consult with representatives of the U.S. Government on the projects to be financed under the Fund;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee to establish guidelines and to review project proposals screened by the Department of Education and to consult with representatives of the U.S. Government on the projects to be financed under the Fund to be composed of the following:

The Department of Education, through a Secretariat which it shall organize for the purpose, is hereby authorized to receive and screen all projects submitted by qualified parties applying for financing under the Special Fund. The projects shall, in turn, be reviewed by the Committee and administered by the Chairman of the National Economic Council.

The Committee and the Department of Education are hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance and information as they may require in the performance of their functions and shall have such other powers consistent with the execution of their duties.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and shall submit from time to time reports on the progress of its activities to the President.

Administrative Order No. 127 dated July 1, 1965, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1966). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.