MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 91

DEFINING THE COMPOSITION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PHILIPPINE-MALAYSIA ANTI-SMUGGLING AGREEMENT

WHEREAS, the Anti-Smuggling Agreement between the Governments of the Republic of the Philippines and the Federation of Malaysia was concluded and signed at Kuala Lumpur on September 1, 1967;

WHEREAS, the Agreement shall enter into force three months from the date of signing and will remain in force until the expiration of six months from date on which either government receives from the other a written notice of its intention to terminate the same, as stipulated in Paragraph 11 of the Agreement; and

WHEREAS, to assure the early and effective implementation of the Agreement it is necessary that there be a well-coordinated action among the agencies of the Government concerned with the implementation thereof;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby designate the members of the Committee for the implementation of the Agreement on Anti-Smuggling Cooperation, with the Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs Manuel Collantes as Chairman, as follows:

Agency

Member

The Department of Foreign Affairs shall be responsible for:

(1) The release of funds allocated for the purpose of implementing the Agreement;

(2) The procurement of equipment and supplies;

(3) The establishment of offices in Sandakan, Jesselton and Semporna in Sabah and in-country stations;

(4) The assignment of personnel in coordination with other agencies of the Government to man the offices in Sabah and in-country stations; and

(5) The in-country information campaign; preparation of documents, forms for clearances, bonds, etc. in coordination with other agencies concerned.

The Bureau of Customs in coordination with the Philippine Navy shall have supervision and control of all personnel in the sub-ports of Batu-Batu, Taganak and Balabac.

The offices in Sabah shall be under the supervision of the Department of Foreign Affairs in coordination with the Bureau of Customs.

The Committee shall submit from time to time to the President of the Philippines its reports and recommendations.

The Committee is authorized to issue such rules and regulations and operating procedures as it may deem necessary to provide for an effective implementation of the Agreement. It is also authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, instrumentality and subdivision of the Government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.