MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 136

CREATING THE COUNTERPART STAFF REQUIRED FOR THE EXECUTION OF THE UNDP-SPONSORED PHILIPPINE TRANSPORT SURVEY

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Counterpart Staff to the consulting firm that will be designated by the United Nations Development Programme and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to undertake the transport survey of the Philippines, composed of the following:

The functions of this Counterpart Staff are as follows:

1. To assist and coordinate the activities of the consulting firm selected by UNDP and IBRD in order to have an expeditious implementation of the transport survey;

2. To assist the consulting firm in obtaining all available economic, traffic and technical data, including information on transport costs and revenues and on the organization, operation and accounting systems of the government agencies responsible for transport administration;

3. To provide the liaison among the appropriate organizations and government agencies and offices concerned with or affected by the project; and

4. To provide such facilities and administrative support and services that may from time to time be required by the foreign consultants, to the extent defined in the agreed Plan of Operation.

The Director of Studies is hereby empowered:

1. To call upon all offices and meet with all persons who may be affected by the work of the transport survey group;

2. To require from the various government departments bureaus and offices, as well as government-owned or controlled corporations, such administrative support and services as may be required by the transport survey group; and

3. To do everything necessary arid expedient for the completion of the transport survey in accordance with the agreed schedule of activities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.