MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 427

AMENDING THE MEMORANDUM DATED MARCH 16, 1976 CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHICO RIVER PROJECT

The Memorandum of March 16, 1976 creating an inter-agency committee for the development of the Chico River Project is hereby amended to include the following Departments and Agencies in addition to the original members:

The Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communications

The Secretary of Social Services and Development

The Secretary of Education and Culture

The Secretary of National Defense

The Secretary of Local Governments and Community Development

The Secretary of Health

The Secretary of Public Information

The Commissioner of the Budget

The Chairman, Commission on Audit

The Director-General, National Economic Development Authority

The Chairman, Human Settlements Commission

The Administrator, National Electrification Administration

The Administrator, Kalinga Special Development Region

The above-mentioned departments and agencies shall likewise extend their resources, facilities and manpower in pursuance of the development of the project in collaboration with the Presidential Assistant on National Minorities and with other member agencies of the Committee. The new members shall also bear with the original members the costs of development involved in this project, as well as subsequent relocation projects, to the extent of their respective participation, to be funded out of their surplus funds and or savings until such costs are incorporated in their regular budgetary outlays.

The Committee shall promulgate its rules and regulations and shall have the authority to call upon any department, bureau or instrumentality of the government not mentioned in this memorandum, as well as the private sector, for any assistance that may be required in the performance of its task.

The Budget Commission shall see to it that all the financial requirements of the project as determined by the Committee are properly supported and shall release the funds of the Member Agencies concerned pursuant to and in accordance with the procedures set forth by the Committee.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1978). [Administrative Order Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.