MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 360

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO COORDINATE AND DIRECT THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PHILIPPINE PORTS AUTHORITY

WHEREAS, in order to realize in the shortest possible time, the creation of the Philippine Ports Authority which is considered vital to the country’s economy, there is a need to create a body which will coordinate and direct the establishment of the same:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Policy Committee on Philippine Ports composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following powers, duties and functions:

a) Provide direction, coordination, guidance and effective management for the establishment of a Philippine Port Authority, including Port Management Units in selected ports;

b) Review and approve the terms of reference for consultancy services, screen consultants and select the most suitable consultant to advise and assist the Government in the establishment of the Philippine Ports Authority.

c) Organize a counterpart staff to work with the selected Consultant in the establishment of a Philippine Ports Authority;

d) Review the recommendations of the Consultant;

e) Review and approve the operational, management, engineering and documentation procedures and staffing plans for the Philippine Ports Authority and the Ports Management Units in the ports concerned.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman for the purpose of discharging its functions and may create ad hoc sub-committees as may be necessary.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in discharging its duties and functions. This would include the detail, assignment, contract, or appointment of such personnel as may be necessary to the consultant’s counterpart staff, and furnishing of data, records or any information pertinent to the objectives of the Philippine Ports Authority. Such sums as may be necessary for the foregoing activities shall be funded from the Portworks Special Fund released to the Bureau of Public Works.

The Committee shall cease to exist upon the establishment and operations of the Philippine Ports Authority or when sooner revoked by this Office.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of April, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1974). [Administrative Order Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.