MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 486

IMPOSING A FINE ON MR. JULIO B. REVELO, REGISTER OF DEEDS OF GINGOOG CITY, IN AN AMOUNT EQUIVALENT TO HIS SALARY FOR FIFTEEN (15) DAYS

This is an administrative case initiated by the Land Registration Commissioner against Julio B. Revelo, Register of Deeds, Gingoog City, for “violation of the Anti-Graft Act and falsification of document.”

Records show that in a deed of sale dated October 25, 1969, Felix Adran sold two parcels of land to respondent for P6,000. However, upon its registration, the purchase price as appearing in the deed of sale was altered to P2,000 thereby resulting in the reduction of the registration fee and documentary stamps for registering the sale from P55.00 to only P23.50.

Confronted with the charges, respondent submitted a written answer denying the same and claiming that he had no reason to alter the purchase price, since he had a standing agreement with Mr. Adran for the latter to pay all the registration expenses. According to him, it was Mr. Adran who personally attended to the registration of the subject document. Respondent further averred that the alteration was the handiwork of an employee of his registry who has since been dismissed for dishonesty.

In the formal investigation which was opted by the respondent, he substantially repeated the contents of his written answer.

After a review of the records, I fail to find any iota of evidence which would sustain a verdict of guilt against respondent on the charges that he allegedly altered the Adran deed of sale. I am more inclined to give weight to his allegations that it was Felix Adran who was going to shoulder all the expenses for the registration of the deed of sale. Considering further that respondent has been in the service for sixteen (16) years, I believe that it is unthinkable that he would risk a smear on his career for a measly amount of P31.50, the difference in the registration fees.

However, respondent is not totally free from blame. His failure to check the amount of registration fees and documentary stamps paid by Adran for the registration of the document before issuing the corresponding certificate of title constitutes negligence on his part. I do not have to stress that his position as well as his delicate duties demand of him a certain degree of diligence which must not be, at any time, overlooked.

WHEREFORE, Mr. Julio B. Revelo is hereby found guilty of simple negligence and fined in an amount equivalent to his salary for fifteen (15) days. He is also hereby warned that a repetition of the same or similar offense will be dealt with more severely.

Bone in the City of Manila, this 21th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1984). [Administrative Order Nos. : 439 – 504]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.