MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 230

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON FREEDOM FROM HUNGER CAMPAIGN

WHEREAS, fully one-half of the world’s population is either ill-nourished or underfed;

WHEREAS, to fight this state of malnutrition and undernourishment, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, of which the Philippines is a member, launched on July 1, 1960, a world-wide Campaign for Freedom from Hunger and invited Member Countries to join in the collective effort to remove the threat of hunger by the establishment of National Committee on Freedom from Hunger Campaign; and

WHEREAS, to give this campaign a wider base on which to operate, it has been deemed necessary to involve people themselves, so that membership to the National Committee should include non-governmental and/or civic organizations and individuals with the government agencies participating actively as consultants;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine National Committee on Freedom from Hunger Campaign which unless otherwise directed, shall continue to function until June 30, 1980. The Committee likewise, shall (1) act as counterpart of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation’s Freedom from Hunger Campaign movement; (2) bring before the people the reality of hunger which confronts all developing countries including the Philippines; (3) stimulate and support nation-wide action program through informational education, cooperative effort and research; (4) mobilize the youth of the country to participate in the world-wide campaign against hunger; and (5) adopt such other measures as will achieve a better understanding of providing adequate food for the present and future population of the world.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Committee is authorized to accept additional members as may be deemed necessary for the effective functioning of the committee. It shall determine and elect its own officers as are necessary.

The seat of the Secretariat shall be at the Nutrition Foundation of the Philippines, with the NFP Executive Director as concurrent Executive Secretary of the committee.

FUNDING: The committee is empowered to raise funds by voluntary contributions according to law to meet its financial obligations.

The Committee shall render special and annual reports of its activities and accomplishments to the President of the Philippines, furnishing copies thereof to the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization.

This Administrative Order supersedes Administrative Order No. 134 dated September 6, 1965 and the records, property, assets and liabilities of the Committee created thereunder are transferred to the Committee herein created.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of July, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Administrative Order Nos. : 200 – 263]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.