MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 399

CONSTITUTING THE KABATAANG BARANGAY DEVELOPMENT COORDINATING COUNCIL AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, at the Second Katabaang Barangay National Convention heId at Camp September 21st Movement in Mt. Makiling, Los Baños, Laguna, a Resolution was adopted formulating plans land projects of the Kabataang Barangay, among which, is the proposal to have the various activities relating to the promotion, development and enhancement of the welfare of the youth coordinated by a body duly constituted for the purpose;

WHEREAS, this need stemmed from the fact that at present these various activities are to a large degree being undertaken separately by the various offices and agencies of the Government and that these activities can be more effectively and efficiently done if properly coordinated;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, in order to effect a more coordinated action as regards youth development and activities, do hereby constitute the Kabataang Barangay Development Coordinating Council composed of the following:

The Kabataang Barangay Development Coordinating Council shall coordinate all activities of the various departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government pertaining to the youth and matters within the concern or sphere of the Kabataang Barangay; monitor data and information relating to these activities; and call upon or enlist the assistance of any office or agency of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, in carrying out its functions, duties and responsibilities.

The existing Kabataang Barangay National Secretariat under the Department of Local Government and Community Development is hereby made the Secretariat of the Council, which shall provide the necessary staff support and services to the Council in carrying out its powers, functions and objectives under this Order.

The same Secretariat shall, at the same time, remain as an office in the Department of Local Government and Community Development to assist, support and provide services as may be required by the Kabataang Barangay in the performance of its functions and duties and in implementing its plans, programs and projects.

The Department of Local Government and Community Development shall provide the necessary funds for the operation and maintenance of the Secretariat from the already existing appropriations of that Department for barangay activities. The Budget Commission shall facilitate the release of funds needed by the Secretariat and the Council in carrying out its functions, duties and responsibilities under this Order.

The Council, through its Chairman, shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to effectively implement the provisions of this Order.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of February, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1977). [Administrative Order Nos. : 349 – 438]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.