MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 293

CREATING THE COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR NUCLEAR POWER STUDY

WHEREAS, the Government welcomes the agreement in principle between the National Power Corporation (NPC) and the Manila Electric Company (MERALCO) for the integrated planning of capacity additions in the Luzon Grid;

WHEREAS, the joint planning has demonstrated that serious consideration should be given to constructing a nuclear power station to be completed in the latter part of this decade;

WHEREAS, a project feasibility study covering technical, economic, safety, organizational and other related aspects should be undertaken to establish the definite viability of the project preliminary to securing its financing;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me, do hereby create the Coordinating Committee for Nuclear Power Study to be composed of the following:

The Committee is hereby authorized to invite a representative from MERALCO as one of its regular members. The Committee shall also have the following functions:

1. Through the appropriate Government agencies, secure the services of a foreign engineering consulting firm that shall undertake a technical and economic feasibility study of constructing a nuclear power station in the Luzon Grid by 1978/79.

2. Provide administrative, technical and local financing support to the engineering consulting firm.

The Committee may create such sub-committees as may be necessary in the performance of its functions.

The Committee may request any department, bureau, office, agency and instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

The Committee shall render a monthly progress report to the Chairman of the Power Development Council.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Administrative Order Nos. : 264 – 316]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.