MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 316

AMENDING THE COMPOSITION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT BOARD

The composition and functions of the Telecommunications Development Board created under Administrative Order No. 130 dated June 18, 1968, as amended under Administrative Orders No. 139 and 224 dated 9th September, 1968 and 29th June, 1970 respectively, are hereby amended as follows:

The Board shall be under the administrative supervision and control of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications who shall provide adequate financial support for its efficient operation.

The Chairman of the Board shall appoint an Executive Director and personnel necessary for its administrative and technical operations.

The Board is hereby empowered:

1. To study and plan the integration of the existing facilities and development programs of the public and private sectors operating telecommunication services thereby insuring an orderly and economic development of the country.

2. To advise the Public Service Commission on effective rules and regulations on technical and operational standards conforming to CCIT’S (Consulative Committees on International Telecommunications) recommendations for proper coordination of services in accordance with Sections 13 and 16 (b) of the Public Service Act.

3. To extend technical assistance and advice to government banking institutions in assessing technical aspects of loan applications for telecommunication services development to ensure the economic usage of funds granted and to avoid duplication of services facilities.

4. To maintain a complete record of technical facilities and equipment in the Philippines and of traffic data for national and international services.

5. To undertake such other duties as required by the President.

6. To submit recommendations on matters of national importance pertaining to decisions of the board, as well as semi-annual reports, to the President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Administrative Order Nos. : 264 – 316 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.