MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 164

CREATING A SPECIAL COMMITTEE FOR STUDENT AFFAIRS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES (UP)

WHEREAS, it is important that the University of the Philippines (UP), as the premier government institution of higher learning in this country, should provide the leadership in dealing with problems arising out of student’s complaints, grievances and demands;

WHEREAS, in order to realize this worthy objective, it is vital that the officials of the government as well as of the University administration should continually be in contact with the students, through their organizations and leadership, and be made aware of their problems by means of dialogue and discussion with the end in view of arriving at solutions thereto through concensus and mutual agreement;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and conscious of my duties and responsibilities as head of the Board of Visitors of the University of the Philippines, do hereby create and constitute a Special Committee for Student Affairs in the University of the Philippines which shall be composed as follows:

The Committee shall also have as members the President of the UP Student Council and three (3) other representatives therefrom who shall be selected by the Council.

It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to meet with the students and discuss problems of mutual concern as well as national issues affecting the students, and study, propose, formulate and/or provide solutions therefor or recommendations thereon.

All departments, bureaus, offices and agencies of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations are hereby directed to extend and render assistance to the Committee whenever the same is needed.

Done in the City of Manila this 13th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.