MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 92

CREATING THE TONDO FORESHORE DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 1597, otherwise known as the “Tondo Foreshore Land Act of 1956”, as amended by Republic Act No. 2439, provides for the survey and subdivision of the Tondo Foreshore into lots for disposition to qualified applicants except that portion one hundred meters from the pier line to the East and those areas which may be reserved by the government for port facilities, roads and other public uses, which provisions have not been implemented up to the present;

WHEREAS, there is a need to unclog the piers of warehouses and other port facilities and to provide the North Harbor with wider spaces for loading and unloading cargoes;

WHEREAS, the North Harbor requires an effective road system to facilitate the movement of vehicles in said port area;

WHEREAS, more lands should be reclaimed from the sea to help bring about a more viable North Harbor port system; and

WHEREAS, integration and coordination, of all the abovementioned activities can best be achieved by centralizing responsibility and authority therefor at the highest level possible;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Tondo Foreshore Development Committee composed of the following:

The Committee shall be assisted by a technical staff to be composed of such personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it from the different offices involved.

The Committee shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Study ways and means of implementing the provisions of Republic Act No. 1597, as amended;

b. Develop an integrated long-term plan for the overall social and economic development of the Tondo Foreshore and its residents;

c. Determine priorities in awarding residential lots to bona fide occupants of lots in the Tondo Foreshore;

d. Study and recommend improvements on the North Harbor facilities bordering the Tondo Foreshore;

e. Submit an annual report of its activities to the President including proposed policies and matters for legislation;

f. Promulgate such rules and procedures as may be necessary to execute the purposes of this Order; and

g. Advise the President on all matters regarding (1) the disposition and sale of the Tondo Foreshore to the tenants thereof; (2) improvements and facilities to be introduced within the Tondo Foreshore for the benefit of the inhabitants thereof, and (3) facilities for improving the North Harbor, including the planning out and construction of an effective road system to serve the North Harbor area.

The Committee may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its functions.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1967). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.