MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINSTRATIVE ORDER NO. 141

CREATING A COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, financially sound and efficiently-managed agricultural cooperatives responsive to and adequately meeting the imperative of increased production and effective marketing are vital to our economy;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an Agricultural Cooperative Development Committee composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following specific objectives:

a) Develop a system of integrating and consolidating the members and business of existing Farmers’ Cooperative Marketing associations;

b) Improve the quality of manpower involved in cooperative development activities;

c) Develop effective cooperative methods of procurement and distribution of agricultural inputs, including equipment and the marketing of farmers’ produce;

d) Devise a financing scheme that will provide adequate and timely credit to cooperatives and their farmer-members; and

e) Provide adequate management counseling, effective supervision and guidance to agricultural cooperatives.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and for the purpose of discharging its functions, may create sub-committees as may be necessary.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in discharging its duties and functions,

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive-Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1968). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.