MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 220

CREATING A STUDY AND COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON THE MANILA BAY ROAD PROJECT

In view of the magnitude of the Manila Bay Road Project and of the need to study thoroughly its many aspects to better implement the same and coordinate the efforts of the various government offices and agencies which would be involved in the carrying out of the Project, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee to undertake a feasibility study and coordinate the activities and efforts of the various offices and agencies of the government which would be affected and/or involved in the Project.

The Committee shall be composed of the following members:

The Committee shall be assisted by a Technical Panel which shall be headed by the Deputy Director General for Operations of the Presidential Economic Staff as Chairman and composed of representatives, to be designated by the respective heads of offices concerned, from the following offices, namely, Department of Public Works and Communications, Office of the Solicitor General, Department of Justice, Bureau of Public Highways, Bureau of Public Works and the Department of Finance.

When necessary and upon the invitation and advice of the Chairman of the Technical Panel, a representative of the Province and/or Municipality abutting the Manila Bay Area may sit in and attend Committee or Panel meetings.

The Committee shall be charged with the following duties and functions:

1. To study, think up and develop the project proposal in all phases and aspects thereof.

2. To recommend financing for the project.

3. To formulate procedures and undertake all necessary preliminary works prior to actual implementation.

4. To submit bi-monthly progress report on the project.

All Departments, bureau, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government including government-owned or controlled corporations and local government instrumentalities are hereby directed to extend assistance to the Committee and Technical Panel, or any of its duly authorized members, whenever such assistance is sought in connection with the work of the Committee or Panel.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Administrative Order Nos. : 200 – 263]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.