MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 455

WHEREAS, there is mounting public concern that the use of asbestos cement pipes for distribution of potable water for human consumption may be a hazard to public health;

WHEREAS, asbestos cement pipes have been and are being used in the distribution system under construction by such water agencies as the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System and the Local Water and Utilities Administration and contracts exist calling for the use of asbestos cement pipes;

WHEREAS, there appears to be a divergence of opinion on the subject of the carcinogenous nature of asbestos cement pipes;

WHEREFORE, a Special Presidential Advisory Committee is hereby created to be composed of the following:

1. DR. JESUS C. AZURIN, Minister, Ministry of Health, as Chairman

2. DR. CELSO ROQUE, Executive Director, NEPC, as Member

3. DR. EMIL Q. JAVIER, Director-General, National Science and Technology Authority, as Member

4. DR. IGNACIO SALCEDO, Director, Product Standard Agency, as Member

5. MR. FRED ELIZALDE, President, Philippine Chamber, of Commerce and Industry, as Member

The Special Committee is hereby empowered to collect and collate data and materials; study and assess all the issues relevant to the above subject in order to determine whether or not the use of asbestos cement pipes for water distribution systems shall be further allowed in the country; and submit to the undersigned within three months from date hereof the results of the study together with recommendations for a policy that would best serve the interest of all the citizenry.

It is hereby ordered that pending the promulgation of such a policy, asbestos cement pipes be used or purchased by MWSS and LWUA or their contractors.

The Special Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any office or official in any office to assist the Special Committee in its task.

Done this 18th day of November, 1982

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1982). [Administrative Order Nos. : 439 – 504 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.