MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 213

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO STUDY BUDGETING CONCEPTS AS THEY RELATE TO NATIONAL PLANS AND PROGRAMS

WHEREAS, it has been the experience that the budget as prepared has often been at variance with, or does not adequately provide for, national plans and programs;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that, in order to have reasonable assurance that development goals of the country may be realized within its limited resources, the budget should be formulated in such a way that it shall truly reflect income resources and provide needed financial support for duly approved national plans and programs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee to study budgetary concepts reflecting national plans and programs including those of local government entities, to be composed as follows:

The Committee shall have the following functions and objectives:

1. To resolve the existing conflicts between plans, programs and budgets with the end in view of establishing a rationale between income and expenditures and to ensure realistic allocation of resources in accordance with priorities established by national planning agencies.

2. To formulate policies and procedures as well as a reporting system by which the planning, programming and budgeting functions of the government and its instrumentalities can be coordinated effectively.

3. To recommend necessary legislation and other measures as may be necessary toward the accomplishment of the foregoing objectives.

The Committee is hereby empowered to form such technical group as may be needed to conduct research and special studies for the Committee.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby required to extend full support and assistance to the Committee.

The Committee shall submit its recommendations to the President on or before April 30, 1970.

Done in the City of Baguio, this 31st day of March, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1970). [Administrative Order Nos. : 200 – 263]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.