MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 284

CREATING A REAL PROPERTY ASSESSMENT COMMITTEE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE

WHEREAS, there is an imperative need to improve the real property assessment function considering the importance of the realty tax as the principal source of revenues for local governments; and

WHEREAS, the attainment of such objective will also result in the equitable distribution of the realty tax burden among all real property owners throughout the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Real Property Assessment Committee in the Department of Finance composed of the following:

The powers, functions and duties of the Real Property Assessment Committee are:

(1) to conduct a study and analysis of the findings of the defunct Special Tax Revision Commission, created under Administrative Order No. 240, series of 1957;

(2) to formulate measures designed to implement the recommendations of said Commission, including proposals for remedial legislation, in the light of the problems presently obtaining in the real property assessment service;

(3) to assist the Secretary of Finance in the formulation and implementation of fiscal policies calculated to enhance the potentialities of the realty tax as source of local government revenues; and

(4) to recommend to the Secretary of Finance methods and procedures that will promote a more efficient and effective supervision over the offices of provincial and city assessors.

The Committee shall convene upon call of the Chairman of the Real Property Assessment Committee. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the holding of a meeting of the Committee. The Chairman and members of the Committee shall not be entitled to additional compensation except for necessary traveling expenses incidental to the discharge of the functions of the Committee in accordance with existing laws and regulations, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices.

The Committee may call on any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations for such assistance as it may need in connection with the performance of its functions, and such assistance shall be extended whenever the same is sought by the committee or any of its members.

The Committee shall finish its task within a period of one (1) year from the date hereof and submit reports of its accomplishments to the Secretary of Finance at least once a month, the first report to be submitted not later than May 31, 1971.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1971). [Administrative Order Nos. : 264 – 316]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.