MALACANANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 440

LIFTING THE PREVENTIVE SUSPENSION OF MAYOR ALFONSO TAN, JR. OF TANGUB CITY

This refers to the request for the lifting of the preventive suspension of Mayor Alfonso Tan, Jr, of Tangub City.

On January 31, 1979, Mayer Alfonso Ten, Jr. of Tangub City, together with City Fiscal Jose Velono, were preventively suspended from office on the basis of the report that he was using his office to harass witnesses in connection with the malpractices and anti-graft cases filed against him by the Kabataang Barangay Chairman thereat.

An investigation was conducted, including that of the National Bureau of Investigation and Director Jolly Bugarin submitted his report stating that “ no sufficient evidence has been gathered to warrant subjects (Mayor Alfonso Tan) prosecution for any crime . Similarly, there is not enough is not enough evidence to establish the charges of harassment against Fiscal Jose Velono.” On the case of Fiscal Velono, the NBI reported to the Acting Minister of Justice, stating that “no sufficient evidence of harassment was gathered against Fiscal Jose R. Velono.” The Acting Minister of Justice then recommended to this Office the lifting of the preventive suspension of Fiscal Velono. This Office has given due course to the recommendation.

In view of the foregoing, the order preventively suspending Mayor Alfonso Tan, Jr. of Tangub City from office is hereby lifted. He is, however, hereby admonished to be more discreet in the performance of his duties in order to forestall the filing of similar charges against him in the future.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1979). [Administrative Order Nos. : 439 – 504 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.