MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 196

PROVIDING FOR SPEEDY IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TEXTBOOK PRODUCTION PROGRAM OF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order;

1. All government purchases of privately-authored basic textbooks in the elementary and high school, if such textbooks have been adopted by the Board on Textbooks through the regular competitive adoption procedures, shall be considered as having complied with the public bidding requirements prescribed under Executive Order No. 298, s. 1940, as amended, and may therefore be ordered from their respective publisher at prices approved by the Board oil Textbooks.

2. An Advisory Committee of the Special Project Group for Textbooks is hereby created to be composed of the Director of Public Schools as Chairman, the Assistant Director of Public Schools (Promotional Activities) as Vice Chairman, and a representative each from the Department of General Services, Department of Education and Bureau of Public Schools, to be designated by the head of Office concerned, as members.

3. Upon the recommendation of the Advisory Committee of the Special Project Group for Textbooks, printing contracts of textbooks programmed for production in a given Fiscal Year with a value of not more than P500,000.00 shall be approved by the Secretary of Education. Contracts valued over P500,000.00 will be submitted for approval to the Permanent Cabinet Committee on Public Bidding.

4. The printing of textbooks teacher’s guides, teachers’ manuals and other teaching materials published by the Bureau of Public Schools which cannot be made by the Bureau of Printing shall, upon approval of the Advisory Committee, be awarded to private printers through, public bidding, the sane to be approved by the Secretary of Education.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ERNESTO M. MACEDA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1969). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 199 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.