MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 409

DECLARING THE PERIOD BETWEEN INDEPENDENCE DAY, JULY 4, AND JULY 31, 1939, AS THE TIME FOR THE FOURTH COMMONWEALTH ROLL CALL OF THE RED CROSS IN THE PHILIPPINES.

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period between Independence Day, July fourth, and July thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, the time for the Fourth Commonwealth Roll Call of the Red Cross in the Philippines.

The need for the Red Cross in the Philippines and in other nations is emphasized by the critical time through which the world is passing. The original and principal objectives for which this great international organization was established are: to provide for the amelioration of the condition of soldiers wounded upon the fields of battle and of civilians who are the unhappy victims of warfare; to neutralize and protect persons engaged in giving such relief, and to furnish supplies for these purposes; to carry on a system of relief in time of peace, and to apply the same for the mitigation of suffering caused by pestilence, famine, fire, flood, and other calamities.

In addition to these original and primary objectives, the Philippine Red Cross conducts a daily program of practical service to the people in all parts of the Archipelago. The record of such service during the past year justifies the appreciation and support of our people.

It is the desire of the Government to encourage and support all efforts to develop the Philippine Red Cross as a volunteer agency through which our citizens can do their part in fulfilling the purposes for which the Red Cross has been established throughout the world.

I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, our business interests, all national, provincial, and municipal officials, the clergy, all the teachers in public and private schools, and other public-spirited individuals and institutions, to actively assist in the organization and conduct of the Roll Call, and to give generous and special support this year in order that the Red Cross may be able to meet all its obligations and responsibilities.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this eighth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives