MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 711

PUBLISHING THE PROCLAMATION OF A STATE OF WAR BETWEEN HUNGARY AND YUGOSLAVIA BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE ANNOUNCEMENTS MADE BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF THE APPLICABILITY TO HUNGARY OF THE RULES AND REGULATIONS PROMULGATED BY HIM UNDER THE NEUTRALITY ACT OF 1939.

Whereas the President of the United States did, on April 15, 1941, issue the following proclamation:

1. “PROCLAMATION OF A STATE OF WAR BETWEEN HUNGARY AND YUGOSLAVIA

“Whereas section 1 of the joint resolution of Congress approved November 4, 1939, provides in part as follows:

‘That whenever the President, or the Congress by concurrent resolution, shall find that there exists a state of war between foreign states, and that it is necessary to promote the security or preserve the peace of the United States or to protect the lives of citizens of the United States, the President shall issue a proclamation naming the states involved; and he shall, from time to time, by proclamation, name other states as and when they may become involved in the war.’

“And whereas it is further provided by section 13 of the said joint resolution that

‘The President may, from time to time, promulgate such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary and proper to carry out any of the provisions of this joint resolution; and he may exercise and power or authority conferred on him by this joint resolution through such officer or officers, or agency or agencies, as he shall direct.’

“Now, therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, acting under and by virtue of the authority conferred on me by the said joint resolution, do hereby proclaim that, Hungary having without justification attacked Yugoslavia, a state of war exists between Hungary and Yugoslavia and that it is necessary to promote the security and preserve the peace of the United States and to protect the lives of citizens of the United States.

“And I do hereby enjoin upon all officers of the United States, charged with the execution of the laws thereof, the utmost diligence in preventing violations of the said joint resolution and in bringing to trial and punishment any offenders against the same.

“And I do hereby delegate to the Secretary of State the power to exercise any power or authority conferred on me by the said joint resolution, as made effective by this my proclamation issued thereunder, which is not specifically delegated by Executive order to some other officer or agency of this Government, and the power to promulgate such rules and regulations no inconsistent with law as may be necessary and proper to carry out any of its provisions.

“In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of Amended to be affixed.

“Done at the city of Washington this fifteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and sixty-fifth.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

“By the President: “CORDELL HULL “Secretary of State”

Whereas the Secretary of State of the United States, did, on April 16, 1941, make the following announcements:

2. “The Secretary of State announces that the regulations under section 2 (c) and (i) of the joint resolution of Congress approved November 4, which he promulgated on November 10 and November 25, 1939, henceforth apply equally in respect to the export or transport of articles and materials to Hungary.”

3. “The Secretary of State announces that the regulations under section 5 of the joint resolution of Congress approved November 4, 1939, which he promulgated on November 6, and amended November 17, 1939, henceforth apply equally in respect to travel by citizens of the United States on vessels of Hungary.”

4. “The Secretary of State announces that the rules and regulations under section 8 of the joint resolution of Congress approved November 4, 1939, which he promulgated on November 6, 1939, henceforth apply equally to the solicitation and collection of contributions for use in Hungary.”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the above proclamation and announcements for the information and guidance of all concerned.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Baguio, this seventeenth day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library