MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 313

PROCLAIMING OCTOBER THIRTY-FIRST TO NOVEMBER FIFTEENTH OF EVERY YEAR AS BOY SCOUTS ANNIVERSARY PERIOD THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES .

For almost a decade the Boy Scouts Organization has been rendering, in an unobtrusive way, valuable service to the nation by cooperating with official and private charitable institutions in giving aid to the helpless and the needy. It has also supplemented the home, the school, and the church in the task of moulding the youth of the land into men of strong character and vigorous health. It has not only conscientiously sought to prepare its members for service to society, but has also materially contributed to the inculcation in the Filipino youth of the ideals of patriotism and citizenship.

The Boy Scouts Movement has enjoyed the support of both the Government and the people of the Philippines. The enactment by the National Assembly of Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred eleven, incorporating the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, proves that the Government fully recognizes the value of the movement. The Filipino people as well as foreigners residing in our country have shown their appreciation of the work done by this organization through their wholehearted response to the National Building Fund Campaign successfully conducted by the Boy Scouts of the Philippines.

Nevertheless, much still remains to be done before the movement can meet the needs of the Boy Scouts adequately. The facilities at the disposal of the Boy Scouts Organization have thus far sufficed to train only a small portion of the boys of the country. The Philippines can never hope to attain her most cherished ideals unless a great majority, if not all, of her boys, the citizens of tomorrow, are given better opportunities than heretofore to prepare themselves for the duties and responsibilities of citizenship. We, as people, are committed to the ideals of democracy; we must insist that our young citizens be trained for citizenship in a democratic way. One of the effective means of carrying out this objective would be to encourage and support the Boy Scouts Movement in the Philippines. The plan, therefore, to hold a Boy Scouts Anniversary Period every year, for the purpose of bringing more emphatically to the attention of our people the value of scouting as an instrument of character development and citizenship training, should have the wholehearted support of the nation

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim the period from the thirty-first day of October, the Foundation Day of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, to the fifteenth day of November, the Anniversary of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, as Boy Scouts Anniversary Period throughout the Philippines to be fittingly observed every year for the purpose of strengthening the work of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines.

I earnestly recommend that in every town where a scout troop has been organized an opportunity be given for every registered Scout on the evening of October thirty-first to recommit himself to the Scout Oath and Law.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library