PROCLAMATION NO. 134

DECLARING THE PERIOD BETWEEN INDEPENDENCE DAY, JULY 4, AND JULY 31, 1937, AS THE TIME FOR THE SECOND COMMONWEALTH ROLL CALL OF THE RED CROSS IN THE PHILIPPINES.

I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period between Independence Day, July fourth, and July thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, the time for the Second Commonwealth Roll Call of the Red Cross in the Philippines.

The record of the Red Cross in ably handling the great disasters of nineteen hundred and thirty-six is still fresh in the minds of our people. Before the storms claiming their toll of human lives and devastating our crops and properties had ceased to rage, the nurses and relief personnel of the Red Cross were already at work in the stricken areas, ministering to those who suffered. Thousands of homes throughout the length and breadth of the Archipelago can bear witness to the humanitarian services rendered by the Red Cross when disasters have spread death and destruction over the face of our land.

It is, therefore, the desire of the Government to encourage and support all efforts to develop the Red Cross as a voluntary agency, through which our citizens, in time of great emergency, can come to the aid of the needy and the suffering with their means and personal services. No effort should be spared on the part of our people to build up in the Philippines a strong Red Cross organization to fulfill the purposes for which this great movement is established in all the leading nations of the world.

I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, our business interests, all national, provincial, and municipal officials, the clergy, all the teachers in public and private schools, and other public spirited individuals and institutions, to actively assist in the organization and conduct of the Roll Call, and to give generous and special support this year in order that the Red Cross may be able to meet all its obligations and responsibilities.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Washington, D. C. (for the City of Manila), this sixth day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

[SEAL]

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary of the Interior