MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 680

DESIGNATING THE PERIOD FROM MARCH NINETEEN TO MARCH TWENTY-EIGHT, INCLUSIVE, AS NATIONAL DEFENSE WEEK

Whereas active duty training for a period of ten (10) days beginning March 19 and ending March 28, 1941, has been ordered for certain reserve units of the Philippine Army;

Whereas the military efficiency of the reserve formations of the Philippine Army is one of the principal factors upon which rests the future security of the nation;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate the period from March 19 to March 28, 1941, inclusive, as National Defense Week and call upon all citizens of the Philippines to extend their support and cooperation in order that the training of the reserve formations may be carried out successfully.

To this end, all officials of the Government, particularly those whose duties during mobilization have been defined in Executive Order No. 184, are directed to familiarize themselves immediately with every circumstance and condition affecting the designated persons in their respective areas, and to render every possible assistance both to the individual and to the military authorities in effecting a prompt and complete concentration of the reservists concerned.

In the furtherance of this purpose, it is of special importance that officers and soldiers called upon to perform this public service be assured of protection against unnecessary or useless sacrifice. More specifically, I urge all employers in the Philippines to follow the example of the Government in not depriving an employee of his position or causing him to suffer loss of pay due to absence incurred in the fulfillment of his military obligations.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twelfth day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library