MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 389

DESIGNATING THE PERIOD FROM MAY 4TH TO MAY 13TH, INCLUSIVE, AS NATIONAL DEFENSE WEEK

Whereas a mobilization for ten days active duty training, beginning May fourth, has been ordered for those Reserve units of the Philippine Army comprising graduates of the nineteen hundred and thirty-seven series of training cadres; and

Whereas the military efficiency of the Reserve formations of the Philippine Army is one of the principal supports upon which rests the future security of the nation;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate the period from May fourth to May thirteenth, inclusive, as National Defense Week, and call upon all citizens of the Philippines to devote themselves with special zeal and effort, during that period, toward the success of this training and development and progress of our national defense forces.

In the furtherance of this purpose all appropriate officials of the Government are directed to familiarize themselves immediately with every circumstance and condition affecting the designated persons in their respective areas, and to render every proper assistance both to the individual and to the military authorities in assuring a complete and prompt concentration of the units concerned.

It is of special importance that officers and soldiers called upon to perform this public service be assured of protection against unnecessary or useless sacrifice. Specifically, and in accordance with law, no Government employee shall be deprived either of his civil position or of his pay because of necessary absence in carrying out this duty. Moreover, I expressly urge all employers in the Philippines, whether they be individuals or corporations, to follow this example of the Government, thus contributing to the success of the national defense program and establishing a claim upon the gratitude of the Filipino people.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirteenth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives