MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 732

PUBLISHING THE EXECUTIVE ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, DATED MARCH 22, 1941, ESTABLISHING SUBIC BAY NAVAL DEFENSIVE SEA AREA AND SUBIC BAY NAVAL AIRSPACE RESERVATION.

Whereas the President of the United States did on March 22, 1941, issue the following Executive Order:

“By virtue of the authority vested in me by the provisions of section 44 of the Criminal Code as amended (U. S. C, title 18, sec. 96), and section 4 of the Air Commerce Act approved May 20, 1926 (44 Stat., 568, 570; U. S. C, title 49, sec. 174), the territorial waters within Subic Bay, Philippine Islands, between extreme high-water mark and the sea and in and about the entrance channel within a line bearing true southwest extending three nautical miles from Panibatujan Point, a line bearing true southwest extending three nautical miles from Sampaloc Point, and a line joining the seaward extremities of the above two bearing lines, are hereby set apart and reserved as a naval defensive sea area for purposes of the national defense, such area to be known as ‘Subic Bay Naval Defensive Sea Area’; and the airspace over the said territorial waters and over the Subic Bay Naval Reservation, Olongapo, Philippine Islands, is hereby set apart and reserved as a naval airspace reservation for purposes of the national defense such reservation to be known as ‘Subic Bay Naval Airspace Reservation.’

“At no time shall any vessel or other craft, other than public vessels Of the United States, be navigated into Subic Bay Naval Defensive Sea Area, unless authorized by the Secretary of the Navy.

“At no time shall any aircraft, other than public aircraft of the United States, be navigated into Subic Bay Naval Airspace Reservation, unless authorizes by the Secretary of the Navy.

“The provisions of the preceding paragraphs shall be enforced by the Secretary of the Navy, with the cooperation of the local law enforcement officers of the United States; and the Secretary of the Navy is J hereby authorized to prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out such provisions.

“Any person violating any of the provisions of this order relating to Subic Bay Naval Defensive Sea Area shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 44 of the Criminal Code as amended (U. S. C, title 18, sec. 96), and any person violating any of the provisions of this order relating to Subic Bay Naval Airspace Reservation shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by the Civil Aeronautics Act of 1938 (53 Stat. 973).

“This order shall take effect ninety days after date hereof.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

“The White House, “March 22, 1941”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the above Executive Order for the information and guidance of all concerned.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this first day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library