MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 637

PUBLISHING THE PROCLAMATION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES DATED OCTOBER 17, 1940, AND SETTING ASIDE NOVEMBER 11, 1940, AS SPECIAL PUBLIC HOLIDAY FOR THE OBSERVANCE OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE ARMISTICE OF 1918.

Whereas the President of the United States did on the 17th day of October, 1940, issue the following proclamation:

“Whereas on November 11, 1918, the nations then at war laid down their weapons and turned their thoughts to the hoped-for dawn of an era of peace and order; and

“Whereas Senate Concurrent Resolution 18, 69th Congress, passed June 4, 1926 (44 Stat. 1982), requests the President of the United States to issue a proclamation calling for the display of the flag of the United States on all government buildings on November 11 and for the observance of .the day with appropriate ceremonies and the Act of May 13, 1938 (52 Stat 351) designates the eleventh day of November of each year as a legal public holiday; and

“Whereas observance of the anniversary of the armistice of 1918 will direct our minds to the need of the world then as now not only for peace but also for peace with understanding not only for a cessation of hostilities but also for mutual respect in the intercourse between nations;

“Now, therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, do hereby direct that the flag of the United States be displayed on all government buildings on November 11 1940 and I call upon the people of the United States to observe the day with appropriate ceremonies in schools and churches or other suitable places.

“In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to be affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington, this seventeenth day of October, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and forty and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and sixty-fifth.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT.”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the provisions of section 30 of the Administrative Code, do hereby designate and proclaim Monday, November 11, 1940, a special public holiday, direct that the flags of the United States and the Philippines be displayed on all government buildings on said day, and call on all the inhabitants of the Philippines to observe the day with appropriate ceremonies in schools and churches or other suitable places.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila this twenty-eighth day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library