MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 364

REVISING THE REGULATIONS GOVERNING AERIAL NAVIGATION IN PHILIPPINE TERRITORY

Whereas it has been found necessary and expedient to exercise effective supervision and control over aerial navigation in the Philippines;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power’s vested in me by law, do hereby issue the following regulations governing aerial navigation in Philippine Territory:

1. Except as hereinafter provided, no aircraft other than those of the United States and Philippine Governments shall fly over any Philippine territory.

2. No flying by any aircraft other than ‘those of the United States and Philippine Governments shall be allowed within the distance of:

(a) Fifteen miles from the perimeter of the following named areas:

(1) Corregidor Island, Manila Bay. (2) Subic Bay, Island of Luzon.

(b) Three miles from the perimeter of the following area:

(1) Cavite Peninsula, Manila Bay,

except that special exception may be authorized by proper authority.

3. Aircraft other than those mentioned in paragraphs one and four may fly in Philippine territory provided they have previously obtained permission as provided in section seven of Aeronautics Bulletin Number Three of the Bureau of Aeronautics. When practicable such airplanes shall be escorted upon entering Philippine territory through a definite route by Philippine Army airplanes.

4. Local aircraft owned by private corporations or individuals may be operated or navigated in Philippine territory only after securing a license duly issued by the Director of Aeronautics in accordance with the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred sixty-eight, and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

5. Aerial photography of any part of Philippine territory is prohibited, except such as is officially made by the United States and Philippine Governments and by agencies expressly authorized by the President of the Philippines.

6. No aircraft other than those of the United States and Philippine Governments shall carry any apparatus, instrument, or device which can be used for aerial photography without securing special written permission from the President of the Philippines.

7. Any violation of any provision of this proclamation shall be dealt with in accordance with law.

Proclamation Numbered Three hundred, twenty-fourth, dated September twenty-fourth,; nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and all other, proclamations and executive orders or part thereof previously issued, which are in conflict with any of the provisions hereof are hereby revoked.

The above regulations shall become effective from the date hereof.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-seventh day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives