MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 536

PROCLAIMING THE EXISTENCE OF A PUBLIC CALAMITY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF PARACALE, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES NORTE.

Having found that the recent fire which broke out in and devastated the municipality of Paracale, Province of Camarines Norte, has wrought havoc among the residents thereof and has made unduly difficult their means of livelihood, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers conferred upon me by section 1 of Act No. 4164, entitled “An Act to prevent the excessive increase in the price of certain prime necessities of life on the occasion of a public calamity, penalizing the violation thereof, and for other purposes,” do hereby proclaim that a public calamity exists in the municipality of Paracale, Province of Camarines Norte, as a result of said fire and do hereby declare in full force and effect therein for a period of not more than six months the provisions of Act No. 4164 which prohibit and penalize the hoarding of the prime necessities of life and the holding of them for sale at prices twenty-five per cent or more higher than the prices which were current in the different localities one month before the disaster occurred.

This proclamation shall not apply to such commodities of prime necessity as are covered by Executive Order No. 233 and its amendments, except with respect to commodities for which a lower maximum price is fixed under the provisions of Act No. 4164, in which case, this maximum price shall govern, notwithstanding the provisions of Executive Order No. 233 and its amendments.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this fourth day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library