PROCLAMATION NO. 9

DESIGNATING THURSDAY, THE 28 TH OF NOVEMBER, 1935, AS A DAY OF NATIONAL THANKSGIVING

Whereas, the President of the United States, in accordance with custom, has set aside Thursday, November twenty-eighth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, as a day of national thanksgiving; and

Whereas, it is most appropriate that on this, the first year of the Commonwealth, the day be observed in the Philippines as in the United States and that the Filipino people be apprised of the proclamation by the President of the United States of America.

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim Thursday, November twenty-eight nineteen hundred and thirty-five as a day of thanksgiving in the Philippines and do enjoin upon the inhabitants thereof to repair to their respective houses of worship and offer thanks to Almighty God for the blessings which He has bestowed upon this country; for the establishment of the Commonwealth base upon the free will and suffrage of the Filipino people and for the generosity of the American Government and people in granting to us this final concession preparatory to the achievement of the status of a free and independent nation; to make humble acknowledgment of our devout gratitude to Him for the bountiful blessings that have been vouchsafed to us during the past year and for the spirit of peace and goodwill that reigns supreme among all elements of our people; and I do also furnish, for the respectful and careful consideration of the people of the Philippines, the following proclamation of President Roosevelt:

“BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA—A PROCLAMATION

“I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, hereby designate Thursday, the twenty-eighth of November, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, as a day of national thanksgiving.

“In traversing a period of national stress our country has been knit together in a closer fellowship of mutual interest and common purpose. We can well be grateful that more and more of our people understand and seek the greater good of the greater number. We can be grateful that selfish purpose of personal gain, at our neighbors’ loss, less strongly asserts itself. We can be grateful that peace at home is strengthened by a growing willingness to common counsel. We can be grateful that our peace with other nations continues through recognition of our own peaceful purpose.

“But in our appreciation of the blessings that Divine Providence has bestowed upon us in America, we shall not rejoice as the Pharisee rejoiced. War and strife still live in the world. Rather, must America by example and in practice help to bind the wounds of others, strive against disorder and aggression, encourage the lessening of distrust among peoples and advance peaceful trade and friendship.

“The Future of many generations of mankind will be greatly guided by our acts in these present years. We hew a new trail.

“Let us then on the day appointed offer our devotions and our humble thanks to Almighty God and pray that the people of America will be guided by Him in helping their fellowmen.

“In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington this twelfth day of November, in the year of Our Lord Nineteen hundred and thirty-five, and of the Independence of the United States of America the One hundred and sixtieth.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT”

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-sixth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

[SEAL]

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary of the Interior