PROCLAMATION NO. 76

PROCLAIMING THE WEEK FROM AUGUST 17 TO 23, OF EACH YEAR, AS “MADE-IN-THE PHILIPINES PRODUCTS WEEK”

Whereas, on the seventeenth day of August, nineteen hundred and thirty-three, the Honorable Frank Murphy, then Governor-General of the Philippine Islands, issued a proclamation as follows:

“It is a natural trait among the peoples of all enlightened countries to love and to feel a special regard for the things that they consider their own. Economic protectionism that is animated by a sane and sound spirit of nationalism is a universally accepted rule of national conduct. The observance of this spirit has been a potent factor in the development of many strong and progressive nations.

“The people of the Philippine Islands would do well to cultivate and develop this same spirit of economic nationalism among themselves for their own welfare and benefit and for the greater progress and development of this Archipelago. The expansion and great development of local industries will bring more wealth, prosperity, and happiness to all the people living in these Islands.

“The Philippines is richly endowed with the precious gifts of nature. We have here an abundance of the basic materials of industry. To a certain extent we have begun to avail ourselves of these natural facilities and advantages for industrial growth, but our local industries are still comparatively few and relatively undeveloped. Most of them remain in their earlier stages of growth. In the meantime, many of our domestic needs that could be fully supplied with local products have to be provided for with considerable importations of foreign articles.

“In order to give the necessary encouragement and stimulus to domestic industries, the people of this country should patronize Philippine products.

“I, therefore, proclaim the week from August seventeenth to August twenty-third, nineteen hundred and thirty-three to be ‘Made-in-the-Philippines Products Week’ and I hereby request all the people of these islands to observe it as a week in which products of the Philippines will be used by them for their home and personal needs. I hope this spirit of cultivating and encouraging home industries will be maintained all the coming years so that it will mark the rise in this country of a vigorous and healthy spirit of economic progressiveness.”

Whereas the annual observance of the “Made-in-the-Philippines Products Week” during the last three years has the people of this country, and has given impetus to the development of native industries;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby designate and proclaim the week from August seventeenth to twenty-third, of each year, as “Made-in-the-Philippines Products Week,” and urge all the people of this country to observe it accordingly.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twelfth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

[SEAL]

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary of the Interior