PROCLAMATION NO. 270

DECLARING THE PERIOD BETWEEN INDEPENDENCE DAY, JULY 4, AND JULY 31, 1938, AS THE TIME FOR THE THIRD COMMONWEALTH ROLL CALL OF THE RED CROSS IN THE PHILIPPINES.

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period between Independence Day, July fourth, and July thirty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, the time for the Third Commonwealth roll Call of the Red Cross in the Philippines.

The year nineteen hundred and thirty-seven will stand out as the most eventful in the history of the Red Cross in this country, As a voluntary agency, in cooperation with the Government, it extended relief several disasters, great and small, that occurred during the year. It helped in the relief and rehabilitation of the families of segregated lepers, and of paroled negative lepers. It accepted and fulfilled a large part of the responsibility in dealing with the sudden evacuation of Americans and Filipinos from China to the Philippines. It supplied hospital and relief materials and funds to China to alleviate the sufferings caused by armed conflicts there. It helped Spanish residents of the Philippines who have relatives in Spain by locating missing members of their families and arranging for transfer of funds.

It is therefore, the desire of the Government to encourage and support all efforts to develop the Red Cross as a voluntary agency, through which our citizens, in time of great emergency, can come to the aid of the needy and the suffering with their resources and personal services. No effort should be spared on the part of our people to build up in the Philippines a strong Red Cross organization to fulfill the purposes for which this great movement is established in all the leading nations of the world.

I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, our business interests, all national provincial and municipal officials, the clergy, all the teachers in public and private schools, and other public spirited individuals and institutions, to actively assist in the organization and conduct of the Roll Call, and to give generous and special support this year in order that the Red Cross may be able to meet all its obligation and responsibilities.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

[SEAL]

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary to the President