PROCLAMATION NO. 259

PUBLISHING THE PROCLAMATION OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES ISSUED ON JANUARY 26, 1938, EXTENDING FOR THREE YEARS THE PERIOD OF OPERATION OF THE ACT APPROVED ON JUNE 14, 1935.

Whereas the President of the United States issued on January twenty-sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, the following proclamation:

“BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

“PROCLAMATION

“Whereas section 1 of the Act of June 14, 1935 (49 Stat., 340), entitled “An Act to protect American and Philippine labor and preserve an essential industry, and for other purposes provides, in part, that, effective May 1, 1935, and for three years thereafter, the total amount of all yarns, twines, cords, cordage, rope, and cable, tarred or untarred, wholly or in chief value of Manila (abaca) or other hard fiber, produced or manufactured in the Philippine Islands, coming into the United States from the Philippine Islands, shall not exceed six million pounds during each successive twelve months period, which six million pounds shall enter the United States duty free; and

“Whereas section 2 of that Act reads:

“ ‘ *   *   *  Pending the final and complete withdrawal of American sovereignty over the Philippine Islands, the President of the United States may, by proclamation, at least ninety days prior to the expiration of the three-year period provided in section 1 hereof, extend the operation of this Act for an additional period of three years or more, provided such extension is accepted by the President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.’

“And whereas the President of the Commonweatlh of the Philippines has indicated to me thorugh the United States High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands his acceptance of an extension of the operation of that Act for an additional period of three years:

“Now, therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, under and by virtue of the authority vested in me by the aforesaid Act and in conformity with section 2 thereof, do hereby announce and proclaim the extension of the operation of that Act for an additional period of three years from and including May 1, 1938.

“In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand an caused the seal of the United States of America to be affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington this 26 th day of January, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, andof the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and sixty-second.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

“By the President:

“CORDELL HULL

“Secretary of State

“(No. 2272)”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the above proclamation of the President of the United States for the information and guidance of all concerned.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

{SEAL}

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary to the President