MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 569

DECLARING THE PERIOD BETWEEN INDEPENDENCE DAY, JULY 4, AND JULY 31, 1940, AS THE TIME FOR THE FIFTH COMMONWEALTH ROLL CALL OF THE RED CROSS IN THE PHILIPPINES.

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period between Independence Day, July fourth, and July thirty-first, nineteen hundred and forty, the time for the Fifth Commonwealth Roll Call of the Red Cross in the Philippines.

Since the last roll call, the outbreak of war in Europe has spread suffering over a large part of the world. The United States and the Philippines have been blessed by Providence in that the shadow of miseries and sufferings, now afflicting millions of our fellow human beings, has not been cast upon us. In grateful appreciation of this good fortune, our Red Cross should be kept prepared to cooperate with the American Red Cross in extending a helping hand to the innocent victims of these tragic events.

The Philippine Red Cross, with its chapters in all provinces, carries on a daily program of practical services throughout the archipelago. During the past year, relief has been extended to the victims of public calamities of all kinds. In the field of public health, Red Cross nurses and dentists served over a million persons, principally children. Constructive assistance has been given to families whose economic life has been disrupted by the ravages of leprosy and to paroled lepers upon their return to community life. Hundreds have been trained in First Aid and Home Hygiene and Care of the Sick. The activities of the Red Cross have reached out into many other fields of public welfare. To continue and expand these services requires the moral and financial support of all our people.

I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines to assist actively in the organization and conduct of the Roll Call, and to give generous and special support this year in order that the Red Cross may be able to meet all its obligations and cope with its responsibilities.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library