MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 50

GIVING DUE RECOGNITION TO THE COURSE OF MILITARY INSTRUCTION AT THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES

Pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-five of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, entitled “The National Defense Act,” and in recognition of the high standard of military instruction in Infantry and Field Artillery given by the United States Army through the Reserve Officers’ Training Unit at the University of the Philippines, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim that this course of military instruction, if pursued to completion, shall exempt students from the trainee instruction prescribed in Title III of the National Defense Act. It shall not exempt them from registration nor from further service in the Reserves.

All male students of the University herein above mentioned, who are citizens of the Philippines, shall be required to take this course of military instruction unless physically disqualified. Those of military age who do not complete their courses of study at this University shall be liable for trainee instruction immediately after severing their connection therewith. If more than twenty years of age but under thirty years, such students shall be included in the annual drawing next to be held, and if drawn therefore, they shall enter upon such trainee instruction. If over thirty years of age, they shall be assigned to the corresponding age group in the Reserve Force.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirty-first day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

[SEAL]

By the President: (Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1938). Messages of the President (Rev. ed., Vol. 2, Prt. 1). Manila: Bureau of Printing.