PROCLAMATION NO. 114

DESIGNATING THURSDAY, THE 26 TH OF NOVEMBER, 1936, AS A DAY OF NATIONAL THANKSGIVING

Whereas, the President of the United States, in accordance with customs, has set aside Thursday, November twenty-sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, as a day of national thanksgiving; and

Whereas, it is most appropriate that on this, the second year of the Commonwealth, the day be observed in the Philippines as in the United States and that the Filipino people be apprised of the proclamation of the President of the United States of America;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim Thursday, November twenty-sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, as a day of thanksgiving in the Philippines and do enjoin the inhabitants thereof to repair to their respective houses of worship and offer thanks to Almighty God for the blessings which He has bestowed upon this country; for the successful completion of the first year of the Commonwealth which has brought about as at no other period in our history the full consciousness of national solidarity, without which it were vain to build the foundation work of government on a sane and enduring basis; for the boon of peace and order thruout the land; for the greater realization of our duty to concern ourselves with the needs and sufferings of our less fortunate brothers; for our bountiful crops and produce; and for the general well-being and contentment so evident everywhere. For these blessings and for many more I call upon all our people to dedicate their noblest thoughts in prayer and grateful thanksgiving to Him without whose grace our greatest accomplish for the respectful and careful consideration of the people of the Philippines, the following Proclamation of President Roosevelt:

“THANKSGIVINGDAY—1936

“BY THE PRESIDENT OF THEUNITED STATES OF AMERICA

“A PROCLAMATION

“I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, hereby designate Thursday, the twenty-sixth day of November, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, as a day of national thanksgiving.

“The observance of a day of general thanksgiving by all the people is a practice peculiarly our own, hallowed by usage in the days before we were a nation and sanctioned thru succeeding years.

“Having safely passed thru troubled waters, it is our right to express our gratitude that Divine Providence has vouchsafed us wisdom and courage to overcome adversity. Our free institutions have been maintained with no abatement of our faith in them. In our relations with other peoples we stand not aloof but make resolute effort to promote international friendship and, by the avoidance of discord, to further world peace, prosperity, and happiness.

“Coupled with our grateful acknowledgment of the blessings it has been our high privilege to enjoy, we have a deepened sense of our solemn responsibility to assure for ourselves and our descendants a future more abundant in faith and in security.

“Let us, therefore, on the day appointed, each in his own way, but together as a whole people, make due expression of our thanksgiving and humbly endeavor to follow in the footsteps of Almighty God.

“In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States of America to be affixed.

“Done at the City of Washington this twelfth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred thirty-six, and of the Independence of the United States of America, the one hundred and sixty-first.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

“By the President:

“R. WALTON MOORE

“Acting Secretary of State”

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

[SEAL]

President of the Philippines

By the President:

Secretary of the Interior