MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 332

PRESCRIBING THE CONDUCT THAT SHOULD BE OBSERVED BY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES CHARGED WITH THE DUTY OF ENFORCING THE ELECTION LAW, ESPECIALLY THE ELECTION INSPECTORS, WITH A VIEW TO INSURING ORDERLY AND CLEAN ELECTIONS.

The essence of representative democracy is the rule by the people through their chosen officials. It is, therefore, of primary importance that the elections be orderly and clean so as to insure a free and genuine expression of the will of the electorate.

The Election Law offers effective safeguards against corrupt practices in the election of public officials, but the effectiveness of these safeguards depends largely upon the impartiality and honesty of the officials who are charged with responsibilities connected with the execution of the law.

Upon the Election Inspectors devolves the greater part of the burden of such responsibilities. Although the Election Inspectors are appointed upon nominations submitted by the majority and minority parties, they are, nevertheless, public officers sitting as judges of elections, with well-defined legal powers and duties. They owe allegiance not so much to the party which has chosen them, as to the people at large whose right to express their will it is their duty to protect.

Democracy becomes a farce when elections do not mean a free vote and an honest count of the ballots. Under the Constitution it is my duty to preserve our democratic system of government.

Now, therefore, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, do hereby announce that it is my determination that the elections in the Philippines shall be free from frauds and that I shall hold every official and employee of the national and local governments strictly accountable for his conduct relating to elections. The public interest is above any partisan consideration. The rights of all, including those of the minority parties, should be adequately protected.

I call upon each and every official and employee charged with the duty of carrying out the Election Law, especially upon the Election Inspectors, irrespective of the parties to which they may belong, to be loyal to their trust and to perform their respective duties in accordance with the law. I invite special attention to the provisions of Article III of the Election Code (Commonwealth Act No. 357) which prohibits certain corrupt practices and of section 687 of the Administrative Code, as amended by Commonwealth Act No.

177, which prohibits officers and employees in the civil service, including members of the armed forces, whether classified or unclassified, permanent or temporary, except those holding elective positions, from engaging directly or indirectly in any partisan activity.

The Government shall prosecute every violation of the Election Law, and no one, especially Election Inspectors, who may be found guilty, will receive executive clemency.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Sources: Presidential Museum and Library