MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 492

PUBLISHING THE PROCLAMATION ISSUED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES ON DECEMBER 12, 1939, AND GIVING PUBLIC NOTICE OF THE APPROVAL BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF NATIONAL ASSEMBLY BILL NO. 1242 NOW KNOWN AS COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 511.

Whereas the President of the United States did, on December 12, 1939, issue the following proclamation:

“Whereas section 7 (a) of the Act of August 7, 1939, 53 Stat. 1226. 1233, provides in part:

” ‘Sections 1 to 5, inclusive, of this amendatory act shall become effective on January 1, 1940, if before that date—

” ‘(1) Subsection 5 of section 1 of the Ordinance appended to the Constitution of the Philippines shall have been amended in the manner now provided by law, by changing the final period of said subsection to a comma, and by adding thereto the words: “as amended by the Act of Congress of the United States approved (followed by the date of the approval of this amendatory act),” and section 3 of the said Ordinance shall have been amended by inserting immediately after the words “approved March 24, 1934” the same amendatory language mentioned above.

” ‘(2) The President of the United States shall have found and proclaimed that the Philippine Government had enacted, subsequent to the adoption of the amendments to the Constitution of the Philippines (as provided in subdivision (1) of this subsection), a law relating to export taxes (as provided in section 1), and has retained those Philippine laws relating to sinking-fund and currency matters which were in effect on May 20, 1938.’

“Whereas amendments to the Constitution of the Philippines have been adopted as provided in the said Act of August 7, 1939, which amendments were approved by me on November 10, 1939;

“Whereas the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines on November 14, 1939, enacted a law relating to export taxes, as provided in the said Act of August 7, 1939, which law I have approved this date; and

“Whereas the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines has retained those laws relating to sinking-fund and currency matters which were in effect on May 20, 1938;

“Now, therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States of America, under and by virtue of the authority in me vested by section 7 (a) of the said Act of August 7, 1939, do hereby find and proclaim that the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines has enacted, subsequent to the adoption of the above-mentioned amendments to the Constitution of the Philippines, a law relating to export taxes as provided in the said Act of August 7, 1939, and has retained those Philippine laws relating to sinking-fund and currency matters which were in effect on May 20, 1938.

“Done at the City of “Washington this twelfth day of December in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and sixty-fourth.

“FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT

“By the President:

“CORDELL HULL “Secretary of State”

Whereas section 7 of National Assembly Bill No. 1242 referred to in the third “Whereas” of the above-quoted proclamation of the President of the United States provides as follows:

“SEC. 7. When this Act shall have been approved by the President of the United States, as provided in section two, subsection (a), paragraph nine, of the Act of Congress of March twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty-four as amended such fact shall be made known by proclamation of the President of the Philippines and this Act shall take effect on the date of said proclamation.”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby publish the above proclamation for the information and guidance of all concerned, and hereby give public notice of the approval by the President of the United States on December 12, 1939, of National Assembly Bill No. 1242, which now becomes Commonwealth Act No. 511.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this fourteenth day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President: JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives