IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE “SIMULATED BIRTH
RECTIFICATION ACT”

Pursuant to Section 23 of Republic Act No. 11222 otherwise known as the
“Simulated Birth Rectification Act, the following Implementing Rules and Regulations
are hereby promulgated :

ARTICLE |
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Title. These Rules and Regulations shall be known and cited as the
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the "Simulated Birth Rectification Act."

Section 2. Purpose. These IRR are hereby promulgated to prescribe the
procedures and guidelines for the implementation of the Simulated Birth Rectification
Act in order to achieve the objectives thereof.

Section 3. Objectives. The objectives of these Rules are stipulated under Section
2 (Objectives) of the Act, to wit:

(a) To grant amnesty and allow the rectification of the simulated birth of a child
where the simulation was made for the best interest of the child, and that
such child has been consistently considered and treated by the person or
persons who simulated such birth as her, his or their own daughter or son;

(b) To fix the status and filiation of a child whose birth was simulated by giving
such child all the benefits of adoption and ensuring that the child shall be
entitled to all the rights provided by law to legally adopted children, without
any discrimination of any kind, as well as to love, guidance and support from
the child's adoptive family;

(c) To exempt from criminal, civil and administrative liability those who simulated
the birth record of a child prior to the effectivity of the Act; Provided, that a
Petition for Adoption with an application for the rectification of the simulated
birth record is filed on or before March 29, 2029;

(d) To provide for and allow a simpler and less costly administrative adoption
proceeding where the child has been living with the person or persons who
simulated her or his birth record for at least three (3) years before March 29,
2019 which is the effectivity of the Act; and,

(e) To educate and inform the public about the rectification of simulated births,
and to encourage people to avail of the benefits of this Act.

Section 4. Definition of Terms. As used in these Rules:

(a) "Act" shall refer to Republic Act No. 11222 otherwise known as the “Simulated
Birth Rectification Act”.

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Ww Paggsl of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations oY

Mfxw dass bal

(b) "Administrative Adoption" refers to a process whereby a person assumes the
parental authority of a child, from the biological parent or parents. It permanently
transfers all rights and responsibilities, along with filiation to the adoptive parent(s).

(c) "Affidavit of Disinterested Persons" refers to an Affidavit executed by two affiants
who are not related to the petitioner(s) by consanguinity or affinity to attest to a fact.

(d) "Certification Declaring a Child Legally Available for Adoption (CDCLAA)" refers
to the certification issued by the DSWD Secretary or his or her duly authorized
representative administratively declaring that the child is legally available for
adoption.

(e) "Child" refers to a person below eighteen (18) years of age or a person eighteen
(18) years or over who is unable to fully take care of herself or himself or protect
herself or himself from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation or discrimination because
of a physical or mental disability or condition, whose birth was simulated.

(f) "Disinterested Person" refers to an individual who attests on a particular fact, i.e.
simulation of birth but has no personal advantage or disadvantage in the outcome or
decision of the Petition for Adoption with an Application for Rectification of Simulated
Birth Record.

(g) "Foundling” refers to a person whose fact/s of birth is/are unknown.

(h) "Indigent" refers to Prospective Adoptive Parent/s|whose net income per month
is less than the Family Income and Expenditures Survey (FIES) conducted by PSA
and approved by the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA).

(i) "New Birth Certificate" refers to the civil registry record of a person registered
pursuant to the Order of Adoption issued by the Secretary, bearing the name by
which he or she shall be known and his or her parents as stated in the Order of
Adoption.

(i) "Order of Adoption" refers to a registrable civil registry document issued by the
Secretary after determining that the administrative adoption is for the best interest of
the child.

(k) “Petition for Administrative Adoption with Application for Rectification of
Simulated Birth Record" (“Petition” for brevity) refers to the accomplished application
stating the circumstances behind the simulation of birth of a child, citing the
petitioner/s qualifications to adopt such child and the grounds that would warrant the
grant of an administrative adoption by the Secretary.

(Il) "Petitioner" refers to person or persons whom the child consider(s) as parent(s)

and intended to legalize their parent-child relationship by filing the Petition for
Administrative Adoption with Application for Rectification of Simulated Birth Record.

R.A. No, 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act a Page 2 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations wy

(m) "Rectified Birth Record" refers to a civil registry record of a person issued
pursuant to the order of the Secretary, which may either be a birth or foundling
certificate, as determined by the facts about the child’s parentage or finding, which
information comprise his or her true identity.

(n) "Regional Director" refers to the head of a field office of the DSWD.
(o) "Secretary" refers to the Secretary of the DSWD.

(p) "Simulation of Birth Record" refers to the tampering of the civil registry record to
make it appear in the record of birth that a child was born to a person who is not
such child’s biological mother, causing the loss of the true identity and status of such
child.

(q) "Social Welfare and Development Office (SWDO)" refers to the office in the city
or municipality that discharges the social welfare and development programs and
services devolved to such local government units.

(f) "Social Worker" refers to a person who passed the Licensure Examination for
Social Workers, has a valid professional license and who exercises sound
professional judgment in handling cases.

Section 5. Coverage and Exclusions. |n the implementation of the Act, those
hereinafter enumerated are covered:

a) Administrative adoption of a non-relative child;

b) Administrative adoption of a relative child within the fourth (4th) degree of
affinity or consanguinity;

c) Administrative adoption of an adult, who is consistently considered and
treated as daughter or son since birth or minority;

d) Administrative adoption where the Petition for Cancellation of Simulated Birth
Certificate or Petition for Adoption with Cancellation of Simulated Birth
Certificate is pending in court in accordance with Section 38 hereof; or

e) Other analogous circumstances as may be determined by the Secretary;

Provided that the child subject of the petition has been living with or under the
custody of the prospective adoptive parents (PAPs) for atleast three (3) years and
they have simulated the birth record of said child prior to the effectivity of the Act.
Provided further, that the petition for Administrative Adoption with Application for
Rectification of Simulated Birth Record is filed within the prescribed period.

Excluded in the coverage of the Act are circumstances not limited to the
following:

a) Rectification or Correction of entries i.e. to reflect the name of the biological
parent/s in the birth certificate;

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act we Page 3 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations a QO

b) Administrative adoption by the relatives of the deceased person(s) who
simulated the birth of a child or person;

c) Administrative adoption by person(s) other than the parent(s) named in the
simulated birth certificate; or

d) Administrative adoption of a child by the purported father only; when the
mother named in the birth certificate is the biological mother of such child;

Section 6. Suppletory Application of Existing Laws. The existing relevant
adoption and child welfare laws, in so far as these are not inconsistent with the Act,
may be applied suppletorily to aid in the implementation of R.A. 11222 and these
IRR.

ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATIVE ADOPTION SERVICES

Section 7. Pre-Administrative Adoption Services. Pursuant to Article ll, Section 4
of RA 8552 or the "Domestic Adoption Act of 1998", prospective adoptive parents
shall be required to attend pre-adoption fora and seminars from the Department or
licensed Child Placing Agency to ensure that they are informed of the rights of the
child and their responsibilities to the child.

The objectives of the fora and seminars are:

(a) To help the PAPs assess their motivation, capacity and readiness to adopt;
(b) To resolve possible adoption issues; and
(c) To prepare the PAP/s for effective parenting

The certificate of attendance in the pre-adoption seminar shall be issued by the
DSWD or child placing agency as one of the supporting documents in filing by the
PAP/s of the petition for administrative adoption with application for rectification of
simulated birth record.

Section 8. Post-Administrative Adoption Services. These services may include
counseling, tracing the roots, reunion and others which shall be made available by
the social workers of the Department and the SWDOs to the adoptee, adopter and
the biological parents.

ARTICLE Ill
ADMINISTRATIVE ADOPTION

Section 9. Rectification of Simulated Birth Record. Subject to the provisions of
the law, a person or persons who, on or before March 28, 2019, simulated the birth

of a child, and those who cooperated in the execution of such simulation, shall not
be criminally, civilly, or administratively liable for such act provided:
ie 4 of 14

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Pag
Implementing Rules and Regulations

(a) That the simulation of birth was made for|the best interest of the child
and that the child has been consistently considered and treated by
such person or persons as her, his, or their own daughter or son; and

(b) That such person or persons has or have filed a petition for adoption
with an application for the rectification on or before March 29, 2029.

All benefits of the Act shall also apply to adult adoptees whose certificates of birth
have been simulated.

Section 10. Administrative Adoption and Rectification. A person or persons who
simulated the birth of a child under the conditions provided under Section 4 of the
Act may avail of administrative proceedings for the adoption and rectification of the
simulated birth record of the child provided:

(a) That the child has been living with and cared for by the petitioners for a
minimum period of 3 years prior to March 29, 2019 which is the
effectivity of the Act;

(b) That when applicable, a certificate declaring the child legally available
for adoption (CDCLAA) is issued by the DSWD in favor of the child.

Section 11. Inadmissible Evidence. All petitions, documents, records and papers
relating to adoption and rectification of simulated births under the Act cannot be
used as evidence against those who simulated the birth of a child or who cooperated
in the execution of such simulation in any criminal, civil, or administrative
proceedings.

ARTICLE IV
CERTIFICATION DECLARING A CHILD LEGALLY AVAILABLE FOR ADOPTION

Section 12. CDCLAA Requirement. Except in the case of an adult prospective
adoptee or a relative child, all petitions under the Act must include a CDCLAA,
issued in accordance with R.A. 9523. The supporting documents of the
application/petition for CDCLAA and the process for its issuance shall conform with
the pertinent guidelines of the Department.

The CDCLAA shall be the primary evidence that the child is legally available for
adoption.

ARTICLE V
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ADOPTION

Section 13. Personal Qualifications. Adopters must:

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 5 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations Sarr

(a) Be Filipino citizen;

(b) Be of legal age;

(c) Possess full civil capacity and legal rights;

(d) Be of good moral character;

(e) Have not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude;

(f) B e emotionally and psychologically capable of caring for children; and,

(g) Be in a position to support, educate and care for his or her children and the
child to be adopted in keeping with the means of the family.

In case of adoption by a married couple, where one of the adopters is a foreign
national married to a Filipino, the foreign national must have been residing in the
Philippines for least three (3) continuous years prior to the filing of the petition for
adoption and application for rectification of simulated birth record.

Section 14. Required Consent. After being properly counseled and informed of the
right to give or withhold approval of the adoption, the written consent of the following
shall be required:

(a)The prospective adoptee, if ten (10) years of age or over;

(b)The petitioner's legitimate and adopted daughters and sons, ten (10) years of
age or over, if any;

(c)The petitioner's illegitimate daughters and sons, ten (10) years of age or over,
if living with said adopter(s), if any; and,

(d)The spouse, if any, of the adoptee.

ARTICLE VI
ADMINISTRATIVE ADOPTION PROCEDURE

Section 15. Petition. The petition for administrative adoption with application for
rectification of simulated birth record for each child shall be in the form of an affidavit
and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the petitioner(s) before any person
authorized by law to administer affirmations and oaths,

It shall state the facts necessary to establish the merits of the petition, and the
circumstances surrounding the simulation of the birth of the child.

Section 16. Documents attached to the Petition. The petition shall be supported
by the following documents:

a) Authenticated copy of the simulated birth record of the child and
authenticated copy of the birth record of the adopters;

b) Affidavit of admission, if the simulation of the birth was done by a third

person, /
R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 6 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations
| &

c) Certification issued and signed by the punong barangay attesting that:

i. The petitioner(s) are bonafide residents of the barangay;
ii. The child has been living with the petitioner/s for at least three (3)
years prior to March 29, 2019;
iii. | The petitioner is indigent, if applicable;

d) Notarized Affidavits of at least two (2) disinterested persons, who reside in the
same barangay where the child resides, attesting that the child has been
living with the petitioner/s for at least three (3) years prior to the effectivity of
the Act;

e) Original copy of CDCLAA issued by the DSWD, except if the prospective
adoptee is an adult or a relative of the adopter(s) within the fourth degree of
consanguinity or affinity;

f) Oldest and recent photographs of the prospective adoptee and the
petitioner(s) taken within the last three (3) months prior to the filing of the
petition;

g) Certificate of Attendance by the Petitioner(s) in Pre- Adoption Fora and
Seminar;

h

z=

As applicable, Marriage Contract, Decree of Annulment, Declaration of Nullity
of Marriage or Decree of Legal Separation;

i) Latest Physical and Medical Evaluation of the adopter(s) by a duly licensed
physician;

j) When appropriate, psychological evaluation of the adopter(s) by a duly
licensed psychologist;

k) Latest NBI / Police Clearance;

1) Latest income tax return or any other documents showing financial capability,
e.g., Certificate of Employment, Bank Certificate or Statement of Assets and
Liabilities; and

m) Authenticated copy of the Negative Certification of Birth, to serve as basis in
the late registration and issuance of rectified birth record;

In case one of the adopter(s) is a foreign national married to a Filipino, he or she
must submit proof of the following:

1) Residence in the Philippines for at least three (3) continuous years prior to the
filing of the petition and maintains such residence until the Order of Adoption

is issued; ey

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act anh Page 7 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations ke

2) Certification by his or her diplomatic or consular office or any appropriate
government agency that he or she has the legal capacity to adopt in his or her
country, and that his or her government allows the adoptee to enter his or her
country as his or her adopted son or daughter.

Section 17. Who may file. Petitioner(s) who simulated a child’s birth record,
consistently considered and treated said child as his or her or their own daughter or
son may file the Petition, provided that the child has been under his or her or their
care and custody for at least three (3) years prior to the effectivity of the Act.

Section 18. When to file. The Petition shall be filed 15 days after the publication of
the IRR until March 29, 2029.

Section 19. Where to file. The Petition together with complete supporting
documents shall be filed by the petitioner(s) with the Social Welfare and
Development Office of the city or municipality where the child resides.

Section 20. Review of Petition. The SWDO shall examine the petition and its
supporting documents within seven (7) days to determine if it is sufficient in form and
substance. If the SWDO finds that the petition is insufficient in form or substance,
the SWDO shall return the same to the petitioner with a written explanation of its
insufficiency.

If the SWDO finds that the petition is sufficient in form and substance, the SWDO
shall forward the petition and the supporting documents within three (3) days to the
Regional Director of DSWD Field Office where the SWDO is situated.

Section 21. Recommendation on the Petition. Upon receipt of the Petition by the
Field Office, a Social Case Study Report for the petitioner(s) and the child shall be
prepared by a licensed social worker of the Field Office who shall conduct home
visits to the petitioner(s) and the child to establish the identity of the child, determine
capacity of the petitioner(s) to care for the child and possession of the personal
qualifications and whether or not the child has been consistently considered and
treated by the petitioner(s) as his or her or their own child.

The report shall clearly indicate whether or not the administrative adoption shall
redound to best interest of the child and shall state the appropriate recommendation.

Such report together with the Petition and the supporting documents from the
SWDO shall be reviewed by the Regional Director. The identity of the child and the
petitioner including the motivation to adopt shall be personally determined by him or
her through the supporting documents of the petition and interview with the petitioner
and the child. In the course of the review, additional information or document/s may
be required from the petitioner to support the petition. The failure of the petitioner to
comply with such request shall not preclude the Regional Director from acting on the
petition based on the evidence at hand. The personal appearance of the petitioner

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 8 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations
he |
| Ye
|

and the child before the Regional Director shall likewise be mandatory.

The Regional Director shall prepare the recommendation on the petition not later
than thirty (30) days from receipt thereof.

Section 22. Transmittal of the Recommendation to DSWD Central Office. The
Regional Director shall endorse to the Office of the Secretary his or her
recommendation on the Petition together with the original copy of the petition and its
supporting documents.

Section 23. Order of Adoption. The Secretary shall act and decide on the petition
within thirty (30) days upon receipt of the recommendation from the Regional
Director.

If the Secretary determines that the adoption shall redound to the best interest of the
child, an Order of Adoption which is a registrable civil registry document, shall be
issued stating the name by which the child shall be known and shall likewise direct
the concerned local civil registrar the:

a) Cancellation of the simulated birth record of the child;

b) Late registration of the rectified birth record, which is a birth or
foundling certificate, bearing the true facts of birth or finding of the
child, as the case may be;

c) Issuance of a new Birth Certificate.

The Order of Adoption shall create a legal status to the existing parent-child
relationship of the petitioner(s) and the child. The Order shall take effect on the date
the petition was filed with the SWDO, even if the petitioner dies before its issuance.
It shall become final upon the expiration of fifteen (15) days from notice thereof to all
parties.

An administrative adoption order obtained under this Act shall have the same effect
as a decree of adoption issued pursuant to Republic Act No. 8552, otherwise known
as the Domestic Adoption Act of 1998. The Order shall be registered accordingly by
the concerned DSWD Field Office at the local civil registrar of the city or municipality
where the child is born or found.

Section 24. Transmittal of Order of Adoption. The Secretary shall transmit the
Order of Adoption to the concerned DSWD Regional Office, which shall in turn
provide original printed copy to the petitioner(s) and certified true copy to the record-
keeping local civil registrar and the Philippine Statistics Authority- Central Office
(PSA-CO). To facilitate the authentication of the Order, the PSA-CO shall likewise
be furnished with an electronic copy thereof.

Section 25. Finality of the Order. The Secretary shall issue a Certificate of Finality
upon the lapse of the 15-day period.

R.A, No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 9 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations

Section 26. Civil Registry Record. Upon receipt of |the certificate of finality, the
record-keeping local civil registrar shall stamp the simulated birth record “cancelled”
with annotation of the following:

i. Issuance of a rectified birth record, bearing the child's true identity; and
ii. Issuance of a new birth certificate, indicating the petitioner/s as parents
pursuant to the administrative adoption.

The rectified birth certificate bearing the name of the biological parents of the child or
the foundling certificate, as the case may be, shall not bear any notation. The copy
of this rectified birth record together with the new birth certificate shall be transmitted
to the PSA. In all cases, the recording and registration of the Order of Adoption, the
rectified birth record and the new birth certificate by the concerned local civil
registrar, shall conform with the internal guidelines prescribed by the PSA.

The cancelled simulated birth certificate and the rectified birth record shall be sealed
in the civil registry records and shall be released or issued only upon the order of the
Secretary or other lawful authority.

Section 27. Socialized Fees. The city or municipal SWDO, the DSWD Field Office
and the Office of Local Civil Registrar may charge socialized fees in an amount not
exceeding One Thousand Pesos (P1,000.00) from those who avail of the
administrative adoption proceedings under the Act.

As far as practicable, the foregoing agencies, in the exercise of their rate-fixing
power, may come up with staggered rates depending on income bracket of
petitioner(s), to effect the socialized fees sanctioned by the Act.

Fees shall be waived if the petitioner(s) is/are found to be indigent as defined in this
IRR.

Section 28. Confidentiality. All petitions, documents, records and papers relating to
the administrative adoption proceedings in the files of the city or municipal SWDOs,
DSWD Central and Field Offices, local civil registrars, or any other agency or
institution participating in such proceedings shall be strictly confidential.

In any event, the disclosure of any information shall only be allowed upon the Order
of the Secretary, based on the written request of the adoptee or in the case of a
minor adoptee, his or her legal guardian or the Adoptive Parent or upon order of any
lawful authority.

Any violation of the confidential nature of the records above-mentioned shall be
punishable pursuant to the penal provisions of the Act, R.A. No. 10173 or the “Data
Privacy Act of 2012” or other relevant laws.

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Quamld¥ Page 10 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations

ARTICLE VII
EFFECTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADOPTION

Section 29. Effects of Administrative Adoption. The administrative adoption shall
have the following effects:

(a) Legitimacy — The adoptee shall be considered the legitimate child of the
adopter for all intents and purposes. As such, the adoptee is entitled to all
rights and obligations provided by law to legitimate children without
discrimination of any kind.

The adoptee is also entitled to love, guidance, and support in keeping with the
means of the family.

(b) Parental Authority — Except when the biological parent is the spouse of the
adopter, all legal ties between the biological parent/s and the adoptee shall be
severed and the same shall be vested in the adopter.

(c) Succession — In legal and intestate succession, the adopter and the adoptee

_shall have reciprocal rights of succession without distinction from legitimate
filiation. However, if the adoptee and his or her biological parents left a will,
the law on testamentary succession shall govern.

Section 30. Order of Denial and Administrative Remedy. Should the Petition be
denied, the Secretary shall issue an Order of Denial in lieu of an Order of Adoption.
Within fifteen (15) days upon receipt of the notice, the petitioner may file a Motion for
Reconsideration to the Office of the Secretary and furnish a copy to the concerned
DSWD Field Office.

The Secretary is given 15 days upon receipt to rule on the Motion for
Reconsideration. In case of denial of the motion, petitioner/s may resort to appeal in
accordance with the existing rules.

Depending on the ground for denial, the order shall be without prejudice to the
refiling of the Petition with the SWDO in accordance with these Rules.

Notwithstanding a denial, nothing in the Act proscribes the petitioner(s) from
resorting to judicial or other modes of adoption.

In the event of a denial founded on the determination by the Secretary that the
administrative adoption will not redound to the best interest of the child, the
Department shall ensure that all means necessary to protect the rights and promote
the welfare of said child shall be in place.

ARTICLE VIII
RESCISSION OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADOPTION

Section 31.Grounds for Rescission. Upon petition of the adoptee, with the

assistance of the city or municipal SWDO or the DSWD if a minor or if over eighteen
(18) years of age but is incapacitated, the adoption may be rescinded on any of the

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 11 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations alll Ye

following grounds committed by the adopter:

. (a) Repeated physical or verbal maltreatment by the adopter;

(b) Attempt on the life of the adoptee;

(c) Sexual assault or violence;

(d) Abandonment and failure to comply with parental obligations; or

(e) Other acts that are detrimental to the psychological and emotional development
of the adoptee.

Adoption, being in the best interest of the child, shall not be subject to rescission by
the adopter. However, the adopter may disinherit the adoptee for causes provided in
Article 919 of the Civil Code.

Section 32. Rescission of Administrative Adoption. The process for
administrative adoption as provided under Section 11 of the Act shall apply to the
rescission of administrative adoption: Provided, That the concerned SWDO,
Regional Director, and the Secretary shall act immediately on the petition for
rescission bearing in mind the best interest of the child.

The Secretary shall furnish a copy of the Order of Rescission to the concerned
DSWD Regional Office, which shall in turn provide copies to the petitioner, the
concerned agencies and the concerned local civil registrar. Thereafter, the
concerned local civil registrar shall cancel the new certificate of birth of the adoptee,
and restore the adoptee’s rectified birth certificate) bearing the name/s of the
biological parents, or the foundling certificate, as the case may be.

Section 33. Effects of Rescission. If the petition for rescission of administrative
adoption is granted by the Secretary, the parental authority of the adoptee’s
biological parents, if known, shall be restored if the adoptee is still a minor or
incapacitated. The reciprocal rights and obligations of the adopter and adoptee to
each other shall be extinguished.

Successional rights shall revert to its status prior to adoption, but only as of the date
of judgment of administrative rescission. Vested rights acquired prior to
administrative rescission shall be respected.

All the foregoing effects of rescission of adoption shall be without prejudice to the
penalties imposable under the Revised Penal Code if the criminal acts are proven.

ARTICLE IX
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

Section 34. Violations and Penalties. The penalty of imprisonment ranging from
six (6) years and one (1) day to twelve (12) years and/or a fine not less than two
hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00) at the discretion of the court shall be
imposed on any person who shall commit any of the following acts:

R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 12 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations

(a) Obtaining consent for an adoption through coercion, undue influence, fraud,
improper material inducement, or other similar acts;
(b) Noncompliance with the procedures and safeguards provided by law for the

adoption; or
(c) Subjecting or exposing the child to be adopted to danger, abuse, or
exploitation.
ARTICLE X
FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 35. Information Dissemination. The DSWD, in coordination with the
Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), the Department of
Education,the Department of Health,various national leagues of local government
units, the Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC), and the Philippine Statistics
Authority (PSA) shall disseminate to the public information regarding the Act and its
implementation.

Section 36. Saving Clause. Nothing in these Rules shall affect any right of an
adoptee acquired by judicial proceeding or otherwise before the commencement of
the Rules.

Section 37. Budgetary Requirement. Frontline agencies must include in their
respective appropriations such sum as may be necessary for the implementation of
the Act, in the year following its enactment and the succeeding years.

Section 38. Transitory Provision. For cases that may qualify under the Act with
Petition for Adoption with Cancellation of Simulated Birth Record or Petition for
Cancellation of Simulated Birth Record that are pending in court, the petitioner/s has
the option to either withdraw the case and avail of this administrative adoption
proceeding at the Department of Social Welfare and Development or continue with
the judicial proceeding.

To ensure efficient implementation of the Act, the DSWD, PSA and other concerned
agencies shall issue the necessary internal guidelines. Likewise, the DSWD and
PSA may opt to enter into a joint memorandum circular whereby the
operationalization of the processes set forth in these Rules shall be laid down.

Section 39. Separability Clause. If any provision or part of this Rule is declared
unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain
in full force and effect.

Section 40. Effectivity. These Rules shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in two (2) newspapers of general circulation or in the Official Gazette.

R.A. No, 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 13 of 14
Implementing Rules and Regulations 9 Q /

The IRR shall be registered with the Office of the National Administrative Register at
the University of the Philippines, UP Diliman, Quezon City.

Approved on 07 October 2019.

ce er
sduaks SELITO D. BAUTISTA LAIRE DENNIS S. “la

Secretary National Statistician

Department of Social re and Development Philippine Statistics Authority

    

ome

MIEN , GUEVARRA oe
Secretary Department of Justice

* tice.
Department of Interior and Local a Department of Justice i ii |
Va i |

MARY MITZI L. CAJAYON-UY LUC .
Executive Director Nationgl President
Council for the Welfare of Children Philippine Associatidn of Civil Registrars, Inc.

owthak pelt anes \ RO DONGETO

TIO520 18-1884

> NN A

 

 

 

 

  
 

President Executive Diréctor
Association of Child Caring Agencies of the Child Rights Network Philippines
Philippines
R.A. No. 11222- The Simulated Birth Rectication Act Page 14 of 14

Implementing Rules and Regulations