IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11057 (PERSONAL PROPERTY SECURITY ACT)

RULE I - PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

 

Section 1.01 Title. These Rules shall be known and cited as the Implementing Rules and
Regulations of Republic Act No. 11057, otherwise known as the “Personal Property
- Security Act” or the “PPSA.”

Section 1.02 Purpose. These Rules are hereby promulgated to prescribe the procedures
and guidelines for the implementation of the PPSA in order to facilitate compliance
therewith and to achieve the objectives thereof.

Section 1.03 Interpretation Clause. These Rules shall be liberally construed to ensure the
fulfillment of the policy objectives of the PPSA.

Section 1.04. Declaration of Policy. \t is the policy of the State to promote economic
activity by increasing access to least cost credit, particularly for micro, small, and
medium enterprises, by establishing a unified and modern legal framework for securing
obligations with personal property.

Section 1.05. Definition of Terns. As used in these Rules, the following terms shall mean:

a) Commodity contract — a commodity futures contract, an option on a commodity
futures contract, a commodity option, or another contract if the contract or

option is:
(i) Traded on or subject to the rules of a board of trade that has been
designated as a contract market for such a contract; or
(ii) Traded on a foreign commodity board of trade, exchange, or market,

and is carried on the books of a commodity intermediary for a
commodity customer;

b) Competing claimant — a creditor of a grantor or other person with rights in an
encumbered asset that may be in competition with the rights of a secured
creditor in the same encumbered asset;

c) Consumer goods — Goods that are used or acquired for use primarily for personal,
family or household purposes;

d) Control agreement — an agreement in writing between the grantor and the
secured creditor which perfects the security interests over intangible asset.

Page 1 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

°)

cP

j)

(i) With respect to intermediated securities, the control agreement is among
the issuer or the intermediary, the grantor and the secured creditor,
according to which the issuer or the intermediary agrees to follow
instructions from the secured creditor with respect to the security, without
further consent from the grantor;

(ii) With respect to rights to a deposit account, the control agreement is
among the deposit-taking institution, the grantor and the secured creditor,
according to which the deposit-taking institution agrees to follow
instructions from the secured creditor with respect to the payment of
funds credited to the deposit account without further consent from the
grantor;

(iii) With respect to commodity contracts, the control agreement is among the
grantor, secured creditor, and intermediary, according to which the
commodity intermediary will apply any value distributed on account of
the commodity contract as directed by the secured creditor without
further consent by the commodity customer or grantor;

Default — the failure of a debtor to pay or otherwise perform a secured obligation,
and any other event that constitutes default under the terms of an agreement
between the grantor and the secured creditor;

Deposit account — consists of deposits in deposit-taking institutions;

Deposit-taking institution —refers to a bank as defined under Republic Act No.
8791, otherwise known as the “General Banking Law”, a non-stock savings and
loan association as defined under Republic Act No. 8367, or the “Revised Non--
Stock Savings and Loan Association Act of 1997”, or a cooperative as defined
under Republic Act No. 9520 otherwise known as the “Philippine Cooperative
Code’;

Equipment — means a tangible asset other than inventory or consumer goods, or
livestock, that is primarily used or intended to be used by the grantor in the
operation of its business;

Financial lease — “financial leasing” of movable properties as defined in Section
3(d) of Republic Act No. 5980, as amended by Republic Act No. 8556, or the
“Financing Company Act of 1998”;

Fixtures — property attached to an immovable or a movable;

Page 2 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

k)

)

m

Nae

n)

P)

q)

8)

t)

Future property — means any movable property which does not exist or which the
grantor does not have rights in or the power to encumber at the time the security
agreement is concluded;

Grantor —
(i) | The person who grants a security interest in collateral to secure its own
obligation or that of another person;
(ii) A buyer or other transferee of a collateral that acquires its right subject to
a security interest;
(iii) A transferor in an outright transfer of an accounts receivable; or
(iv) A lessee of goods;

Intangible asset —means any movable property other than a tangible asset
including, but not limited to, investment property, deposit accounts, commodity
contracts and receivables;

Intellectual property —shall refer to “intellectual property rights” defined in
Section 4.1 of Republic Act No. 8293 or the “Intellectual Property Code of the
Philippines”. It shall include copyright, trademarks, service marks, patents,
industrial designs and trade secrets;

Intermediary —a person, including, but not limited to, a bank, trust entity,
depositary, broker, or central securities depositary, that in the ordinary course of
business or regular activity maintains an account for such securities or assets, for
another person, and is acting in that capacity;

Intermediated securities — means securities credited to a securities account and
rights in securities resulting from the credit of securities to a securities account;

Inventory — means tangible assets held by the grantor for sale or lease in the
ordinary course of the grantor’s business, including raw materials and work in
process;

Investment property — means any property right arising from an investment. The
term shall include but will not be limited to property in securities and
commodity contracts;

Lien —a qualified right or a proprietary interest, which may be exercised over the
property of another;

Non-intermediated securities — means securities other than Intermediated

Securities;

Page 3 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

v)

Ww

~~

x)

aa

mo

bb)

cc)

Notice — a statement of information that is registered in the Registry relating to a
security interest or lien. The term includes an initial notice, amendment notice,
and termination notice;

Operating lease —an agreement by which the owner temporarily grants the use of
his property to another who undertakes to pay rent therefor;

Perfection —any act authorized by the PPSA and these Rules that makes a
security interest binding as against third parties;

Possession — the holding of a thing or the enjoyment of a right;

Priority — the right of a person in an encumbered asset in preference to the right
of a competing claimant;

Proceeds — any property received upon sale, lease or other disposition of
collateral, or whatever is collected on or distributed with respect to collateral,
claims arising out of the loss or damage to the collateral, as well as a right to
insurance payment or other compensation for loss or damage of the collateral;

Product —a tangible asset which results when a tangible asset is so physically
associated or united with one or more other tangible asset of a different kind, or
when one or more tangible assets are so manufactured, assembled or processed,
that they have lost their separate identities;

Purchase money security interest — a security interest in goods taken by the seller
to secure the price or by a person who gives value to enable the grantor to
acquire the goods to the extent that the credit is used for that purpose;

Receivable — means a right to payment of a monetary obligation, excluding a right
to payment evidenced by a negotiable instrument, a right to payment of funds
credited to a bank account and a right to payment under a non-intermediated
security;

dd) Recognized market —an organized market in which large volumes of similar assets

ee)

are bought and sold between many different sellers and buyers, and accordingly
one in which prices are set by the market and not negotiated between individual
sellers and buyers;

Registration — the process of filing a notice as defined under these Rules with the
Registry;

Page 4 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

ff)

Registry — the centralized and nationwide electronic registry established in the
Land Registration Authority (LRA) where notice of a security interest and a lien
in personal property may be registered;

gg) Secured creditor — a person that has a security interest. For the purposes of

registration and priority only, it includes a buyer of an account receivable and a
lessor of goods under an operating lease for not less than one (1) year;

hh) Securities account —an account maintained by an intermediary to which

ii)

DD

securities may be credited or debited;

Security — shares, participation or interests in a corporation or in a commercial
enterprise or profit-making venture and evidenced by a certificate, contract,
instruments, whether written or electronic in character. It includes but is not
limited to:

(i) Shares of stocks, bonds, debentures, notes as evidence of indebtedness,
asset-backed securities;

(ii) Investment contracts, certificates of interest or participation in a profit-
sharing agreement, certificates of deposit for a future subscription;

(iii) Fractional undivided interests in oil, gas or other mineral rights;

(iv) Derivatives like options and warrants;

(v) Certificates of assignments, certificates of participation, trust certificates,
voting trust certificates or similar instruments

(vi) Proprietary or nonproprietary membership certificates in corporations;
and

(vii)Other instruments as may in the future be determined by the Securities
and Exchange Commission;

Security interest — a property right in collateral that secures payment or other
performance of an obligation, regardless of whether the parties have
denominated it as a security interest, and regardless of the type of asset, the
status of the grantor or secured creditor, or the nature of the secured obligation;
including the right of a buyer of accounts receivable and a lessor under an
operating lease for not less than one (1) year;

kk) Tangible asset —means any tangible movable asset. Except in Rules 3.07, 3.08,

4.09, and 6.05, this term includes money, negotiable instruments, negotiable
documents and certificated non-intermediated securities but only if the mere
possession of such instruments results in the ownership of the underlying rights
or property embodied by them, in accordance with the laws governing such
instruments;

Page 5 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

ll) Writing — for the purpose of the PPSA and these Rules, includes electronic
records.

RULE II - SCOPE OF APPLICATION

 

Section 2.01 Scope. — These Rules shall apply to all transactions of any form that secure

an obligation with personal property, whether it is a tangible or an intangible asset,

except interests in aircraft subject to Republic Act No. 9497, or the "Civil Aviation

Authority Act of 2008," and interests in ships subject to Presidential Decree No. 1521, or
* the "Ship Mortgage Decree of 1978."

Section 2.02 Forms of Security Arrangements. Contracting parties are free to enter into any
form of security arrangements over movable property, as long as the security
arrangement covering the same is not inconsistent with the PPSA or these Rules.
Subject to existing law, parties may also apply these Rules to other functional
equivalents of security interest, including fiduciary transfers of title, financial lease;
assignment or transfer of receivables; and sale with retention of title.

Section 2.03 Security Interests in Personal Property. — A security interest may be created
over all forms of tangible or intangible asset or personal property as defined by the
Civil Code, including but not limited to:

(a) Rights arising from contracts, including but not limited to:
1. Securities
2. Commodity contracts
3. Lease of goods including financial leases and operating leases for a period

of not less than one (1) year

(b) Equipment

(c) Inventory

(d) Deposit accounts

(e) Negotiable instruments

(f) Negotiable documents of title

(g) Consumer goods

(h) Intellectual property

(i) — Livestock

(j) Fixtures, accessions, and commingled goods, or

(k) | Future property or after-acquired assets.

Provided, that a security interest can only be created on the asset over which the grantor
has a legal right.

Page 6 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

RULE III - CREATION OF SECURITY INTEREST
Creation of a Security Interest

Section 3.01. Creation of Security Interest. — A security interest shall be created by a

security agreement or the lease of an operating lease for not less than one (1) year. A

security agreement is likewise created by the sale of an account receivable, unless
- otherwise stipulated by all the parties in the document of sale.

Section 3.02 Continuity of Security Interest. — A security interest created under the PPSA
shall continue in the collateral notwithstanding sale, lease, license, exchange, or other
disposition of the collateral, except as otherwise provided in these Rules, or as agreed
upon by the parties.

Form of the Security Agreement

Section 3.03. Form of Security Agreement. — A security agreement must be contained in a
written contract signed by the parties. It must identify the collateral and the secured
obligation. It may consist of one or more writings that, taken together, establish the
intent of the parties to create a security interest.

The security agreement shall likewise provide for the language to be used in
agreements and notices. The grantor shall be given the option to have the agreement
and notices in Filipino. The Department of Finance (DOF) shall prepare model security
agreements in plain English and Filipino provided in Annex “A” of these Rules.

Section 3.04 Description of Collateral. — A description of collateral in the security
agreement and/or in registration notices shall be considered sufficient if it reasonably
identifies the collateral. A specific description of the collateral shall not be required in
constituting the security interest. A description such as "all personal property," "all
equipment," "all inventory," or "all personal property within a generic category" of the
grantor shall be sufficient.

Asset-Specific Rules

Section 3.05 Security Interests Over Future Property

(a) A security agreement may provide for the creation of a security interest in
future property or after-acquired assets, but the security interest in that

Page 7 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

property is created only when the grantor acquires rights in it or the power to
encumber it.

(b) A security agreement may provide that a security interest in a tangible asset
that is transformed into a product extends to the product. A security interest
that extends to a product is limited to the value of the encumbered asset
immediately before it became part of the product.

(c) A security agreement may provide that a security interest in a tangible asset
extends to its replacement. A security interest that extends to a replacement is
limited to the value of the encumbered asset immediately before it was
replaced.

Section 3.06 Security Interests Over Right to Proceeds and Commingled Funds

(a) A security interest in personal property shall extend to its identifiable or
traceable proceeds.

(b) Where proceeds in the form of funds credited to a deposit account or money
are commingled with other funds or money:

(i) The security interest shall extend to the commingled money or funds,
notwithstanding that the proceeds have ceased to be identifiable to the
extent they remain traceable;

(ii) The security interest in the commingled funds or money shall be limited
to the amount of the proceeds immediately before they were commingled;
and

(iii) If at any time after the commingling, the balance credited to the deposit
account or the amount of the commingled money is less than the amount
of the proceeds immediately before they were commingled, the security
interest against the commingled funds or money shall be limited to the
lowest amount of the commingled funds or money between the time
when the proceeds were commingled and the time the security interest in
the proceeds is claimed.

Section 3.07 Security Interest Over Tangible Assets Commingled in a Mass

(a) A security interest in a tangible asset that is commingled in a mass extends to
the mass.

Page 8 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(b) A security interest that extends to a mass is limited to the same proportion of
the mass as the quantity of the encumbered asset bore to the quantity of the
entire mass immediately after the commingling.

Section 3.08 Security Interest in Certain Accounts Receivable. —

(a) A security interest in an account receivable shall be effective notwithstanding
any agreement between the grantor and the account debtor or any secured
creditor limiting in any way the grantor's right to create a security interest;
Provided: Nothing in this section affects the right of a buyer to create a security
interest over the account receivable. Provided, further: that any release of
information is subject to agreements on confidentiality.

(b) Nothing in this section shall affect any obligation or liability of the grantor for
breach of the agreement in subsection (a).

(c) Any stipulation limiting the grantor's right to create a security interest shall be
void.

(d) This section shall apply only to accounts receivable arising from:

(i) A contract for the supply or lease of goods or services other than
financial services;

(ii) A construction contract or contract for the sale or lease of real property;
and

(iii) A contract for the sale, lease or license of intellectual property.

Section 3.09 Protection of Account Debtor — Except as otherwise provided in the PPSA
and these Rules, the creation of a security interest in a receivable does not, without the
consent of the debtor of the receivable, affect its rights and obligations, including the
payment terms contained in the contract giving rise to the receivable. A payment
instruction may change the person, address or account to which the debtor of the
receivable is required to make payment.

Section 3.10. Rights to Payment of Funds Credited to a Bank Account — A security interest in
a right to payment of funds credited to a bank account is effective notwithstanding an
agreement between the grantor and the deposit-taking institution limiting in any way
the grantor’s right to create a security interest.

Section 3.11 Tangible Assets with Respect to which Intellectual Property Is Used — A security
interest in a tangible asset with respect to which intellectual property is used does not
extend to the intellectual property and a security interest in the intellectual property
does not extend to the tangible asset.

Page 9 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

Extinguishment of Security Interest

Section 3.12 Extinguishment of Security Interest. — A security interest is extinguished
when all secured obligations have been discharged and there are no outstanding
commitments to extend credit secured by the security interest.

RULE IV
PERFECTION OF SECURITY INTERESTS

 

Perfection of Security Interest
Section 4.01 Perfection of Security Interest. —
(a) On perfection, a security interest becomes effective against third parties.

(b) A security interest shall be perfected when it has been created and the secured
creditor has taken one of the actions in accordance with these Rules.

Means of Perfection

Section 4.02 Means of Perfection - Tangible Assets — A security interest in tangible assets
may be perfected by either:

(a) Registration of a notice as defined under these Rules with the Registry: Provided,
that a security that is not registered remains valid between the parties; or

(b) Possession, whether actual or constructive, of the tangible asset either by the
secured creditor or a depositary acting for the secured creditor. Provided, that
the debtor or the grantor cannot possess the collateral on behalf of the secured
creditor for purposes of perfecting and maintaining the security interest over
such collateral.

If a security interest in a tangible asset is effective against third parties, a security
interest in a mass to which the security interest extends is effective against third parties
without any further act.

Section 4.03 Means of Perfection - Intangible Assets. — A security interest in intangible
assets may be perfected by either:

(a) Registration of a notice as defined under these Rules with the Registry: Provided,
that a security that is not registered remains valid between the parties; or

Page 10 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

J

(b) Conclusion of a control agreement. For purposes of determining the time of
perfection of the security interest, the control agreement shall be executed under
oath, and shall indicate the date and time of its execution.

Section 4.04 Perfection of Security Interest in Intermediated Securities or Deposit Accounts. —
A security interest in intermediated securities or deposit accounts may be perfected by:

(a) Registration of a notice as defined under these Rules with the Registry: Provided,
that a security that is not registered remains valid between the parties;

(b) Creation of a security interest in favor of the deposit-taking institution or the
intermediary; or

(c) Conclusion of a control agreement.

For purposes of determining the time of perfection of the security interest, the security
agreement or control agreement shall be executed under oath, and shall include the
date and time of its execution

Nothing in these Rules shall require a deposit-taking institution or an intermediary
under sub-section (b) to enter into a control agreement, even if the grantor so requests.
A deposit-taking institution or an intermediary that has entered into such an agreement
shall not be required to confirm the existence of the agreement to another person unless
requested to do so by the grantor.

Section 4.05 Perfection of Security Interest in Electronic Securities — A security interest in
electronic non-intermediated securities may be by:

(a) Registration of a notice as defined under these Rules with the Registry:
Provided, that a security that is not registered remains valid between the parties;

(b) The execution of a control agreement between the grantor and secured creditor;
or,

(c) Control, through notation of a security interest in the books maintained by or
on behalf of the issuer for the purpose of recording the name of the holder of
the securities.

Section 4.06 Perfection of Security Interest in Intermediated Electronic Securities — A
security interest in investment property that is electronic (ie. a scripless or
uncertificated) security held by an intermediary may be by:

Page 11 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

a) Registration of a notice as defined under these Rules with the Registry:
Provided, that a security that is not registered remains valid between the parties;

b) The execution of a control agreement between the intermediary, the grantor
and secured creditor;

For purposes of determining the time of perfection of the security interest, the control
agreement shall be executed under oath, and shall include the date and time, specifying
~ the hour and minute of its execution

Section 4.07 Parties to, Form and Contents of a Control Agreement. —

(a) With respect to intermediated securities, a control agreement shall:
(i) Be executed in writing by the issuer or the intermediary, the grantor and
the secured creditor;
(ii) Stipulate that the issuer or the intermediary agrees to follow instructions
from the secured creditor with respect to the security, without further
consent from the grantor;

(b) With respect to rights to deposit account, a control agreement shall:
(i) Be executed in writing among the deposit-taking institution, the grantor
and the secured creditor;
(ii) Stipulate that the deposit-taking institution agrees to follow instructions
from the secured creditor with respect to the payment of funds credited
to the deposit account without further consent from the grantor;

(c) With respect to commodity contracts, a control agreement shall:

(i) Be executed in writing among the grantor, secured creditor, and
intermediary;

(ii) Stipulate that the commodity intermediary will apply any value
distributed on account of the commodity contract as directed by the
secured creditor without further consent by the commodity customer or
grantor.

Continuity of Perfected Security Interest
Section 4.08 Change in Means of Perfection. — A security interest shall remain perfected
despite a change in the means for achieving perfection: Provided, that there was no time

when the security interest was not perfected.

Section 4.09 Disposition of Perfected Security Interest Before Default. —

Page 12 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(a) Transferee Exceptions. — Any party who obtains, in the ordinary course of
business, any movable property containing a security interest shall take the
same free of such security interest provided he was in good faith. No such good
faith shall exist if the security interest in the movable property was registered
prior to his obtaining the property.

(b) Perfection in Proceeds. —

(i) Before default, upon disposition of the collateral, a security interest shall
extend to proceeds of the collateral without further act and be
continuously perfected, if the proceeds are in the form of money,
accounts receivable, negotiable instruments or deposit accounts.

(ii) Before default, upon disposition of the collateral, if the proceeds are in a
form different from money, accounts receivable, negotiable instruments
or deposit accounts, the security interest in such proceeds must be
perfected by one of the means applicable to the relevant type of
collateral within fifteen (15) days after the grantor receives such
proceeds; otherwise, the security interest in such proceeds shall not be
effective against third parties.

Section 4.10. Fixtures, Accessions, and Commingled Goods. — A perfected security interest
in a movable property which has become a fixture, or has undergone accession or
commingling shall continue provided the movable property involved can still be
reasonably traced. In determining ownership over fixtures, accessions, and commingled
goods, the provisions of Book II of Republic Act No. 386 or the "Civil Code of the
Philippines" shall apply.

RULE V
THE REGISTRY

Operation of Registry

Section 5.01. Establishment. The LRA, within six (6) months from the publication of these
Rules, shall establish and administer the centralized, nationwide Registry, which shall
contain, among others, the following information:

(a) Initial notice of security interest and lien in personal property;

(b) Amendment notice providing new information or continuing the period of
effectiveness of an initial notice;
(c) Termination notice.

Page 13 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

O

The Registry shall provide electronic means for registration and searching of notices.
The LRA shall issue the necessary guidelines on the use and management of the
Registry.

Section 5.02. Sourcing of Funds. — The funds needed for the implementation of these
Rules shall be taken from the Special Account arising from revenues collected by the
LRA under Section 111 of Presidential Decree No. 1529, without need for any further
government approval.

* Section 5.03. Fees Set by Regulation. — The fees for registering a notice and for requesting
a certified search report shall be set by regulations issued by the DOF for the recovery
of reasonable costs of establishing and operating the Registry. Such regulations must
take into consideration the following requirements:

(a) Fees imposed must not be burdensome to either lender or grantor.

(b) There shall be no fee for electronic searches of the Registry records or for the
registration of termination notices.

(c) The Registry may charge fees for services not mentioned above.
Section 5.04. Registry Duties. —

(a) The Registry shall, for each registered notice:
(i) assign a unique registration number;
(ii) create a record that bears the number assigned to the initial notice and the
date and time of registration; and
(iii) maintain the record for public inspection.

(b) The Registry shall index notices by the identification number of the grantor,
except for notices containing a serial number of a motor vehicle, which shall be
indexed by serial number.

(c) The Registry shall provide a copy of the electronic record of the notice, including
the registration number and the date and time of registration to the person who
submitted it.

(d) The Registry shall maintain the capability to retrieve a record by the
identification number of the grantor, and by serial number of a motor vehicle.

e) The Registry shall maintain records of lapsed notices for a period of ten (10
gisiry P P
years after the lapse.

Page 14 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

I

(f) The duties of the Registry shall be merely administrative in nature. By registering
a notice or refusing to register a notice, the Registry does not determine the
sufficiency, correctness, authenticity or validity of any information contained in
the notice, or the validity of the security agreement.

Registration of Notice
Section 5.05. Sufficiency of Notice. —

(a) An initial notice of security interest shall not be rejected:

(i) If it identifies the grantor by an identification number, as further
prescribed in the regulations;

(ii) If it identifies the secured creditor or an agent of the secured creditor by
name;

(iii) If it provides an address for the grantor and secured creditor or its agent;

(iv) If it describes the collateral;

(v) Ifit states the duration of effectivity of the security interest; and

(vi) If the prescribed fee has been tendered, or an arrangement has been made
for payment of fees by other means.

If the grantor is a natural person, that grantor shall be identified through the name
appearing in any of the grantor’s government issued identification, as may be
prescribed by the LRA.

If the grantor is a juridical person, that grantor shall be identified through its name
in the most recently registered articles of incorporation, or in an agreement
constituting the legal person.

(b) If the Registry rejects to register a notice, it shall promptly communicate to the
person who submitted the notice, within three (3) days from the rejection, the
fact of and the reason for its rejection.

(c) Each grantor must authorize the registration of an initial notice by signing a
security agreement or otherwise in writing.

(d) A notice may be registered before a security agreement is concluded. Once a
security agreement is concluded, the date of registration of the notice shall be
reckoned from the date the notice was registered.

(e) A notice of lien may be registered by a lien holder without the consent of the
person against whom the lien is sought to be enforced.

Page 15 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(f) Description of the collateral in a notice shall be entered in English.

Section 5.06. One Notice Sufficient for Security Interests Under Multiple Security Agreements.
— The registration of a single notice may relate to security interests created by the
grantor under one (1) or more than one security agreement.

Section 5.07. Effectiveness of Notice. — A notice shall be effective at the time it is
discoverable on the records of the Registry and for the duration of the term indicated in
the notice, unless a continuation notice is registered before the term lapses. The copy of

’ the electronic record of the notice provided to the person who submitted it indicating
the date and time of effectivity shall be conclusive.

A notice substantially complying with the requirements of this Rule shall be effective
unless it is seriously misleading. Seriously misleading notices include notices which do
not provide the identification number of the grantor.

A notice that may not be retrieved in a search of the Registry against the correct
identifier of the grantor shall be ineffective with respect to that grantor.

The registration of a notice shall neither expand nor diminish the security interest
beyond the terms of the security agreement, except as otherwise provided by the PPSA
or these Rules. Any error or misrepresentation in the notice with respect to the
description of the security interest shall not affect any rights beyond those granted in
the original security agreement.

Amendment and Termination of Notice

Section 5.08. Amendment of a Notice. — A notice may be amended by the registration of
an amendment notice that identifies the initial notice by its registration number and
provides new information.

The amendment notice to be valid may be filed:

(a) By the secured creditor alone, if the changes to the security interest can be
effected with the sole consent of the secured creditor; or

(b) By the grantor, if the changes to the security interest requires the grantor’s
consent.

A secured creditor who files the amendment notice necessarily attests that no other
consent is necessary for the amendment to take effect.

If the amendment notice adds collateral that is not proceeds, it must be authorized by
the grantor in writing. If the amendment notice adds a grantor, it must be authorized by

Page 16 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

the added grantor in writing. Such amendment notices shall be effective as to the added
collateral or grantor from the date of its registration and shall be effective only as to
each secured creditor who authorizes it.

If a secured creditor assigns a perfected security interest, an amendment notice may
be registered to reflect the assignment.

Section 5.09. Continuation of Notice. — .The period of effectiveness of a notice may be
continued for an additional days by registering an amendment notice that identifies the

‘initial notice by its registration number. It must be registered within six (6) months
before the expiration of the effective period of the notice.

Section 5.10. Compulsory Amendment by Court Order. — The court may, on application by
the grantor, issue an order that the notice be amended in accordance with the demand,
which order shall be conclusive and binding on the LRA: Provided, that the secured
creditor who disagrees with the order of the court may appeal the order.

The court may make any other order it deems proper for the purpose of giving effect to
an issued compulsory amendment order.

The LRA shall amend a notice in accordance with a court order made under this section
as soon as reasonably practicable.

Any person who, without negligence on his part, sustains loss or damage, or is
deprived of his priority right in consequence of an erroneous or false description in the
notice made by the filing party may bring an action in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the recovery of damages from the responsible party. The same court
may also order the correction of the error or false description in the notice.

Section 5.11. Termination of Effectiveness of a Notice. — The effectiveness of a notice may
be terminated by registering a termination notice that identifies the initial notice by its
registration number and each secured creditor who authorizes the registration of the
termination notice. The notice is terminated from the date and time when the
information in the notice is no longer accessible to searchers of the public registry
record.

A termination notice terminates effectiveness of the notice as to each authorizing
secured creditor.

Section 5.12. Compulsory Termination by Court Order. — The court may, on application by
the grantor, issue an order that the notice be terminated in accordance with the
demand, which order shall be conclusive and binding on the LRA: Provided, that the
secured creditor who disagrees with the order of the court may appeal the order.

Page 17 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

The court may make any other order it deems proper for the purpose of giving effect to
an issued compulsory termination order.

The LRA shall terminate a notice in accordance with a court order made under this
section as soon as reasonably practicable.

Section 5.13. When the Grantor May Demand Amendment or Termination of a Notice. — A
grantor may give a written demand to the secured creditor for the amendment or
* termination of the effectiveness of the notice in the following cases:

(a) All the obligations under the security agreement to which the registration relates
have been performed and there is no commitment to make future advances;

(b) The secured creditor has agreed to release part of the collateral described in the
notice;

(c) The collateral described in the notice includes an item or kind of property that is
not a collateral under a security agreement between the secured creditor and the
grantor;

(d) No security agreement exists between the parties; or
(e) The security interest is extinguished in accordance with this Rule.

Upon receipt of the demand for amendment submitted by the grantor, the secured
creditor must register, within fifteen (15) working days, a notice amending the
registration to release some property that is no longer collateral or that was never
collateral under a security agreement between the secured creditor and the grantor in a
case within subsection (c) of paragraph 1 of this section.

Upon receipt of the demand for termination submitted by the grantor, the secured
creditor must register, within fifteen (15) working days, a notice terminating the
registration in a case within subsections (a), (d) or (e) of paragraph 1 of this section.

Section 5.14. Procedure for Noncompliance with Demand. — If the secured creditor fails to
comply with the demand within fifteen (15) working days after its receipt, the person
giving the demand under the two preceding sections may ask the proper court to issue
an order terminating or amending the notice as appropriate.

Section 5.15. No Fee for Compliance of Demand. — A secured creditor shall not charge any
fee for compliance with a demand received under Section 5.13 of this Rule.

Page 18 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

Public Access and Search

Section 5.16. Public Record. — The electronic records of the Registry shall be the official
records. All notices registered and the information contained in such notices, shall be
considered as part of the public record and may be searched and examined by any
person: Provided that the processing of all information under these Rules shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Republic Act 10173, otherwise known as the “Data
Privacy Act of 2012”.

’ Registration of a notice of the public auction in accordance with Section 7.08 (b) of these
Rules is sufficient to comply with the publication requirement therein.

Section 5.17. Search of Registry Records and Certified Report. — The Registry shall
communicate the following information to any person who requests it:

(a) Whether there are in the Registry any unlapsed notices that indicate the
grantor's identification number or vehicle serial number that exactly matches the
relevant criterion provided by the searcher;

(b) The registration number, and the date and time of registration of each notice; and
(c) All of the information contained in each notice.

If requested, the Registry shall issue a certified report of the results of a search. Certified
reports of search results shall be treated as official records of the Registry, which shall
be admissible into evidence in judicial proceedings without extrinsic evidence of its
authenticity.

Section 5.18. When Registration and Search Constitutes Interference with Privacy of Individual.
— A person who submitted a notice for registration or carried out a search of the
Registry with a frivolous, malicious or criminal purpose or intent shall be subject to civil
and criminal penalties according to the relevant laws.

Correction of Errors

Section 5.19. Correction of Errors Made by the Registry. — Without delay after discovering
that it made an administrative error or omission in entering into the public record the
information contained in a notice submitted for registration or erroneously removed
from the public registry record information contained in the registered notice, the
Registry must:

(a) Register a notice to correct the error or omission, or;

Page 19 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(b) Restore the erroneously removed information, and send a copy of the
information in the registered notice to the person identified in the notice as the
secured creditor.

The registration of a notice referred to in letter (a) is effective as of the time the
information in the notice becomes accessible to searchers of the public registry record.

Section 5.20. False or Misleading Information.—The entry of false or misleading
information in any notice or lien or record entered and made publicly available in the

* Registry may result in a prosecution for Data Interference, Computer-related Fraud or
Computer-related Forgery under Republic Act No. 10175, otherwise known as the
“Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012”.

RULE VI
PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTEREST

General Rule

Section 6.01 Time of Perfection. — The priority of security interests and liens on the same
collateral shall be determined according to the time of registration of a notice or
perfection by other means, without regard to the order of creation of the security
interests and liens, or to the mode of perfection except as provided in Sections 6.02 to
6.05 of these Rules.

Priority Rules for Intangible Assets

Section 6.02 Priority for Investment Property and Deposit Accounts. — Subject to Section
6.01, the following rules shall govern when applicable:

(a) A security interest in a deposit account with respect to which the secured
creditor is the deposit-taking institution or the intermediary shall have priority
over a competing security interest perfected by any method.

(b) A security interest in a deposit account or investment property that is perfected
by a control agreement shall have priority over a competing security interest
except a security interest of the deposit-taking institution or the intermediary.

(c) The order of priority among competing security interests in a deposit account or
investment property that were perfected by the conclusion of control agreements
shall be determined on the basis of the time of conclusion of the control
agreements.

Page 20 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

J

(d) Any rights to set-off that the deposit-taking institution may have against a
grantor's right to payment of funds credited to a deposit account shall have
priority over a security interest in the deposit account.

(e) A security interest in electronic non-intermediated securities perfected by a
notation of the security interests in the books maintained for that purpose by or
on behalf of the issuer shall have priority over a security interest in the same
securities perfected by any other method.

(f) A security interest in electronic securities not held with an intermediary
perfected by the conclusion of a control agreement shall have priority over a
security interest in the same securities perfected by registration of a notice in the
Registry.

(g) A security interest in electronic securities held with an intermediary and
perfected through a control agreement shall have priority over a security interest
in the same securities perfected by any other method.

(h) The order of priority among competing security interests in electronic securities
not held with an intermediary perfected by the conclusion of control agreements
is determined on the basis of the time of conclusion of the control agreements.

Priority Rules for Tangible Assets

Section 6.03 Priority for Tangible Assets Embodied in Instruments. — Subject to Section 6.01,
the following rules shall govern when applicable:

(a) A security interest in a security certificate perfected by the secured creditor's
possession of the certificate shall have priority over a competing security interest
perfected by registration of a notice in the Registry.

(b) A security interest in an instrument or negotiable document that is perfected by
possession of the instrument or the negotiable document shall have priority over
a security interest in the instrument or negotiable document that is perfected by
registration of a notice in the Registry.

(c) A perfected security interest in livestock securing an obligation incurred to
enable the grantor to obtain food or medicine for the livestock shall have priority
over any other security interest in the livestock, except for a perfected purchase
money security interest in the livestock, if the secured creditor providing credit
for food or medicine gives written notification to the holder of the conflicting
perfected security interest in the same livestock before the grantor receives
possession of the food or medicine.

Page 21 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

Priority Rules for Specific Cases
Section 6.04 By Operation of Law. —

(a) Priority and Right of Retention. — A person who provides services or materials
with respect to the goods, in the ordinary course of business, and retains
possession of the goods shall have priority over a perfected security interest in
the goods until payment thereof.

(b) Effect of Grantor’s Insolvency. — Subject to the applicable insolvency law, a
security interest perfected prior to the commencement of insolvency proceedings
in respect of the grantor shall remain perfected and retain the priority it had
before the commencement of the insolvency proceedings.

During insolvency proceedings, the perfected security interest shall constitute a
lien over the collateral.

Section 6.05 Priority of Purchase Money Security Interest. —

(a) A purchase money security interest in equipment and its proceeds shall have
priority over a conflicting security interest, if a notice relating to the purchase
money security interest is registered within three (3) business days after the
grantor receives possession of the equipment.

(b) A purchase money security interest in consumer goods that is perfected by
registration of notice not later than three (3) business days after the grantor
obtains possession of the consumer goods shall have priority over a conflicting
security interest.

(c) A purchase money security interest in inventory, intellectual property or
livestock shall have priority over a conflicting perfected security interest in the
same inventory, intellectual property or livestock if:

(i) The purchase money security interest is perfected when the grantor
receives possession of the inventory or livestock, or acquires rights to
intellectual property; and

(ii) Before the grantor receives possession of the inventory or livestock, or
acquires rights in intellectual property, the purchase money secured
creditor gives written notification to the holder of the conflicting perfected
security interest in the same types of inventory, livestock, or intellectual
property. The notification sent to the holder of the conflicting security
interest may cover multiple transactions between the purchase money

Page 22 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

secured creditor and the grantor without the need to identify each
transaction.

(d) The purchase money security interest in equipment or consumer goods perfected
timely in accordance with subsections (a) and (b), shall have priority over the
rights of a buyer, lessee, or lien holder which arise between delivery of the
equipment or consumer goods to the grantor and the time the notice is

 

registered.
RULE VII
ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST AND SECURED CREDITOR'S
RIGHTS

Section 7.01 Enforcement With or Without Judicial Process — The secured creditor may
enforce its security interest whether through a judicial process or through an extra-
judicial process, including the sale of the secured assets through either a public or
private disposition. Any judicial enforcement of security interests, including the
disposition of collateral, shall be governed by rules promulgated by the Supreme Court.

Section 7.02 Expedited Repossession of the Collateral (Without Judicial Process) — The
secured creditor may take possession of the collateral without judicial process if the
security agreement so stipulates: Provided, that possession can be taken without a breach
of the peace. Breach of the peace shall include entering the private residence of the
grantor without permission, resorting to physical violence or intimidation, or being
accompanied by a law enforcement officer when taking possession or confronting the
grantor.

If the collateral is a fixture, the secured creditor, if it has priority over all owners and
mortgagees, may remove the fixture from the real property to which it is affixed
without judicial process. The secured creditor shall exercise due care in removing the
fixture.

Section 7.03 Expedited Repossession of the Collateral (With Judicial Process) — If, upon
default, the secured creditor cannot take possession of collateral without breach of the
peace, the secured creditor may proceed as follows:

(a) The secured creditor shall be entitled to an expedited hearing upon application
for an order granting the secured creditor possession of the collateral. Such
application shall include a statement by the secured creditor, under oath,
verifying the existence of the security agreement attached to the application and
identifying at least one event of default by the debtor under the security
agreement,

Page 23 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

O

(b) The secured creditor shall provide the debtor, grantor, and, if the collateral is a
fixture, any real estate mortgagee, a copy of the application, including all
supporting documents and evidence for the order granting the secured creditor
possession of the collateral; and

(c) The secured creditor is entitled to an order granting possession of the collateral
upon the court finding that a default has occurred under the security agreement
and that the secured creditor has a right to take possession of the collateral. The
court may direct the grantor to take such action as the court deems necessary and
appropriate so that the secured creditor may take possession of the collateral.

Section 7.04 Right of Higher-Ranking Secured Creditor to Take Over Enforcement —

(a) Even if another secured creditor or a lien holder has commenced enforcement, a
secured creditor whose security interest has priority over that of the enforcing
secured creditor or lien holder shall be entitled to take over the enforcement
process.

(b) The right referred to in subsection (a) of this section may be invoked at any time
before the collateral is sold or otherwise disposed of, or retained by the secured
creditor or until the conclusion of an agreement by the secured creditor for that
purpose.

(c) The right of the higher-ranking secured creditor to take over the enforcement
process shall include the right to enforce the rights by any method available to a
secured creditor under the PPSA and these Rules.

Section 7.05. Recovery in Special Cases — Upon default, the secured creditor may without
judicial process:

(a) Instruct the account debtor of an accounts receivable to make payment to the
secured creditor, and apply such payment to the satisfaction of the obligation
secured by the security interest after deducting the secured creditor's reasonable
collection expenses. On request of the account debtor, the secured creditor shall
provide evidence of its security interest to the account debtor when it delivers
the instruction to the account debtor;

b) In a negotiable document where the security interest is perfected by possession,
8 P y Pp
proceed as to the negotiable document or goods covered by the negotiable
document;

Page 24 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(c) Ina deposit account maintained by the secured creditor, apply the balance of the
deposit account to the obligation secured by the deposit account; and

(d) In other cases of a security interest in a deposit account perfected by a control
agreement, instruct the deposit-taking institution to pay the balance of the
deposit account to the secured creditor's account by providing:

(i) a copy of the security agreement that creates or provides for a security
interest; and

(ii) the secured party's affidavit stating thata default has occurred, and thatthe
secured party is entitled to enforce the security interest non-judicially.

Section 7.06 Right to Dispose of Collateral — After default, a secured creditor may sell or
otherwise dispose of the collateral, publicly or privately, in its present condition or
following any commercially reasonable preparation or processing.

Section 7.07. Commercial Reasonableness Required. —

(a) In disposing of collateral, the secured creditor shall act in a commercially
reasonable manner.

(b) A disposition is commercially reasonable if the secured creditor disposes of the
collateral in conformity with commercial practices among dealers in that type of

property.

(c) A disposition is not commercially unreasonable merely because a better price
could have been obtained by disposition at a different time or by a different
method from the time and method selected by the secured creditor.

Section 7.08. Notification Requirements Prior to Disposition. —

(a) Not later than ten (10) days before disposition of the collateral, the secured
creditor shall notify:

(i) | The grantor:

(ii) | Any other secured creditor or lien holder who, five (5) days before
the date notification is sent to the grantor, held a security interest or
lien in the collateral that was perfected by registration; and

(iii) Any other person from whom the secured creditor received
notification of a claim of an interest in the collateral if the
notification was received before the secured creditor gave
notification of the proposed disposition to the grantor.

Page 25 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(b) The grantor may, after default, waive the right to be notified.

(c) A notification of disposition is sufficient if it identifies the grantor and the
secured creditor; describes the collateral; states the method of intended
disposition; and states the time and place of a public disposition or the time after
which other disposition is to be made.

(d) The secured creditor shall notify the persons entitled to notification via
registered mail, private courier, electronically, or through any means where
receipt of the notice can be established by a disinterested third party.

(e) The requirement to send a notification under this section shall not apply if the
collateral is perishable or threatens to decline speedily in value or is of a type
customarily sold on a recognized market.

Section 7.09. Guidelines on Private or Public Disposition. —

(a) The secured creditor may dispose of the collateral through a sale open to
participation by the general public.

(b) In case of extra-judicial disposition, the secured creditor may, subject to the
guidelines below, select the method, manner, time, place and other aspects of the
sale or other disposition, lease or license, including whether to sell or otherwise
dispose of, lease or license encumbered assets individually, in groups or
altogether: Provided, that the disposition is undertaken in good faith and satisfies
the commercial reasonableness requirement under Section 7.07. Judicial
dispositions shall be governed by rules promulgated by the Supreme Court.

(c) The secured creditor shall, no later than ten (10) days before the extra-judicial
disposition of the collateral, cause the posting with the Registry of a notice that
sufficiently describes the collateral to be sold and specifies the method, manner,
time, place and other details of the sale. The Registry shall ensure that all such
notices posted are publicly accessible and searchable. In adherence with the
commercial reasonableness requirement, the secured creditor may also cause the
advertisement of the disposition through any other means or medium as the
secured creditor may deem as suitable, to maximize awareness of the sale among
dealers in the type of property to which the collateral belongs.

(d) All collateral shall be disposed through auction and the following indicators may
be taken into account in determining whether the sale satisfies the good faith and
commercial reasonableness requirement:

(i) that the person or entity who presides over the auction is an experienced
dealer in the type of property sold;

Page 26 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(ii) that the participating bidders do not engage in collusive practices that
prevent free and open competition;

(iii) that the records of the proceedings, including the identities and respective
submissions of the bidders, are documented in writing and subsequently
maintained, and;

(iv) that the highest bidder is duly awarded the collateral.

The winning bidder must fully pay the bid price at the conclusion of the
auction. Otherwise, the collateral may be awarded to the next highest
bidder.

(e) Any government agency that regularly undertakes public auctions in the course
of its regular activities may be engaged by any secured creditor to preside over
public auctions over securitized movable collateral under this Section, through
rules and regulations that must be submitted to the Department of Finance for
prior approval. Private entities such as auction houses, industry groups of
secured creditors, or organizations of recognized dealers of specific movables
may likewise adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of public auctions,
subject to the approval of the Department of Finance. Any public auction of
movable collateral conducted by any government agency or private entity under
rules duly approved by the Department of Finance shall be conclusively
presumed to be commercially reasonable.

(f) The secured creditor may buy the collateral at any public disposition, or at a
private disposition but only if the collateral is of a kind that is customarily sold
on a recognized market or the subject of widely distributed standard price
quotations.

If a method of disposition of collateral has been approved in any legal

& P PP y leg
proceeding, whether judicial or administrative, it is conclusively commercially
reasonable.

Section 7.10. Right of Redemption. —

(a) Any person who is entitled to receive a notification of disposition in accordance
with these Rules is entitled to redeem the collateral by paying or otherwise
performing the secured obligation in full, including the reasonable cost of
enforcement.

(b) The right of redemption may be exercised, unless:

(i) | The person entitled to redeem has, after the default, waived in writing the
right to redeem;

Page 27 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

J

(ii) | The collateral is sold or otherwise disposed of, acquired or collected by the
secured creditor, or when an agreement with those effects on the collateral
is concluded by the secured creditor; or,

(iii) | The secured creditor has retained the collateral.

Section 7.11. Application of Proceeds. —

(a) The proceeds of disposition shall be applied in the following order:

(i) |The reasonable expenses of taking, holding, preparing for disposition, and
disposing of the collateral, including reasonable attorneys' fees and legal
expenses incurred by the secured creditor;

(ii) The satisfaction of the obligation secured by the security interest of the
enforcing secured creditor; and

(iii) The satisfaction of obligations secured by any subordinate security
interest or lien in the collateral if a written demand and proof of the
interest are received before distribution of the proceeds is completed.

(b) The secured creditor shall account to the grantor for any surplus, and, unless
otherwise agreed, the debtor is liable for any deficiency.

(c) The reasonable expenses of holding the collateral shall include all expenses
incurred by the secured creditor in the preservation and care of the collateral in
his possession with the diligence of a good father of a family.

(d) The secured creditor shall be liable to the grantor for the value of the loss and
deterioration that may be suffered due to his failure to preserve and care for the
collateral.

Section 7.12. Rights of Buyers and Other Third Parties, —
(a) If a secured creditor sells the collateral under this Chapter, the buyer shall
acquire the grantor's right in the asset free of the rights of any secured creditor or

lien holder.

(b) If a secured creditor leases or licenses the collateral under this Chapter, the lessee
or licensee shall be entitled to the benefit of the lease or license during its term.

(c) If a secured creditor sells, leases or licenses the collateral not in compliance with

this Chapter, the buyer, lessee or licensee of the collateral shall acquire the rights
or benefits described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section: Provided, that it had

Page 28 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

g

no knowledge of a violation of this Chapter that materially prejudiced the rights
of the grantor or another person.

Section 7.13. Retention of Collateral by Secured Creditor, —

(a) After default, the secured creditor may propose to the debtor and grantor to take
all or part of the collateral in total or partial satisfaction of the secured obligation,
and shall send a proposal to:

(i) | The debtor and the grantor;

(ii) | Any other secured creditor or lien holder who, five (5) days before the
proposal is sent to the debtor and the grantor, perfected its security
interest or lien by registration; and

(iii) | Any other person with an interest in the collateral who has given a written
notification to the secured creditor before the proposal is sent to the
debtor and the grantor.

(b) The secured creditor may retain the collateral in the case of:

(i) A proposal for the acquisition of the collateral in full satisfaction of the
secured obligation, unless the secured creditor receives an objection in
writing from any person entitled to receive such a proposal within twenty
(20) days after the proposal is sent to that person; or

(ii) A proposal for the acquisition of the collateral in partial satisfaction of the
secured obligation, only if the secured creditor receives the affirmative
consent of each addressee of the proposal in writing within twenty (20)
days after the proposal is sent to that person.

(c) A proposal for the retention of the collateral is sufficient if it includes:

(i) | A statement of the amount required at the time the proposal is given to
satisfy the secured obligation, including interest and the reasonable cost of
enforcement, and the amount of the secured obligation that is proposed to
be satisfied;

(ii) | A statement that the secured creditor proposes to acquire the encumbered
asset described in the proposal in total or partial satisfaction of the secured
obligation;

(iii) A statement of the date after which the secured creditor will acquire the
encumbered asset.

Section 7.14. Remedies for Secured Party's Failure to Comply with the Rules —

Page 29 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(a) Judicial orders concerning noncompliance —If it is established that a secured party is
not proceeding in accordance with these Rules, a court may order or restrain
collection, enforcement, or disposition of collateral on appropriate terms and
conditions.

(b) Damages for noncompliance—A party or interested person who fails to comply
with the provisions of these Rules shall be liable in the amount of any loss
resulting from such failure. Loss caused by a failure to comply may include loss
resulting from the debtor's inability to obtain, or increased costs of, alternative
financing.

(c) Person entitled to recover damages—A person that, at the time of the failure, was a
debtor, a grantor, or held a security interest in or other lien on the collateral may
recover damages under subsection (b) for its loss.

RULE VIII
PRIOR INTERESTS AND THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD

Section 8.01. Interpretation of Transitional Provisions. — For this Rule, unless the context
otherwise requires:

(a) Existing secured creditor — means a secured creditor with a prior security
interest;

(b) Prior law — means any law that existed or in force before the effectivity of the
PPSA;

(c) Prior interest — means a security interest created or provided for by an
agreement or other transaction that was made or entered into before the
effectivity of the PPSA and that had not been terminated before the effectivity
of the PPSA, but excludes a security interest that is renewed or extended by a
security agreement or other transaction made or entered into on or after the
effectivity of the PPSA;

(d) Transitional period — means the period from the date of effectivity of the PPSA
until the date when the Registry has been established and operational.
Before the Effectivity of the PPSA
Section 8.02. Creation of Prior Interest. —

(a) Creation of prior interest shall be determined by prior law.

Page 30 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

(b) A prior interest remains effective, subject to Section 8.03 of these Rules,
between the parties notwithstanding that its creation did not comply with the
creation requirements of the PPSA and these Rules.

Section 8.03. Perfection of Prior Interest. —

a) A prior interest that was perfected under prior law continues to be deemed
P P Pp
perfected under the PPSA and these rules until the earlier of:

(i) |The time the prior interest would cease to be perfected under prior law;
and

(ii) The beginning of full implementation of the PPSA.

Section 8.04. Priority of Prior Interest. — The priority of a prior interest as against the
rights of a competing claimant is determined by the prior law if:

(a) The priority of a prior interest as against the rights of a competing claimant is
determined by the prior law if:

(i) The security interest and the rights of all competing claimant arose
before the effectivity of the PPSA; and

(ii) The priority status of these rights has not changed since the effectivity of
the PPSA.

(b) For purposes of subsection (a)(ii) of this Rule, the priority status of a prior
interest has changed only if:

(i) It was perfected when the PPSA took effect, but ceased to be perfected;
or

(ii) It was not perfected under prior law when the PPSA took effect, and was
only perfected under the PPSA.

Section 8.05. Enforcement of Prior Interest. —

(a) If any step or action has been taken to enforce a prior interest before the
effectivity of the PPSA and these Rules, and such prior interest falls within
Section 8.02(b) also of this Rule, enforcement may continue under the prior law
or may proceed under the PPSA and these Rules.

(b) Subject to subsection (a) of this Rule, prior law shall apply to a matter that is
the subject of proceedings before a court before the effectivity of the PPSA.

Page 31 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

yf

During the Transitional Period

Section 8.06. Date of Effectivity of the Transitional Period. — The transitional period shall
begin on February 9, 2019, which is the date of effectivity of the PPSA pursuant to
Section 67 thereof.

Section 8.07. Creation of Security Interest. — All security interests created during the
Transitional Period are governed by the PPSA.

- Section 8.08. Perfection of Security Interest. — The perfection of all existing security
interests created during the Transitional Period shall be governed by the PPSA.
Provided, however, that during the Transitional Period, registration of the security
agreement with the LRA shall be in accordance with Section 4 of Act No. 1508 ,
otherwise known as "The Chattel Mortgage Law." The LRA shall also determine a
system of provisional registration of such agreements during such Transitional
Period.

(a) A written agreement between a grantor and a secured creditor creating a prior
interest is sufficient to constitute authorization by the grantor of the
registration of a notice covering assets described in that agreement under these
Rules.

(b) If the perfection requirements of these Rules are satisfied before the perfection
of a prior interest ceases in accordance with Rule 8.03, the prior interest
continues to be perfected under these Rules from the time when it was
perfected under the prior law.

(c) If a prior interest referred to in subsection (b) of this section was perfected by
the registration in the registry of a notice under prior law, the time of
registration under the prior law shall be the time to be used for purposes of
applying the priority rules of these Rules.

(d) If the perfection requirements of these Rules are not satisfied before the
perfection of a prior interest ceases in accordance with Rule 8.03, the prior
interest is perfected only from the time it is perfected under these Rules.

Section 8.09. Priority of Security Interest. — The priority of competing security interests
shall be determined during the Transitional Period by applying the PPSA.

Section 8.10. Enforcement of Security Interest. — The enforcement of all existing security
interests during the Transitional Period shall be governed by the PPSA.
Section 8.11. Rules on Enforcement Procedure. — Subject to Section 47 of the PPSA and its

Page 32 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

f

corresponding Chapter in these Rules, the expedited hearing/proceedings shall be
conducted in a summary manner consistent with the declared policies of the law and
these Rules and in accordance with the rules of procedure that the Supreme Court may
promulgate.

RULE IX
LAWS REPEALED AND AMENDED

 

Section 9.01. Repealing Clause. —

(a) The following laws are hereby repealed:

(i) Sections 1 to 16 of Act No. 1508, otherwise known as "The Chattel

Mortgage Law";

(ii) Articles 2085-2092 of the “Civil Code of the Philippines”, insofar as
movable property is concerned;

(iii) Articles 2093-2123 and 2140-2141 of the Civil Code of the Philippines;

(iv) Section 13 of Republic Act No. 5980, as amended by Republic Act No.
8556, otherwise known as the "Financing Company Act of 1998";

(v) Sections 114-116 of Presidential Decree No. 1529, otherwise known as
the "Property Registration Decree";

(vi) Section 5(e) of Republic Act No. 4136, otherwise known as the "Land
Transportation and Traffic Code."

(b) The following laws are hereby amended insofar as the provisions thereof are
inconsistent with the PPSA;

(i) Section 10 of Presidential Decree No. 1529

(ii) | Article 2127 of the Civil Code of the Philippines;

(iii) Articles 2241, 2243, and 2246-2247 of Civil Code of the Philippines,
insofar as the preferences created by these provisions are inconsistent
with the priority rights of the secured creditor perfected pursuant to the
PPSA and these Rules;

(c) All laws, decrees, orders, and issuances or portions thereof, which are
inconsistent with the provisions of the PPSA, are hereby repealed, amended, or
modified accordingly.

Section 9.02. Interpretation. — If there is any conflict between a provision of these Rules
and a provision of any other law and its rules, these Rules shall govern unless the
other law or its rules specifically cites or amends the conflicting provisions of these
Rules.

Page 33 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

G

RULE X
EFFECTIVITY

Section 10.01. Separability Clause. — Should any provision herein be declared
unconstitutional or contrary to law, the same shall not affect the validity of the other
provisions of these Rules.

' Section 10.02. Effectivity. — These Rules shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
complete publication in the Official Gazette or a newspaper of general circulation.

The Office of the National Administrative Register (ONAR) of the UP Law Center
shall be provided three (3) certified copies of these Rules.
Section 10.03. Implementation. — Notwithstanding the entry into force of these Rules

under Section 10.03, the implementation of the Act shall be conditioned upon the
Registry being established and operational under Rule IV.

CARLOS G. DOMIN Z
Secretary of Finance

OCT 10 2019

Page 34 of 34
Implementing Rules and Regulations of Personal Property Security Act

ANNEX _4_
A. Model Security Agreement for a Specific Asset

SECURITY AGREEMENT

This SECURITY AGREEMENT (the “AGREEMENT”) made and executed on this
day of 20 at , by and between:

(Name of GRANTOR), (of legal age, single/nmrried to with
address at )/(@ corporation organized and existing under
and by virtue of the laws of the Republic of the Philippines, with principal
address at in this act represented by its
) hereinafter referred to as “GRANTOR”

 

 

 

-and-

(Name of SECURED CREDITOR), (of legal age, single/married to
with address at )/(a corporation organized and
existing under and by virtue of the laws of the Republic of the Philippines,
with principal address at in this act
represented by its ) hereinafter referred to
as “SECURED CREDITOR”.

 

 

 

WITNESSETH:

1. The GRANTOR agrees to create a security interest over the movable property
described below, in favor of the SECURED CREDITOR, to secure its obligation to
pay (amount) under (description of the agreement from which the obligation arises,
including the date the agreement was entered into)

2. The security interest covered under this Agreement shall cover the movable
property described below:

(Description _of encumbered asset, for example, located _at...

manufactured by ..., with serial number ...)

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereunto set their hands on this day of
at

[Name of the GRANTOR] [Name of the SECURED CREDITOR]

Signed in the Presence of:

 

Witness Witness

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

(REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

BEFORE ME, a Notary Public for and in this ___ day of 20
personally appeared:

 

Name Competent Evidence of Date of Place of
Identity Issue Issue
GRANTOR
SECURED
CREDITOR

known to me as the same persons who executed the foregoing Agreement and
acknowledged to me that the same is their free and voluntary act and deed or that of the
principals represented by them.

I further acknowledge that this instrument, including the foregoing Agreement and this
page on which this acknowledge is written, consists of two (2) pages, all signed by the
parties and sealed with my notarial seal.

WITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL on the date and the place first above written.

Doc. No.
Page No.
Book No.
Series of

B. Model Security Agreement Covering All Assets of the GRANTOR
SECURITY AGREEMENT

This SECURITY AGREEMENT (the “AGREEMENT”) made and executed on this
day of 20 at , by and between:

 

(Name of GRANTOR), (of legal age, single/married to with
address at )/(a@ corporation organized and existing under
and by virtue of the laws of the Republic of the Philippines, with principal
address at in this act represented by its
) hereinafter referred to as “GRANTOR”

 

 

 

-and-

(Name of SECURED CREDITOR), (of legal age, single/married to
with address at )/(a@ corporation organized and
existing under and by virtue of the laws of the Republic of the Philippines,
with principal address at in this act
represented by its ) hereinafter referred to
as “SECURED CREDITOR’.

 

 

 

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, the SECURED CREDITOR has agreed to make available to the
GRANTOR a line of credit to finance the operations of the GRANTOR pursuant to a credit
agreement dated (as same may be amended, supplemented or restated
from time to time, the “CREDIT AGREEMENT”);

WHEREAS, the execution of this Security Agreement is a condition to the
extension of credit by the SECURED CREDITOR to the GRANTOR under that CREDIT
AGREEMENT.

NOW, THEREFORE, the parties hereby agree as follows:

1. Definitions

In this agreement:

(a) Each term which is defined in Republic Act No. 11057 (“Personal Property Security
Act”) has the meaning given to it in the Personal Property Security Act;

(b) “Event of Default” means (i) any event that constitutes an “event of default” under
the CREDIT AGREEMENT, and (ii) any failure by the GRANTOR to comply with
any of its obligations under this agreement;

2. Creation of the security interest and secured obligations
2.1 Creation of the security interest
The GRANTOR creates in favor of the SECURED CREDITOR a security interest in all of

the GRANTOR’s present and future assets which are within the following categories of
assets (the “Encumbered Assets”):

(a) Inventory;

(b) Receivables;

(c) Equipment;

(d) Funds credited to a bank account;

(e) Negotiable documents, including without limitation, bills of lading and
warehouse receipts;

(f) Negotiable instruments, including without limitation, bills of exchange,
cheques and promissory notes;

(g) Intellectual property and rights as licensee;

(h) (insert other assets as applicable)
(i) To the extent not listed above, all proceeds and products of all of the foregoing.

2.2 Secured Obligations

The security interest hereby created secures all present and future obligations of the
GRANTOR to the SECURED CREDITOR under or contemplated by the CREDIT
AGREEMENT and this agreement (“Obligations”).

3. Representations of the GRANTOR
3.1 Location of certain Encumbered Assets

(a) The inventory and the equipment of the GRANTOR are and will be held or used
by the GRANTOR at all times in the Republic of the Philippines and, unless the
GRANTOR notifies the SECURED CREDITOR of a change, at the addresses listed
in the Annex to this agreement;

(b) The billing addresses of the debtors of the receivables owed or to be owed to the
GRANTOR are and will be at all times in the Republic of the Philippines, unless
the GRANTOR notifies the SECURED CREDITOR of a change by a notice
specifying other jurisdictions in which debtors of these receivable have billing
addresses;

(c) The bank accounts of the GRANTOR are and will be held at all times at branches
of banks in the Republic of the Philippines, and, unless the GRANTOR notifies the
SECURED CREDITOR of a change, at the addresses listed in the Annex to this
agreement. The account agreements relating to these bank accounts are and will
be governed by the relevant laws of the Republic of the Philippines and do not and
will not refer to another law for matters relevant to this agreement.

3.2 Location and name of the GRANTOR

(a) The registered office and the place of central administration of the GRANTOR are
and will be located at all times in the Republic of the Philippines;

(b) The GRANTOR’s exact name and legal status are as specified on the first page of
this agreement. The GRANTOR will not change its legal status without the prior
written consent of the SECURED CREDITOR and will not change its name without
giving to SECURED CREDITOR a thirty (30) day prior notice of the change.

4. Authorizations relating to the Encumbered Assets

4.1 Registrations

The GRANTOR authorizes the SECURED CREDITOR to register any notice and to take
any other action necessary or useful to make the SECURED CREDITOR’s security interest
effective against third parties by registration.

4.2 Inspection and copies

(a) The SECURED CREDITOR may inspect the Encumbered Assets and the
documents or records evidencing same and for such purposes may enter into the
GRANTOR’s premises, upon giving prior reasonable notice to the GRANTOR;

(b) At the request of the SECURED CREDITOR, the GRANTOR will furnish to the
SECURED CREDITOR copies of the invoices, contracts and other documents
evidencing its receivables.

4.3 Dealings with Encumbered Assets

(a) Until the SECURED CREDITOR notifies the GRANTOR that an Event of Default
has occurred, the GRANTOR may sell, lease, license or otherwise dispose of its
inventory and documents of title, collect its receivables and negotiable
instruments and dispose of worn-out or obsolete equipment, in each case, in the
ordinary course of its business;

(b) The GRANTOR will not grant any security interest in the Encumbered Assets and,
except as permitted by paragraph (a), will not sell, lease, license or otherwise
dispose of the Encumbered Assets;

(c) Unless otherwise agreed between the parties, the SECURED CREDITOR may at
any time notify the debtors of the GRANTOR’s receivables of the existence of its
security interest. However, a notification given prior to the occurrence of an Event
of Default will authorize the debtors to make their payments to the GRANTOR
until otherwise instructed by the SECURED CREDITOR following the occurrence
of an Event of Default.

5. Undertakings relating to the Encumbered Assets
5.1 Movable assets

The GRANTOR undertakes that the Encumbered Assets will remain movable assets at
all times and will not be physically attached to immovable property.

5.2 Effectiveness of the security interest

The GRANTOR will take all actions and execute all documents reasonably required by
the SECURED CREDITOR for the SECURED CREDITOR’s security interest to be at all
times enforceable and effective and enjoy priority against third parties in all jurisdictions
where the Encumbered Assets may be located or where the security interest may be
enforced.

5.3 Bank accounts

The GRANTOR will take all steps required for the SECURED CREDITOR’s security
interest to be made effective against parties through a control agreement with respect to

all funds credited to a bank account held with a bank other than with the SECURED
CREDITOR.

6. Enforcement
6.1 Rights after an Event of Default
After the occurrence of an Event of Default and to the extent same is continuing:

(a) the SECURED CREDITOR may enforce its security interest and exercise all rights
of a secured creditor under the Personal Property Security Act and any other
applicable law;

(b) the SECURED CREDITOR may also, subject to any mandatory provision of
applicable laws:

(i) take possession, use, operate, administer and sell, lease, license or
otherwise dispose of any of the Encumbered Assets, in each case, on terms
and conditions it deems appropriate;

(ii) collect the GRANTOR’s receivables and negotiable instruments,
compromise or transact with the debtors of these receivables and
instruments, and grant discharges to them; and

(iii) take all other actions necessary or useful for the purpose of realizing on
the Encumbered Assets, including without limitation completing the
manufacture of inventory and purchasing raw materials.

6.2 Access to the GRANTOR’s premises

The GRANTOR permits the SECURED CREDITOR to enter into and use the premises
where the Encumbered Assets are located for the purposes of the exercise of the
SECURED CREDITOR’s enforcement rights.

6.3 Manner of enforcement

The enforcement rights may be exercised on all of the Encumbered Assets taken as a
whole or separately in respect of any part of them.

6.4 Reimbursement of expenses

The GRANTOR will reimburse the SECURED CREDITOR upon demand for all costs,
fees and other expenses incurred by the SECURED CREDITOR in the exercise of its rights
(including without limitation in the enforcement of its security interest), with interest at
an annual rate of **%.

7. General Provisions
7.1 Additional and continuing security

The security interest created by this agreement is in addition to (and not in substitution
for) any other security held by the SECURED CREDITOR and is a continuing security
that will subsist notwithstanding the payment from time to time, in whole or in part, of
any of the Obligations. However, this security interest will extinguish when the
commitment to extend credit under the CREDIT AGREEMENT has terminated and all
Obligations have been satisfied in full.

7.2 Collections

Any sum collected by the SECURED CREDITOR from the Encumbered Assets prior to
all the Obligations becoming due may be held by the SECURED CREDITOR as
Encumbered Assets.

7.3 Other Recourses

The exercise by the SECURED CREDITOR of any right will not preclude the SECURED
CREDITOR from exercising any other right provided in this agreement or by law, and all
. the rights of the SECURED CREDITOR are cumulative and not alternative. The
SECURED CREDITOR may enforce its security interest without being required to
exercise any recourse against any person liable for the payment of the Obligations or to
realize on any other security.

7.4 Inconsistency with the CREDIT AGREEMENT

In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this agreement and
the provisions of the CREDIT AGREEMENT, the provisions of the CREDIT
AGREEMENT will prevail.

8. Governing Law

This agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the
Republic of the Philippines. The provisions of this agreement must also be interpreted in
order to give effect to the intent of the parties that the SECURED CREDITOR’s security
interest be valid and effective in all jurisdictions where the Encumbered Assets may be
located and where the rights of the SECURED CREDITOR may have to be enforced.

9. Notices

Any notice by a party to the other must be in writing and given in accordance with the
notice provisions of the CREDIT AGREEMENT.

10. Counterparts and signatures

This agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts and by each party in
separate counterparts and any full set of these separate counterparts will constitute an
original copy of this agreement. Delivery of an executed counterpart of a signature page
to this agreement by electronic mail will be as effective as delivery of a manually executed
counterpart of this agreement.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereunto set their hands on this day of
at

 

[Name of the GRANTOR] [Name of the SECURED CREDITOR]

Signed in the Presence of:

 

Witness Witness

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
(REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

BEFORE ME, a Notary Public for and in this day of 20
personally appeared:

Name Competent Evidence of Date of Place of
Identity Issue Issue
GRANTOR
SECURED
CREDITOR

known to me as the same persons who executed the foregoing Agreement and
acknowledged to me that the same is their free and voluntary act and deed or that of the
principals represented by them.

I further acknowledge that this instrument, including the foregoing Agreement and this
page on which this acknowledge is written, consists of ___ (__) pages, all signed by the
parties and sealed with my notarial seal.

WITNESS MY HAND AND SEAL on the date and the place first above written.

Doc. No.
Page No.
Book No.
Series of

KASUNDUAN SA GARANTIYA

Itong KASUNDUAN SA GARANTIYA, ginawa at isinakatuparan ngayong ika- araw ng
, 12 dito sa sa pagitan nina:

(PANGALAN NG NAGKALOOB), may sapat na gulang, walang asawa/ kasal kay

, Naninirahan sa , isang korporasyong binuo at umiiral sa
ilalm at bisa ng mga batas ng Republika ng Pilipinas, may principal na lugar sa
at kinakatawan ng /ni , at dito ay binabanggit bilang
“NAGKALOOB”
-at—

(PANGALAN NG NAGPAPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA), may sapat na gulang,

walang asawa/kasal kay , Naninirahan sa isang
korporasyong binuo at umiiral sa ilalim at bisa ng mga batas ng Republika ng Pilipinas, may
principal na lugar sa at kinakatawan ng /ni , at dito
ay binabanggit bilang “NAGPAPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA”

NAGPAPATUNAY:

1. Ang NAGKALOOB ay sumang-ayon upang lumikha ng GARANTIYA sa _ari-ariang
natitinag na nakasaad sa ibaba nito, pabor kay (NAGPAPAUTANG)
upang garantiyahan ang obligasyon ukol sa pagbabayad sa ilalim ng
(Kasunduan may petsang ) bilang batayan ng obligasyon.

2. Ang karapatan sa garantiya na nabibilang sa Kaunduang ito ay sumasaklaw sa ari-ariang
natitinag na nakalahad sa ibaba:

(Paglalarawan sa nakasanlang  ari-arian na matatagpuan sa
na may tatak/ uri bilang )

 

SA KATUNAYAN NG LAHAT, kami ay lumagda ngayong ika- araw
ng dito sa :
NAGKALOOB NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA

Nilagdaan sa harap nina:

Saksi Saksi

PAGKILALA

REPUBLIKA NG PILIPINAS )

LUNGSOD NG )S.S

SA ARAW NA ITO, ngayong_ ika araw ng
20 dito sa ay humarap at nagpakita ng
kanilang patunay ng pagkakakilanlan:
PANGALAN PAGKAKAKILANLAN PETSA LUGAR
NAGKALOOB

 

NAGPAUTANG NA
MAY GARANTIYA

Kapwa nagpakilala sa akin na sila ang nagsagawa ng kasulatang ito at kanilang
kinikilala sa akin na ito ay kanilang kusa at malayang gawa.

Ang kasulatang ito ay nauukol sa KASUNDUAN SA GARANTIYA, binubuo ng
DALAWANG (2) pahina, kabilang ang pahinang ito, nilagdaan ng nagsagawa pati na ang
kanilang mga saksi sa bawat pahina nito.

MASDAN AT TUNGHAN ang aking lagda at dampi ng timbre notaryal sa pook at
petsang nasasaad sa dakong unahan nito.

Notaryo Publiko

Pahina Bing
Kasulatan Bing.
Aklat Bing
Serye ng 20

KASUNDUAN SA GARANTIYA

Itong KASUNDUAN SA GARANTIYA, ginawa at isinakatuparan ngayong ika- araw ng
, 20 dito sa sa pagitan nina:

(PANGALAN NG NAGKALOOB), may sapat na gulang, walang asawa/ kasal kay

, naninirahan sa , isang korporasyong binuo at umiiral sa
_ ilalim at bisa ng mga batas ng Republika ng Pilipinas, may principal na lugar sa
at kinakatawan ng /ni , at dito ay binabanggit bilang
“NAGKALOOB”
2@ te

(PANGALAN NG NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA), may sapat na gulang, walang

asawa/ kasal kay , Naninirahan sa isang
korporasyong binuo at umiiral sa ilalim at bisa ng mga batas ng Republika ng Pilipinas, may
principal na lugar sa at kinakatawan ng /ni , at dito

ay binabanggit bilang “NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA”
NAGPAPATUNAY :

SAPAGKAT, ang NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA ay sumang-ayon upang mabigyan ang
NAGKALOOB ng hanay ng pautang upang tustusan ang mga proyekto ng NAGKALOOB sa ilalim
ng kasunduang may petsang (na maaring amyendahan, susugan o baguhin
paminsan minsan ang KASUNDUAN SA PAUTANG);

SAPAGKAT, ang pagkakasakatuparan nitong KASUNDUAN SA GARANTIYA ay isang
kondisyon para sa pagbigay ng pautang mula sa NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA tungo
sa NAGKALOOB, sa ilalim ng KASUNDUAN SA PAUTANG;

SAMAKATUWID, ang MAGKABILANG PANIG ay sumasang-ayon;

1. Mga Nakatakda sa KASUNDUANG ito:

a. Ang bawat termino na nakatakda sa ilalim ng Republika Blg. 11057 ( “Personal
Property Security Act”) ay magtataglay ng kahulugang nakasaad sa RA.11057;

b. Pagkukulang (“Event of Default”) ay may kahulugang (i) anumang pangyayari
na maituturing na di pagtupad sa KASUNDUAN SA PAUTANG, at (ii) anumang
di pagtupad ng NAGKALOOB sa alinmang pananagutan sa ilalim ng
KASUNDUANG ito;

2. Paglikha ng Interes sa Garantiya at may garantiyang obligasyon:

2.1 Ang NAGKALOOB ay nagbibigay ng Interes sa Garantiya (“Security Interest”)
sa NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA ukol sa lahat ng mga ari-arian sa
kasalukuyan at hinaharap na nakapaloob sa mga sumusunod na kategorya na
may “Ari-ariang may Pananagutan”

(a) Imbentaryo;

(b) Pasahod;

(c) Kagamitan;

(d) Mga pondong nakalagak sa “bank account”;

(e) Mga dokumentong maipagbibili (“negotiable instrument”), na may pasubali,
listahan ng kargada, resibo ng bodega;

(f) Mga instrumentong maipagbibili (“negotiable instrument”), na walang
pasubaili, listahan ng palitan, tseke, at kasulatan ng pagbabayad- utang;

(g) Mga pag aaring intelektual at karapatan ng lisensya;

(h) Mga iba pang ari-arian kung mayroon;

(i) Samga bagay na hindi nakalista dito lahat ng naibunga at produkto ng mga
nabanggit sa itaas;

2.2 OBLIGASYONG MAY GARANTIYA
Ang Interes sa Garantiya (“Security Interes”) na dito’y nilikha ay gumagarantiya
sa lahat ng obligasyon ng NAGKALOOB sa NAGPAUTANG NG MAY
GARANTIYA sa kasalukuyan at sa hinaharap at sa anumang itinatadhana ng
KASUNDUAN SA PAUTANG;

3. Mga Panukala ng NAGKALOOB
3.1 Lugar ng mga ari-arian may pananagutan

(a) Ang inbentaryo at kagamitan ng NAGKALOOB ay hahawakan at gagamitin
lamang ng NAGKALOOB sa Republika ng Pilipinas maliban kung ang
NAGKALOOB ay nagbigay-alam sa NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA
ukol sa mga pagbabago ng lugar na nakasaad sa listahan kalakip ng
KASUNDUANG ito;

(b) Ang listahan ng mga nangutang ng mga halagang matatanggap ng
NAGKALOOB ay mananatili sa Republika ng Pilipinas maliban kung ang
NAGKALOOB ay nagbigay-alam sa NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA
ukol sa mga pagbabago ng lugar na nakasaad sa listahan kalakip ng
KASUNDUANG ito;

(c) Ang mga bank account ng NAGKALOOB ay mananatili lamang sa mga sangay
ng bangko sa Republika ng Pilipinas maliban kung ang NAGKALOOB ay
nagbigay-alam sa NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA ukol sa mga
pagbabago ng lugar na nakasaad sa listahan kalakip ng KASUNDUANG ito.
Ang mga KASUNDUAN ukol sa bank account ay masasakop ng mga angkop
na batas ng Republika ng Pilipinas at hindi sakop ng ibang batas sa mga bagay
na may kaugnayan sa KASUNDUANG ito;

3.2 Lugar at Pangalan ng NAGKALOOB

(a) Ang nakatalang tanggapan at lugar ng punong himpilan ng NAGKALOOB ay
mananatili habang panahon sa Republika ng Pilipinas;

(b) Ang wastong pangalan at kalagayang ligal (“civil status”) ng NAGKALOOB ay
mananatili kung ano ang nakalahad sa unang pahina ng KASUNDUANG ito.
Ang NAGKALOOB ay hindi magpapalit ng kalagayang ligal nang wala munang
pahintulot ng NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA sa loob ng tatlumpung
(30) araw.

4. Pagbibigay ng Otoridad kaugnay ng Ariariang may Pananagutan (‘“Encumbered
Assets”)

4.1 Pagrerehistro
Ang NAGKALOOB ay nagbibigay ng karapatan sa NAGPAUTANG NG MAY
GARANTIYA upang magparehistro ng anumang patalastas at magsagawa ng
anumang hakbang na kinakailangan o makakatulong upang ang GARANTIYA
ng NAGPAPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA ay magkaroon ng mabisang
panagot laban sa _sinumang_ ikatatlong partido (“third party”) na
magpaparehistro din;

4.2 Inspeksyon at Kopya

a. Ang NAGPAPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA ay maaaring mag-
inspeksyon sa mga ari-ariang pananagutan(“Encumbered Assets”) at
anumang mga dokumento o talaan nito, at para dito maaaring pasukin ang
lugar ng NAGKALOOB, matapos magbigay ng sapat na pabatid;

b. Ang NAGKALOOB ay magbibigay sa NAGPAPAUTANG NG MAY
GARANTIYA ng kopya ng mga resibo, kontrata, at iba pang dokumentong
nagpapatunay ng mga pautang;

4.3 Mga Transakyon sa ariariang may pananagutan(“Encumbered Assets”)
a. Hanggang hindi pa naipagbibigay alam ng NAGPAUTANG NG MAY
GARATIYA sa NAGKALOOB ang tungkol sa di pagtupad (“Event of
Default”) ang NAGKALOOB ay maaaring magbenta, magpaupa,

magpahintulot 0 maglipat ng imbentaryo at mga dokumento ng pag
mamayari, maningil ng mga pautang at mga (“negotiable instrument”) at
magdispatsa ng mga sira o lumang kagamitan bilang bahagi ng
pamamalakad sa negosyo

b. Ang NAGKALOOB ay hindi magbibigay ng anumang “Security Interest” sa
mga ariariang may garantiya, maliban sa mga bagay na nakasaad sa talata
(a), at hindi maaring magbenta, magpaupa, magbigay-lisensya o
magpaubaya ng mga ariariang may pananagutan.

c. Maliban kung may napagkasunduan ang magkabilang panig ang
NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA ay maaring magbigay- babala
anumang oras sa mga pinagkakautang ng NAGKALOOB tungkol sa
“Security Interest”, subalit ang paunang babala na naibigay bago mang yari
ang “Event of Default” ay magbibigay karapatan sa mga nangutang na
magbayad sa NAGKALOOB maliban kung may naiibang tagubilin ang
NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA matapos nangyari ang “Event of
Default”

5. Mga Pangakong Pagsasagawa ukol sa ari ariang may pananagutan
5.1 Mga Ariariang Natitinag(“Movable Assets”)
Ang nagkaloob ay nangangakong ang mga Ari-ariang may pananagutan ay
mananatiling Ari-ariang Natitinag at hindi ikakabit sa ari-ariang di-natitinag.

5.2 Pagiging mabisa ng Interes sa Garantiya (“Security Interest”)
Ang NAGKALOOB ay magsasagawa at magpapatupad ng lahat ng hakbang
upang ang lahat ng dokumentong makatuwirang hinihingi ng NAGPAUTANG
NA MAY GARANTIYA para ang kaniyang Interes garantiya (“Security
Interest”) ay mananatiling maipatutupad, mabisa at may pagiging una kaysa
sa pangatlong panig sa lahat ng nasasakupan ng bias ng ariariang may
pananagutan saan man ito naroroon.

5.3 Mga Bank Account
Ang NAGKALOOB ay gagawa ng lahat ng paraan upang ang “Security
Interest” ng NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA ay magiging mabisa sa
lahat ng partido sa pamamagitan ng kasunduan sa pagkontrol ng lahat ng
ponding nakalagak sa “bank account” maliban sa hawak ng NAGPAUTANG
NA MAY GARANTIYA

6. Pagpapatupad
6.1 Mga Karapatan kung may di pagtupad

Pagkatapos ng pangyayari at habang nagpapatuloy ang “Event of Default”:

(a) Ang NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA ay maaring magpatupad ng
kanyang Interes sa Garantiya at gamitin ang lahat ng kaniyang karapatan
sa ilalim ng Personal Property Security Act at iba pang angkop na batas.

(b) Ang NAGPAUTANG NG MAY GARANTIYA ay maaring magpatupad ng
mga sumusunod ng probisyon ng angkop na batas:

(i) Hawakan, gamitin, paandarin, pangasiwaan, ipagbili, paupahan,
bigyang lisensya o dispatsahin ang alin mang ariariang may
pananagutan sa ano mang paraan na kanyang mamarapatin

(ii) Singilin ang mga pautang at instrumentong maipagbibili ng
NAGKALOOB, at makipagkasundo o makipag-unawaan sa mga may
utang tungkol sa mga singilin at instrumentong ito, at magpawalang
bisa sa mga ito.

(iii) Magsagawa ng lahat ng mga hakbang na kinakailangan o makabubuti
sa pagpapatupad ng pakinabang sa mga ariariang may pananagutan,
kabilang na ang mga pagsagawa ng imbentaryo at pagbili ng hilaw na
sangkap.

6.2 Karapatan upang Pasukin ang bakuran ng NAGKALOOB
Ang NAGKALOOB ay magbibigay pahintulot sa NAGPAUTANG NA MAY
GARANTIYA upang pasukin at gamitin ang lugar at kapaligiran kung saan
naroon ang ariariang may pananagutan upang ipatupad ang mga karapatan
nito.

6.3 Paraan ng Pagpapatupad
Ang magpapatupad ng mga karapatan sa mga ariariang may pananagutan ay
maaaring ipatupad sa kalahatan o sa bahagi nito.

6.4 Muling Pagbabayad ng mga ipinaluwal
Ang NAGKALOOB ay magsasauli ng gastos sa NAGPAUTANG NA MAY
GARANTIYA kapag ito as humingi ng kapalit ng kaniyang mga nagastos sa
pagpapatupad ng kaniyang mga karapatan, at ito ay may interesna_—‘%
bawat taon.

7. Mga Pangkalahatang Probisyon
7.1 Karagdagan at patuloy na garantiya
Ang interes sa garantiya na nilikha ng kasunduang ito ay bilang karagdagan
(at hindi kapalit) ng ibang garantiyang hawak ng NAGPAUTANG NA MAY
GARANTIYA, at ito ay magpapatuloy sa kabila ng pana-panahong
pagbabayad ng kabuuan o bahagi ng mga obligasyon. Subalit ang interes sa
garantiyang ito ay magwawakas kapag natapos na ang mga
napagkasunduang pautang at kung lahat ng mga obligasyon ay natupad nang
lubusan.

7.2 Mga Koleksyon
Ang anumang halagang nakolekta ng NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA
mula sa ariariang may pananagutan bago pa maging takdang panahon ay
maaaring hawakan niya bilang ariariang may pananagutan.

7.3 Iba pang Mapagkukunan
Ang pagpapatupad ng NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA ng kaniyang
karapatan ay hindi hadlang upang siya ay magsagawa ng iba pang mga
karapatan sa ilalim ng kasunduang ito o ng mga batas, at ang lahat ng
karapatan niya ay makakasanib at hindi salit-salitan. Ang NAGPAUTANG NA
MAY GARANTIYA ay maaaring magpagtupad ng kaniyang interes dito nang
hindi kailangang unahin ang ibang taong may utang o may ibang seguridad.

7.4 Hindi pag kakapareho sa KASUNDUAN NG PAUTANG
Kung mayroong pagkakaiba sa kasunduang ito at sa KASUNDUAN SA
PAUTANG ay mananaig ang Kasunduan sa Pautang.

8. Mga Angkop na Batas
Ang kasunduang ito ay nasasakop at bibigyang kahulugan sa ilalim ng mga batas ng
Republika ng Pilipinas. Ang mga probisyon nito ay bibigyan din ng kahulugan ayon sa
intensyon ng magkabilang panig upang ang “security interest” ay magkakabisa sa lahat
ng lugar kung saan maipatutupad ang mga karapatan ng NAGPAUTANG NA MAY
GARANTIYA.

9. Mga Pabatid
Ang anumang pabatid ng magkabilang panig sa isa’t isa ay dapat nakasulat at ibibigay
ayon sa itinatadhana ng KASUNDUAN SA PAUTANG.

10 . Mga katulad na kopya at lagda ng bawat Panig
Ang kasunduang ito ay maaari ng isagawa sa kahit ilang katulad na kopya (counterparts)
at ng bawat panig sa magkakahiwalay na kopya, at ang alin mang katulad na kopya ay
magiging orihinal na kopya. Ang pagpapadala ng naisagawang katulad na kopya ng
pahinang may lagda sa pamamagitan ng “electronic mail” ay may ganoon ding bisa
katulad ng katulad na kopya (counterpart) na kanilang nilagdaan.

SA KATUNAYAN NG LAHAT, kami ay lumagda ngayong ika- araw
dito sa .

 

NAGKALOOB NAGPAUTANG NA MAY GARANTIYA

Nilagdaan sa harap nina:

Saksi Saksi
PAGKILALA

REPUBLIKA NG PILIPINAS )
LUNGSOD NG )S.S

SA ARAW NA ITO, ngayong_ ika araw ng
20 dito sa ay humarap at nagpakita ng
kanilang patunay ng pagkakakilanlan:
PANGALAN PAGKAKAKILANLAN PETSA LUGAR
NAGKALOOB

 

 

NAGPAUTANG NA
MAY GARANTIYA

 

Kapwa nagpakilala sa akin na sila ang nagsagawa ng kasulatang ito at kanilang
kinikilala sa akin na ito ay kanilang kusa at malayang gawa.

Ang kasulatang ito ay nauukol sa KASUNDUAN SA GARANTIYA, binubuo ng
DALAWANG (2) pahina, kabilang ang pahinang ito, nilagdaan ng nagsagawa pati na ang
kanilang mga saksi sa bawat pahina nito.

MASDAN AT TUNGHAN ang aking lagda at dampi ng timbre notaryal sa pook at
petsang nasasaad sa dakong unahan nito.

Kasulatan Bling. Notaryo Publiko
Pahina Bing

Aklat Bing

Serye ng 20