MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 335

CREATING A CIVILIAN EMERGENCY ADMINISTRATION, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND DUTIES AND PROVIDING FOR THE COORDINATION AND CONTROL OF CIVILIAN ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE PROTECTION OF THE CIVIL POPULATION IN EXTRAORDINARY AND EMERGENCY CONDITIONS

WHEREAS, the Civilian Emergency Planning Board has recommended immediate adoption of measures to control and coordinate civilian participation in meeting grave emergencies; and

WHEREAS, it appears necessary and desirable that comprehensive rules and regulations be issued to safeguard the integrity of the Philippines and to insure the tranquility of its inhabitants;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by Commonwealth Act Numbered Six hundred, do hereby create and constitute a Civilian Emergency Administration, which shall function through and be administered by the following officials and organizations and those that may hereafter be designated:

1. The National Emergency Commission, composed of the Secretary of National Defense as Chairman and a representative of each Executive Department as members. This Commission shall, subject to the approval of the President, formulate and execute policies and plans for the protection and welfare of the civil population or the Philippines in extraordinary and emergency conditions. It shall have general supervision and control over the officials and organizations as authorized herein, in so far as their duties pertain to said Administration, and shall function through (1) The Manager, Philippine Red Cross; (2) a Director of Publicity and Propaganda; (3) a Food Administrator; (4) an Industrial Production Administrator; (5) a Fuel and Transportation Administrator; (6) a National Air Raid Warden; (7) a Director of Communications and such other officials as may be appointed by the President from time to time.

2. A Provincial Emergency Committee in each province, composed of the Provincial Governor, as Chairman, and the Provincial Treasurer, the Provincial Fiscal, the District Engineer, the Division Superintendent of Schools, the Provincial Inspector of Constabulary, the District Health Officer, and the Provincial Agricultural Supervisor, as members. This committee shall have general supervision and control over the Municipal Emergency Committees.

3. A Municipal Emergency Committee in each municipality or municipal district, composed of the Municipal Mayor, as Chairman, and the Municipal Treasurer, the ranking or Principal Teacher, the Chief of Police, the Sanitary Officer, the Municipal Agricultural Inspector, and a representative of the Municipal Council, as members. This Committee shall organize local units for emergency purposes in accordance with and subject to the rules and regulations to be prescribed by the National Emergency Commission. Such local units shall consist of (1) a Volunteer Guard, (2) Air Raid Protection, (3) protection of utilities and industries (4) food administration, (5) evacuation, (6) public welfare and morale, (7) transportation and fuel administration (8) medical and sanitary, (9) publicity and propaganda and such other services as may be authorized from time to time.

4. A City Emergency Committee in each chartered city, composed of the City Mayor, as Chairman, and the City Treasurer, the City Fiscal or Attorney, the City Engineer, the City Superintendent of Schools, the Chief of Police, the City Health Officer, the Chief of the Fire Department, and a representative of the Municipal Board, as members. This Committee shall organize local units for emergency purposes as prescribed for municipalities under paragraph (3) hereof.

5. For the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this Order, the cooperation of all departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Government is hereby enjoined and the whole-hearted support of the inhabitants of the Philippines earnestly requested.

Done at the City of Baguio, this 1st day of April, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Orders Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.