MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 107

DESIGNATING THE COMMISSION OF HEALTH AND WELFARE TO TAKE CHARGE OF COLLECTING THE INFORMATION AND FURNISHING THE REPORTS DESIRED BY THE PERMANENT CENTRAL OPIUM BOARD

In order to enable the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to cooperate with the Permanent Central Opium Board at Geneva, Switzerland, for the purpose of regulating the traffic in, and suppressing the abuse of narcotic drug, the Commissioner of Health and Welfare is hereby designated to gather and prepare on forms prescribed for the purpose all necessary reports of detailed statistics on imports, export, manufacture, stocks, seizures, and estimated needs of narcotic drugs and other such statistical data on said drugs as may be periodically required by the United States Government for the use of the said Permanent Central Opium Board.

The Commissioner of Health and Welfare shall also report the particulars of individual cases of illicit traffic on narcotic drugs. The particulars given shall indicate as far as possible:

(a) The kind and quality of drugs involved;

(b) The origin of the drugs, their marks and labels;

(c) The points at which the drugs were diverted into the illicit traffic;

(d) The place from which the drugs were dispatched, and the names of shipping or forwarding agents or consigners; the methods of consignment and the name and address of consignees, if known:

(e) The methods and routes used by smugglers and names of ships, if any, in which the drugs have been shipped;

(f) The action taken by the Government in regard to the persons involved particularly those possessing authorizations or licenses and the penalties imposed;

(g) Any other information which would assist in the suppression of illicit traffic.

In addition to these statistical reports and to the reports of individual cases of illicit traffic, the Commissioner of Health and Welfare shall likewise render a general annual report on the traffic in narcotics drugs.

For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Order, the Commissioner of Health and Welfare shall be guided by the agreement reached at the Narcotics Limitation Convention held at Geneva on July thirteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-one, to which the United States was a party and by the memorandum of the United States Department of State attached hereto and made a part of this Order.

The Collector of Customs, the Collector of Internal Revenue, the Chairman of the Board of Pharmaceutical Examiners, the Opium Committee, the Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army, the Commissioner of Public Safety and all chiefs of police of chartered cities and municipalities shall from time to time furnish the Commissioner of Health and Welfare such data or information as may be required by the latter official in the preparation of his statistical and annual reports. The Commissioner of Health and Welfare is hereby empowered to require from any official, instrumentality, or agency of the Government such data or information as he may need in carrying out the provisions of this Order.

Upon the completion of the several reports called for in this Order, the same shall be forwarded by the Commissioner of Health and Welfare to the Office of the President of the Philippines for transmittal to the United States Government.

The Memorandum Order, dated October twenty-first, nineteen hundred and thirty, of the former Governor-General, regarding the preparation of a statement of seizures of narcotics is hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 107. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 635-644.