MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 328

REGULATING THE REAPPOINTMENT OR REINSTATEMENT OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES WHO RESIGN TO ENGAGE IN POLITICAL ACTIVITY

Whereas it has been observed that certain officers or employees in the Philippine civil service resign their positions shortly before elections for the purpose of launching their candidacies for elective positions or of promoting and working for the candidacies of others, evidently with the understanding that should they fail to get elected and their candidates should win, they would be reappointed to the same or higher positions in the Government; and

Whereas such practice is prejudicial to the government service as it tends to involve public functionaries and employees in partisan politics, aside from successfully circumventing and avoiding the civil service rules and regulations prohibiting pernicious political activity on the part of civil service employees;

Now, therefore, by virtue of the authority conferred upon me by section 661 ( f ) of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended by Commonwealth Act No. 177, and upon rec­ommendation of the Commissioner of Civil Service and the Secretary of the Interior, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby order that a government officer or employee who resigns within three months of any election, whether national or local, for the purpose of launching his candidacy or of promoting the candidacy of another shall be ineligible for reappointment or reinstatement in the government service for a period of six months after such election.

Done at the City of Manila, this nineteenth day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 334]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.