MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 210

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 118 (CREATING THE PHILIPPINE SUGAR ADMINISTRATION)

Whereas, Commonwealth Act Numbered Two hundred and thirty-six authorizes the department, bureau, office or instrumentality of the National Government created thereunder to promulgate, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, the necessary rules and regulations to carry into effect its functions under the United States Sugar Act of Nineteen hundred and thirty-seven and under Act Numbered Forty-one hundred and sixty-six, as amended;

Now, therefore:

1. Paragraph (5) of Executive Order Numbered One hundred eighteen, dated September sixteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, is amended so as to read as follows:

“(5) The Philippine Sugar Administrator shall make the allocation of any United States quota established for the Philippines pursuant to the ‘Sugar Act of nineteen hundred and thirty-seven’ on the basis specified in section six ( d ) of Public Act Numbered One hundred twenty-seven, approved March twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and thirty-four; and shall establish, with the approval of the President of the Philippines, the quota for domestic, reserve and/or other export sugar and make the allocations thereof among the mills, plantation owners and planters pursuant to the provisions of Act Numbered Forty-one hundred and sixty-six, as amended.”

2. A new paragraph is inserted in the aforesaid Executive Order Numbered One hundred eighteen, said paragraph to read as follows:

“(7) The Philippine Sugar Administration is authorized to promulgate, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, the necessary rules and regulations to carry into effect its functions under the United States Sugar Act of nineteen hundred and thirty-seven and under Act Numbered Forty-one hundred and sixty-six, as amended, said rules and regulations to be likewise embodied in ‘Philippine Sugar Orders’ as provided in paragraph (6) hereof.”

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of June, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 210. Messages of the President, 5 (1), pp. 976-977.