MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 313

RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF THE COAT-OF-ARMS OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE GREAT SEAL OF THE GOVERNMENT AS AUTHORIZED IN COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 602

In order to obtain uniformity in the design and proper use of the Coat-of-Arms of the Philippines for official purposes, as authorized in Commonwealth Act No. 602, and to make uniform the various seals of the different government entities, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations for the guidance and observation of the corresponding government authorities and everybody concerned:

A. THE NATIONAL COAT-OF-ARMS

1. The national Coat-of-Arms is as follows:

(a) Arms : Paleways of two pieces, dexter (right), azure (blue), and sinister (left), gules (red); a chief white, bearing three mullets (five-pointed stars), (gold), dexter (right), center and sinister (left); an oval field, white, emblazoning at the honor point the symbolic eight-rayed sun in rayonnant, or (gold), each ray-flanked on both sides by lesser and minor rays, or (gold). This is the Coat-of-Arms proper of the Philippine.

(b) Crest : The American eagle proper. The right talon grasping an olive branch with eight leaves, vert (green), and eight fruits, gules (red), and the left talon grasping three spears, or (gold). This is the symbol of American sovereignty.

(c) Scroll : Beneath, a scroll, argent (silver), with the word “Philippines,” or (gold), inscribed thereon. The scroll shall be placed just below but without touching the seal proper. (See accompanying illustrations.)

B. OTHER LOCAL COAT-OF-ARMS

2. Upon recommendation of the Philippines Heraldry Committee created by Executive Order No. 310, dated December 4, 1940, and subject to the approval of the President, provinces and chartered cities are hereby authorized to adopt and use their own Coat-of-Arms, showing local heraldry— geographical, industrial or historical characteristics which would distinguish them from other parts of the country: Provided , That those already granted and in use during the Spanish regime, like the Coat-of-Arms of Manila, may be retained.

C. THE GREAT SEAL OF THE GOVERNMENT

3. The Great Seal of the Government shall be circular in form, with the arms as described in paragraph 1 hereof, but without the scroll and the inscription thereon, and surrounding the whole a double margin, circle within which shall appear in the upper portion the words “Government of the Philippines.” and in the lower portion, “United States of America,” the two phrases being divided by two small five-pointed stars. For the purpose of placing the Great Seal, the colors of the arms shall not be deemed essential. (See accompanying design.)

4. The Great Seal shall be and remain in the custody of the President of the Philippines, and shall be affixed to or placed upon all commissions signed by him, and upon such other official documents and papers of the Commonwealth of the Philippines as may by law be provided, or as may be required by custom and usage in the discretion of the President of the Philippines.

D. OTHER SEALS

5. The official seals of the Congress of the Philippines, the Supreme Court, and the various Departments shall be similar to the Great Seal, except in the wording around the ring, their size not to exceed 7/8 of the Great Seal, or 2-3/4 inches in diameter

6. (a) The official seals of the Court of Appeals and the other courts commissions, bureaus and other government offices or entities shall contain the Coat-of-Arms proper without the crest or scroll; and around the ring, the name of the government entity. Their size shall not exceed 2/3 of the Great Seal, or 2 inches in diameter.

(b) If authorized by law, provinces, cities, municipalities or other political subdivisions shall be entitled to keep appropriate seals which shall be considered as their corporate or official seals. Such seals shall be in accordance with the requirements prescribed in subparagraph (a) of paragraph 6 hereof: Provided , That the local coat-of-arms prescribed in paragraph 2 hereof may be emblazoned in their seals.

7. The administrative seals of the various departments, bureaus and other offices, provinces, cities, municipalities and other political subdivisions, commonly used on papers of routinary internal administration, are only ordinary office seals and not the official or corporate seals, and shall not therefore, bear the Coat-of-Arms of the Government.

E. COAT-OF-ARMS OR GREAT SEALS IN PERSONAL FLAGS

8. Only the personal flag of the President of the Philippines shall bear the national Coat-of-Arms in full colors

9. Personal flags, if and when authorized for other officials of the Government, shall display in the center the seal device of the corresponding Department.

F. USE OF NATIONAL COAT-OF-ARMS AND GOVERNMENT SEALS

10. The national Coat-of-Arms, if and when used as insignia of the armed forces, shall be as prescribed in Commonwealth Act No. 602 without any modification whatsoever; but proper heraldic designs as embellishment or supports are authorized. Only in cap, helmet, hat or coat lapels of the armed forces may the Coat-of-Arms be used and never as belt badges.

11. The Coat-of-Arms shall not be used as a background for police badges, except that the shield proper only maybe used, without the crest, having a scroll bearing the name of the city or municipality, and with or without heraldic embellishment or support.

12. Government vessels—except tugboats, cascos, dredges or any watercraft for marine labor—and government planes may use the Coat-of-Arms in full colors, gold or silver as required by regulations of the different departments.

13. (a) The Coat-of-Arms of the Philippines shall not be painted on government cars or railway coaches, except on those personally or officially used by the President of the Philippines, which shall be in full colors, and on those officially used by the Vice President, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, which shall be in silver.

(b) If used in plate-number to indicate government ownership, outline form of the shield only without any emblazoning is sufficient.

14. The use of the Coat-of-Arms and the Great Seal in Philippine coins or Philippine currency of any kind shall be by authority of the President of the Philippines.

15. (a) The use of the Coat-of-Arms in letterheads and envelopes shall be for official purposes only; and any use thereof by any government employee for private or personal correspondence shall be dealt with administratively.

(b) The national Coat-of-Arms shall not be used in personal stationary, name cards, or greeting cards, except in those of the President of the Philippines, Vice President, the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, in full colors (gold, silver or dry seal as may be directed) in case of the President of the Philippines; in dry seal, gold or silver in case of others herein authorized.

(c) The national Coat-of-Arms proper, without the crest and the scroll, may be used in the personal stationery of members of the Cabinet, members of the Congress of the Philippines, judges of any court of record, commissioners, generals of the armed forces, bureau directors, provincial governors and city mayors.

16. The use of the national Coat-of-Arms and the Great Seal as trade-marks, advertisements, or labels for commercial, industrial or agricultural purposes by private persons, corporations or associations, and the printing or stamping of the same on articles or commodities intended for sale, barter or exchange, shall be prohibited and any violation thereof shall be punishable according to the provisions of section 2 of Commonwealth Act No. 602.

17. The display or use of the national Coat-of-Arms-.s or the Great Seal in cockpits, clubhouses or buildings dedicated to gambling of any kind, public dance halls, dancing schools and show-houses shall also be prohibited, and a violation thereof shall be dealt with as provided in section 2 of Commonwealth Act No. 602.

18. When the Coat-of-Arms and the Great Seal of the Philippines are used in the interior of private residences and/or commercial houses as national decorations, they shall, like the national flag, occupy a place of prominence.

Done at the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Executive Order Nos. : 248 – 399]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.