MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 292

ESTABLISHING THE MANILA PORT AREA RAT-PROOF BUILDING ZONE

Whereas it appears necessary and advisable that existing regulations be amended for rat control in the Manila South Port District to prevent the introduction of bubonic plague;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby designate that portion of the lands reclaimed by the Government, surveyed during January, nineteen hundred and eight, known as Reclamation Number One, Manila Harbor, and commonly known as Port Area District, the “Manila Port Area Rat-Proof Building Zone” within the limits of which only rat-proof building construction made of durable and hard materials, such as reinforced concrete, bricks, iron, steel, or other permanent similarly durable and hard materials, shall be allowed: Provided , That doors, door frames, window frames, roof trusses, partitions, and similar portions of a building may be constructed of wood: Provided, further , That mamposteria (adobe) shall not be considered as satisfactory building material. The plans for all proposed construction within the said zone shall bear the approval of the Director of Public Works and the Director of Health, and the building hereinafter constructed shall not be allowed to be used for any purpose whatsoever until the Director of Public Works and the Director of Health shall have certified the work to be satisfactory for, the purpose of rat control. The scoring of foodstuffs including feed for livestock and fowls shall not be permitted in said zone unless it is kept in rat-proof receptacles which meet with the approval of the Director of Health.

All leases of land within the Manila Port Area Rat-Proof Building Zone shall be subject to the conditions mentioned in the preceding paragraphs to insure the exclusion and prevent the harboring of rats therein to the satisfaction of the Director of Health. Such leases shall contain the further condition that no stable, pigs, chickens or other fowls or domestic animals, the food of which might serve as food for rodents, shall be maintained within the said zone.

This Order supersedes Executive Order No. 235, series of 1930.

Done at the City of Manila, this 5th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Executive Order Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.