MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 120

REGULATING THE REGISTRATION OF, AND ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBER PLATES TO, MOTOR VEHICLES USED BY GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS

In order to provide a uniform system for the registration of, and assignment of number plates to, motor vehicles used by officials of the United States Government in the Philippines, officials of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, consuls and other representatives of foreign governments, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby issue the following regulations for the guidance of all concerned:

1. All motor vehicles purchased or owned by any division, branch, department, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Commonwealth of the Philippines shall be promptly registered in the Bureau of Public Works, and shall bear at all times official registration number plates plainly marked with the official designation of “Philippines” and Government shield. Motor vehicles used for special purpose may with the written approval of the President of the Philippines, be assigned private registration number plates.

2. Only one set of registration number plates shall be assigned or issued for use on motor vehicles registered in the Philippines and with the exception of those automobiles used and occupied by the United States High Commissioner to the Philippines, the President of the Philippines, the Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army and officers of the United States Army and Navy entitled under federal law or regulation to do so, no other motor vehicles registered in the Philippines shall bear distinguishing flags, stars, or other emblems.

3. Both officials and private registration number plates numbered from one to one hundred twelve inclusive, shall be reserved for use by officials of the Government of the United States in the Philippines, officials of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, and the consuls and other representatives of foreign government, and shall be assigned to such officials by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications with the prior approval of the Office of the President.

Executive Order Numbered Eighty-nine, dated December nineteenth, nineteen hundred and nineteen, and all other orders and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked.

This Order shall take effect on January first, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of September, in the year of the Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 120. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 667-668.