MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 87

PRESCRIBING INSTRUCTION TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS DURING THE TIME THAT THE PRESIDENT IS OUTSIDE THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the public interest requires my presence outside the Philippines;

Now, therefore, the following instructionare hereby issued for the conduct of public affairs during my absence:

1. The President of the Philippines shall continue to exercise all functions of his office as enjoined by the Constitution and the laws, in the same manner as when he is within the national territory. The Secretary to the President shall, as therefore, sign all papers that are ordinarily signed by him by or under the authority of the President.

2. Each Secretary of Department shall attend to and decide matters which pertain to his Department and which under the law, he may decide. On those matters which require approval of the President, in case urgent action is needed, such approval shall be obtained by cable. On other departmental business which, although within the jurisdiction of a Secretary of Department, are of such importance as to affect the general policies of the Government and, therefore, should be the subject of consultation with the President, the Secretary concerned may communicate for such purpose with the President by cable or other convenient means of communication.

3. The Cabinet shall hold its weekly meetings and shall meet at such other times as may be necessary. The Vice-President shall preside over Cabinet meetings; when the Vice-President is absent from Manila, the senior member of the Cabinet present shall preside. Matters which have heretofore been acted upon by the Cabinet shall continue to be considered and decided by the Cabinet: Provided, however, That in the absence of unanimity of opinion on any question submitted, no decision shall be taken until it shall have been submitted to the President.

4. All official communications to the President, whether by letter or by cable, shall be transmitted through or by the Secretary to the President.

5. The Vice-President shall preside over all official ceremonies, receive and return the official calls of American and foreign dignitaries in behalf and in representation of the President, and on such occasions the Vice-President shall be entitled to the honors and courtesies due to the President of the Philippines.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 87. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 604-605.