MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 109

PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN THE REPAIR OF TYPEWRITERS AND SIMILAR EQUIPMENT OF THE VARIOUS OFFICES OF THE NATIONAL, PROVINCIAL, CITY, AND THE MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS

Pursuant to the provisions of Act Numbered Forty-one hundred and eleven, the following procedure is hereby adopted in the repair of typewriters and similar equipment of the various offices of the National, provincial, city, municipal government:

1. In the case of typewriters of government offices falling under Exception One of Executive Order Numbers Four hundred seventy-three, series of nineteen hundred and thirty-four (see paragraph four hereof), repairs not exceeding a total cost of ten pesos for each typewriter (including cost of new parts) may be execute immediately by any repair shop or mechanic in the locality or nearby town, without referring the same to the city Government Marine Railway and Repair Shops: Provided, however, That a report shall be submitted to the Government Marine Railway and Repair Shops giving the nature of the work done and a list of new parts furnished together with their cost.

2. In the case of typewriters of Government offices falling under Exception One of Executive Order Numbered Four hundred seventy-three, and involving repairs estimated to cost in excess of ten pesos on one typewriter (including cost of new parts) before the work is done, the matter shall first be referred, for comment and recommendation, to the Government Marine Railway and Repair Shops, together with the original offer or offers of one or more repair shops of the locality or nearby town, such offers to specify clearly the work to be done, the parts to be renewed, and the price charged.

3. If there are a sufficient number of typewriters in one provincial government office and neighboring municipal government offices requiring repairs, a request for a typewriter service mechanic may be made by the provincial treasurer concerned to the Government Marine Railway and Repair Shops. In such case, the said Government Shops will detail an experienced mechanic to that province for such length of time as may be necessary to do work, traveling expenses to be a proper charge to the province concerned in addition to the actual cost of undertaking the repair work including materials and labor.

4. For the purpose of compliance with Exception One of Executive Order Numbered Four hundred seventy-three, government offices located within the following provinces are considered as not falling under said Exception:

5. This Order shall take effect on August first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and all supersede all other executive orders or parts of executive orders inconsistent herewith.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 109. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 646-647.