MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 195

REVISING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 72, DATED DECEMBER 3, 1936, ESTABLISHING A CLASSIFICATION OF PORTS

For the purpose of fixing the responsibility for the proper administration, operation and maintenance of ports, and upon the recommendation of the National Transportation Board created by Executive Order Numbered Forty-five, I. Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby establish the following classification of ports:

1. National ports. —National ports shall comprise all ports primarily of importance to foreign, interisland, and inter-provincial commerce. Other ports which, on account of their geographical locations, are necessary for enforcing customs regulations or for national defense, may also be classified “as National ports. The improvement and maintenance of National ports shall be financed by the National Government, and their administration and operation shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Insular Collector of Customs.

2. Pursuant to the above classification and the provisions of section one thousand one hundred and forty-five of the Revised Administrative Code and Commonwealth Act Numbered One Hundred and seventy-five, the following ports are hereby designated as National ports:

I. PORTS OPEN TO OVERSEAS SHIPPING:

II. PORTS OPEN TO COASTWISE TRADE ONLY:

3. Municipal ports. —Municipal ports shall comprise all other ports not classified as National ports. The administratiton and operation of municipal ports shall be under the municipal councils concerned, subject to the general regulations that may be issued by the Insular Collector of Customs, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter Thirty-nine of the Administrative Code. The maintenance and improvement of these ports shall be financed by the municipalities concerned and from appropriations authorized by the National Government and such work shall be carried out with the advice and under the general supervision of the Director of Public Works.

(4) Any municipal port may hereafter be declared a National port or any National port declared a municipal port, when it is considered necessary to do so in the interest of commerce, for the enforcement of customs regulations, or for National defense purposes.

This Order shall take effect as of January first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirteenth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 195. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 956-958.