MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 332

PROHIBITING THE PAYMENT OF ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT INCLUDING THOSE ON THE BOARDS OF MANAGEMENT OF GOVERNMENT-OWNED AND CONTROLLED ENTERPRISES

Whereas the present condition of the finances of the National Government demands the exercise of the strictest economy in the expenditure of the public funds:

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby order that:

1. The payment of all additional compensation heretofore ordered by the President of the Philippines and by other officials in the exercise of the discretion vested in them under existing laws, to officers and employees of the National Government, and any of its branches, dependencies, and instrumentalities, including the per diems of those appointed Chairman and members of the Board of Directors of government-owned or controlled corporations or enterprises and the fees of those appointed Chairman and members of the various Boards of Examiners, is hereby suspended.

2. The provisions of the next preceding paragraph shall not apply to (1) additional compensation for officers and employees under contract; (2) additional compensation for the Chiefs of technical bureaus as authorized in section paragraph (4) of the Salary Law; (3) per diems for officers of the Philippine Army or the Philippine Constabulary serving as aides-de-camp to the President in accordance with section 62 of the Administrative Code; (4) additional compensation for municipal treasurers and other government employees acting as deputy provincial treasurers, postmasters, gauge keepers, and rain observers; (5) additional compensation to members of the committee of accountants authorized under section 1625–G of the Administrative Code; and (6) additional compensation for overtime service pursuant to the provisions of section 7–I (32) of Commonwealth Act No 246 and of section 1656 of the Administrative Code.

All orders, rules, and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Manila, this fourteenth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 201 – 334]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.