MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 155

PRESCRIBING THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF THE PHILIPPINE ARMY

In accordance with the provisions of article ninety of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, known as the National Defense Act, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby prescribe the following scale of salaries and allowances for officers of the Philippine Army and reserve officers to whom extensive travel in active service has been ordered, with the exception of third lieutenants in a probationary status, which shall take effect on the first day of February, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight: Provided, That no officer shall receive less than the basic salary rate corresponding to the grade he held as an officer of the Philippine Constabulary prior to the date of the effectivity of the fifteen percent salary reduction prescribed in Act Numbered Four thousand thirty-two, including the longevity pay enjoyed under article eight hundred forty-six of the Administrative Code prior to the first day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty-three: Provided, further, That no officer shall receive less than the salary he is currently receiving: And provided, finally, That no officer appointed or designated Chief of the Philippine Constabulary who prior to such appointment or designation served as Chief of Staff or as a Division General of the Philippine Army, shall, while holding the position of Chief of the Philippine Constabulary, receive, in the form of salary and allowances, less than what he was receiving when he was Chief of Staff or Division General of the Army.

Monthly rental allowance when public quarters are not occupied

In cities

Outside of cities

Chief of Staff

P 8,500

P200

General of Division

P 60

General of Brigade

Colonel

Lieutenant Colonel

Commander

Captain

First Lieutenant

Second Lieutenant

Third Lieutenant

The salary to be received by each officer individually shall be entered in a roster of officers of the Philippine Army, prepared and approved as prescribed in paragraph four of the General Provisions, article seven of Commonwealth Act Numbered Two hundred forty-six.

Executive Order Numbered One hundred forty, dated February seventh, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and the third year of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.

MANUEL L. QUEZON
President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS
Secretary to the President

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Executive Order No. 155. Messages of the President, 4 (1), pp. 1325-1326.