MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 215

REVISING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 115 ENTITLED “REQUIRING THE APPROVAL OF THE SECRETARY OF PUBLIC WORKS AND COMMUNICATIONS IN THE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF ANY GOVERNMENT RADIO STATION AND AUTHORIZING THE GRANTING OF GENERAL AUTHORITY TO THE PHILIPPINE ARMY TO ESTABLISH AND OPERATE RADIO STATIONS FOR MILITARY PURPOSES”

Whereas the Secretary of Public Works and Communications is, under the provisions of Act Numbered Three thousand eight hundred forty-six, empowered to regulate the establishment, use, and operation of all radio stations and all forms of radio communications and transmissions within the Philippines and to issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary;

Whereas, although radio stations of the Government are exempted from the provisions of Act Numbered Three thou­sand eight hundred forty-six (section nine), it is deemed necessary that the establishment, use, and operation of such stations should be also subject to regulation by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, for the purpose of uniformity and efficiency; and

Whereas, in order to effectively carry out the purposes of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, known as The National Defense Act, it is indispensable that the Philippine Army should have exclusive control of its own radio stations and radio communications;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby direct that no branch of the Philippine Government, except the Philippine Army, shall construct, install, establish, or operate a radio station, either fixed or mobile, without the approval of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications; and no requisition for radio station apparatus, except those of the Philippine Army, shall be filled by the Purchasing Agent unless the specifications for such apparatus shall have been approved by the said Secretary.

The Philippine Army is hereby granted general authority to establish, maintain, and operate radio stations and radio system of communications for military purposes; and to make requisitions for radio equipment and supplies without being coursed through the Secretary of Public Works and Communications.

All call letters, with the exception of those of mobile stations for military purposes, and frequencies for use of the Philippine Army for fixed and mobile radio stations, shall be assigned by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, who shall be informed of the location of fixed stations, the name of ship or aircraft stations, and the power and type of apparatus. These stations, whether fixed or mobile, shall comply with the rules and regulations prescribed by the said Secretary to prevent and eliminate interference between radio stations. The call letters of mobile stations used for military purposes will be allocated by the Philippine Army authorities, such call letters to consist of any group of letters, figures, or combination thereof which are not allocated to other radio communication services.

Executive Order Numbered Four hundred fifteen, dated March tenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-three, and Executive Order Numbered One hundred fifteen, dated September first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, are hereby repealed.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-second day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 215. Messages of the President, 5 (1), pp. 988-989.