MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 368

PROCUREMENT OF OFFSHORE PATROL RESERVE OFFICERS

Pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by the Constitution and existing laws, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby prescribe the following regulations governing the procurement of reserve officers in the Offshore Patrol of the Army of the Philippines:

1. Reserve Officer’s in the Offshore Patrol of the Army of the Philippines shall be procured in the following manner:

a. By voluntary application, and b. By compulsory draft whenever necessary.

2. Reserve Officers in the Offshore Patrol are generally classified according to the service or establishment to which they are assigned as follows:

a. Those assigned for duty in the Q-Boat Flotilla, b. Those assigned for duty in the Offshore Patrol shore establishments, and c. Those assigned for duty in the Auxiliary forces.

3. Applicants for commission in the Offshore Patrol Reserve shall state the service or establishment to which they want to be assigned. They shall be required to pass the regular physical examination prescribed for officers of the Army: Provided, however, That in the case of those applicants who will be assigned for duty in the auxiliary forces of the Offshore Patrol, such defects as shall not affect the applicants’ capabilities for discharging the duties of an officer on board an auxiliary vessel may be waived.

(a) In order that an applicant may be commissioned in the Offshore Patrol Reserve and assigned in the Q-Boat Flotilla, he must hold a diploma or certificate as having f successfully passed the examination given by the Board of Marine Examiners; or be the holder of a degree requiring a four-year course in any accredited university or college, or a ROTC graduate; shall not be more than thirty years of age at the date of the filing of his application and must have undergone such training as the Chief of Staff of the Army of the Philippines shall prescribe.

(b) Applicants for reserve commission, to be assigned in the shore establishments of the Offshore Patrol, must possess such technical, qualifications as are deemed necessary for commissioned service therein. Reserve Officers assigned in the shore establishments include naval architects and engineers, mechanical or geodetic engineers, radio or naval ordnance technicians, superintendents of drydock yards, or other persons possessing qualifications of similar importance to the functions of the Offshore Patrol.

(c) Applicants who are appointed as Reserve Officers in the Offshore Patrol, and assigned to the Auxiliary Forces thereof, comprise the merchant marine officer and radio personnel who are duly qualified, and holding government license, as such. The original rank of a reserve officer commissioned in, and assigned to the auxiliary forces of, the Offshore Patrol shall be correspondingly determined by the license held by him at the time he filed his application or is drafted into the service as follows:

4. At such time as the exigencies of the service may require, all marine officers and other persons rendering technical services on board a vessel or connected with navigation, who are not yet heretofore commissioned in the Offshore Patrol Reserve, may be drafted and required to perform such duties as are deemed necessary. Upon being so drafted, they shall be commissioned and appointed to the grades corresponding to the licenses held by them, as determined in paragraph 3 (c) hereof, or according to their educational qualifications and professional training and skill.

5. In order that the provisions of the next preceding paragraph may be fully effected when necessary, the Insular Collector of Customs and the Chief of the Radio Division of the Department of National Defense are hereby required to furnish the Chief of Staff complete lists of all persons who are now holding, or who may hereafter be issued, licenses as marine officers, engineers, pilots, radio or telegraph operators, together with pertinent information regarding the educational and professional qualification, employment of such persons and such other data as may be desired by the Chief of Staff.

6. The details as to the manner of drafting in the Offshore Patrol Reserve persons rendering technical services on board vessels or in connection with navigation shall be determined by the Chief of Staff. In case of national emergency, or at such time as compulsory drafting is necessary, the Chief of Staff shall submit to the President of the Philippines his recommendation as to who shall be drafted.

Done at the City of Manila, this ninth day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.