MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 44

ADDITIONAL CORDAGE ALLOTMENT FOR 1936-1937

WHEREAS, the Insular Collector of Customs in his letter submitted June sixteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, found reasons to revise his reports of April seventeenth and May twenty-fifth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, on shipments made by the different manufacturers of rope to the United States; and

WHEREAS, it now appears that besides the allotments given them in Executive Order Numbered Thirty-six, dated June third, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, these manufacturers are entitled to additional quota of cordage for shipment to the United States during the period from May first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, to April thirtieth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven;

Therefore, pursuant to the authority vested in me by Public Act Numbered One hundred and thirty-seven of the Seventy-fourth Congress, approved June fourteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, entitled “An Act to protect American and Philippine labor and to preserve an essential industry, and for other purposes,” it is hereby ordered that:

Aside from the amount allocated to the producers and manufacturers in Executive Order Numbered Thirty-six, they are hereby given additional allocation of cordage for shipment to continental United States, from May first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six to April thirtieth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, as follows:

lbs.

533,507

975,794

22,088

7,211

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done at the City of Manila, this fourth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

[SEAL]

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 62. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 880.