MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 184

PROMULGATING RULES ON MOBILIZATION

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by section two (d) of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, known as the National Defense Act, the following duties are hereby prescribed for provincial city, and municipal officials in the procurement of reservists on mobilization:

I. Provincial governor

(a) He shall be responsible that each reservist is notified at once to report for duty upon mobilization.

(b) He shall advise all municipal and municipal district mayors in his province of the order of mobilization and shall devise ways and means to broadcast the order with the end in view of having all inhabitants within his jurisdiction informed of the contents thereof.

(c) He shall cause copies of the order of mobilization to be posted on the most conspicuous buildings throughout the province, such as the provincial and municipal buildings, public schools, markets, bridges, and all other buildings housing government offices or where people usually gather.

(d) He shall require the mayors to have the order broadcast in the poblacion and big barrios every day at dusk by town criers (bandillo) until mobilization has been completed.

(e) He shall, in time of actual emergency, make arrangements with the press and motion-picture operators to publish and announce the order of mobilization; with the church authorities to have their bells rung, and with factory and shipowners to have their sirens blown, at the hour of mobilization.

II. Municipal mayor

(a) He shall distribute the order of mobilization among the municipal councilors according to the domiciles of the reservists to be mobilized, and shall assemble such reservists in the municipal building.

(b) He shall see to it that an appropriate send-off is given the reservists from his municipality.

III. Municipal councilor

(a) He shall distribute the mobilization order among his barrio lieutenants and in case his council district comprise any area of the poblacion, he shall personally deliver the order to the reservists residing in such area.

(b) Upon delivering the order, he shall make each reservist sign, or affix his thumbmark to, the duplicate in the place “RECEIVED THE ORIGINAL COPY,…………………,” after which he shall sign such duplicate himself in the place provided for the purpose.

(c) He shall order the reservists to assemble in the municipal building and wait for transportation conveyances to bring them to the mobilization center.

IV. Barrio lieutenant

(a) He shall personally deliver the mobilization order to the reservists residing in his barrio.

(b) Upon delivering the order, he shall make each reservist sign, or affix his thumbmark to, the duplicate in the place “RECEIVED THE ORIGINAL COPY,…………………….,” after which he shall sign such duplicate himself in the place provided for the purpose.

(c) He shall forward the duplicate of the order duly signed by him and the reservist to the district commander through channel; that is, through the councilor and the mayor. It shall constitute valuable evidence in court, should the reservist fail to report.

(d) He shall instruct the reservists under him to assemble in a designated place in his barrio, preferably his house, and shall conduct them to the municipal building.

(e) He shall be responsible that all the reservists under him are promptly advised of the mobilization order and shall see to it that they respond to the call.

V. City Mayor

(a) He shall perform the duties as above provided for provincial governors and municipal mayors, with the modification that instead of distributing the order of mobilization among the city councilors, he shall deliver the order to the chief of police, who shall, in turn, deliver same to his policemen, who shall perform the duties corresponding to the municipal councilors and barrio lieutenants as enumerated above.

Done at the City of Manila, this second day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 184. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 883-885.