MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 361

CREATING THE CORPS OF PROFESSORS OF THE PHILIPPINE MILITARY ACADEMY AND PROVIDING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF MEMBERS THEREOF

By virtue of the powers vested in me by section 22 ( c ) of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, as amended, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby create the Corps of Professors, Philippine Military Academy.

There shall be such numbers of professors and assistant professors in the Corps of Professors as may be determined from time to time by the President of the Philippines. Such professors and assistant professors shall be carried in a separate roster of the regular force apart from the general roster of the army.

Members of the Corps of Professors shall be in addition to the number of commissioned officers of the Regular Force prescribed in subparagraph ( d ) , section twenty-two of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, as amended.

The appointment and promotion of the members of the Corps of Professors shall be as follows:

( a ) Professors shall be appointed to the initial grade of Major. They become eligible for promotion to the grade of Lieutenant-Colonel after eight years of service as Major in the Corps of Professors, and to Colonel, after ten years of service as Lieutenant-Colonel in the Corps of Professors. The grade of Colonel shall be the highest grade to which professors shall be promoted.

( b ) Assistant professors shall be appointed to the initial grade of First Lieutenant. They become eligible for promotion to the grade of Captain after four years of service as First Lieutenant in the Corps of Professors; to Major after six years of service as Captain in the Corps of Professors; and to Lieutenant-Colonel after eight years of service as Major in the Corps of Professors. The grade of Lieutenant-Colonel shall be the highest grade to which assistant professors shall be promoted: Provided, however, That an assistant professor upon attaining the grade of Major or Lieutenant-Colonel may be advanced in academic title from that of assistant professor to professor, whenever a vacancy occurs in the latter category, in which case he becomes entitled to the rights to promotion of professors.

( c ) Officers of the Regular Force, not prohibited by law to transfer to other branches of the army, may be appointed to the Corps of Professors upon their own application, in which case they shall carry their grade to their new appointment : Provided, That officers thus appointed as assistant professors shall be so appointed to the grade of First Lieutenant if they are of a lower grade and those appointed as professors shall be so appointed to the grade of Major if they are of a lower grade: Provided, further, That nothing in this Executive Order shall prevent the Chief of Staff from detailing for specified periods such officers of the arms and services of the army, who are desired to occupy any position in the faculty of the Philippine Military Academy as special professors or otherwise. Officers of the arms and services assigned by the Chief of Staff to the faculty of the Philippine Military Academy shall not by virtue of such assignment become separated from their assigned arms and services and shall not be subject to the rules and regulations governing the promotion of members of the Corps of Professors.

( d ) Professors and assistant professors appointed by virtue of this Executive Order, shall, for purposes of promotion, be credited with whatever service they had rendered in the capacity of professor, acting professor, assistant professor, acting assistant professor, or Head or Acting Head of any department of instruction of the Philippine Military Academy, prior to their appointment. Except as hereinbefore provided, members of the Corps of Professors shall be given the same pay, allowances, rights to retirement, privileges, and the like, to which other officers of the Regular Force are entitled.

Done at the City of Manila, this, sixth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Executive Order Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.