MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 38

WHEREAS, the facilities and grounds of the existing Philippine Military Academy are totally inadequate for meeting essential requirements in the training of the number of cadets required under the provisions of the National Defense Act, and the establishment of a new site and erection of necessary structures thereon would constitute a heavy drain upon the public treasury; and

WHEREAS, the Teachers’ Camp, Baguio, at present being utilized only in the summer months, offers facilities needed for the requirements of the Military Academy and it may be used temporarily for this purpose without precluding the continued accommodation there of teachers during summer vocational periods, and such arrangement has been recommended by the Department of Public Instruction and the Philippine Army;

Now, therefore, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, I hereby authorize the Army of the Philippines to utilize Teachers’ Camp, Baguio, for conducting the Philippine Military Academy, and transfer the custody and responsibility for the control and maintenance of said Camp during the time in which it is so used from the Bureau of Education to the Philippine Army, subject to the following conditions:

1. That the Bureau of Education will have the use of Teachers’ Camp, as usual, for the period from March fifteenth to June fifteenth of each year;

2. That alterations and additions to existing buildings and the construction of new buildings, when necessary, shall be carried out, insofar as practicable, so as to permit their utilization by both the Military Academy and by teachers attending summer Camps;

3. That the four cottages now assigned to the Secretary of Public Instruction, the Under Secretary of Public Instruction, the Director of Education, and the Assistant Director of Education, respectively, and their immediate premises, shall be reserved for that use throughout the year;

4. That the quarters now occupied by the custodian of Teachers’ Camp shall be retained for the use of the Bureau of Education throughout the year;

5. That the building known as Bua Dormitory shall be temporarily used by the primary school pending the erection of a suitable building to accommodate children of primary school age in adjoining districts;

6. That the Philippine Army shall provide adequate and suitable storage space for the equipment and property of the Bureau of Education utilized in summer training of teachers at Baguio; and

7. That the Bureau of Public Works shall assign suitable space in the Government Center buildings for housing the intermediate and high school grades formerly accommodated at Teachers’ Camp.

Done at the City of Manila, this fourth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1936). Executive Order No. 38. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 838-839.