MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 110

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 102, DATED JUNE 14, 1937, PRESCRIBING SPECIFICATIONS FOR STANDARD PORTLAND CEMENT AND HIGH-SILICA CONTENT CEMENT

Executive Order Numbered One hundred two, dated June fourteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Upon recommendation by the Director of Public Works and the Secretary of Public Works and Communications that high-silica content cement be used for certain classes of public works in order to effect durability and economy, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by la, do hereby order that all Portland cement that may hereafter be purchased by the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines for use in construction work to be done by or for the Government shall conform with the specifications of the United States Government known as “Federal Specification for Portland Cement, SS-C-192,” dated October fourteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty; Provided, however, That, to meet local climatic conditions, by reason of the fact that it will be necessary to make test at a somewhat higher temperature than twenty-one degrees centigrade (seventy degrees Fahrenheit), twenty-seven degrees centigrade (eighty and six-tenths degrees Fahrenheit) shall be substituted for the temperature given in said specification: And provided, further, That high-silica content cement that may be used by the government shall also comply with the following requirements:

“(1) The cement shall be the product obtained by inter-grinding Portland cement clinker with a pozzolanic material containing not less than fifty per cent of silica, the pozzolanic material having been previously dehydrated and calcined at a suitable temperature. The requisite amount of gypsum may be added before or during the grinding operation.

“(2) Chemical composition:

“The following limits shall not be exceeded:

“(3) Fineness:

“At least eighty-five percent shall pass a standard three hundred twenty-five-mesh sieve.

“(4) Tensile strength:

“The average tensile strength in pounds per square inch if not less than three standard mortar briquettes composed of one part of cement and three parts of Standard Ottawa sand, by weight, shall be equal to or higher than the following:

Days

Pounds

“There shall be no retrogression in strength from seven to twenty-eight days.

“Executive Order Numbered Seventy-five, series of nineteen hundred and twelve; Executive Order Numbered nineteen, series of nineteen hundred and eighteen; and Executive Ordered Numbered Three hundred sixty-seven, series of nineteen hundred thirty-two, are hereby repealed.”

Done at the City of Manila, this thirtieth day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 110. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 647-648.