MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 207

REQUIRING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ROTC UNITS IN ALL COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES AS A REQUISITE TO RECOGNITION BY THE GOVERNMENT

By virtue of the powers vested in me by section thirty-five of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, known as the National Defense Act, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby proclaim and ordain that all colleges and universities and similar institutions of learning having a total enrolment of one hundred students or more, upon proper receipt of notification from the Chief of Staff, Philippine Army, shall include a course of military instruction, commonly known as ROTC Course as a compulsory portion of their respective curricula for all physically fit male citizens of undergraduate status, and shall faithfully conduct the course in accordance with the policies and regulations approved by the President of the Philippines. The Chief of Staff shall detail competent army officers to conduct the ROTC course herein required, without charge to the colleges and universities concerned, and shall supply them with the necessary military equipment, likewise without expense, except as to that involved in the care and safekeeping thereof and in furnishing the regulation bonds.

By authority of Act Numbered Twenty-seven hundred and six, as amended, failure on the part of any institution hereinbefore mentioned, now recognized by the Government, to comply with this Order shall be sufficient justification for the Secretary of Public Instruction to have such recognition withdrawn; and hereafter no institution of learning referred to in this Order shall be granted Government recognition unless its curriculum includes the prescribed military instruction herein provided.

No exemptions to this Order shall be granted, except by specific direction of the President of the Philippines.

Done at the City of Manila, this fifteenth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 207. Messages of the President, 5 (1), pp. 973.