MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 290

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE GIVING OF SECURITY FOR EVERY FIREARM HELD UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 888 OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE

Pursuant to the authority vested in me under section nine hundred and five of the Revised Administrative Code, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby issue the following rules and regulations to govern the giving of security for every firearm held on license issued under the provisions of section eight hundred and eighty-eight of the same code:

1. Any person desiring to possess one or more firearms for personal protection or for use in hunting or other lawful purposes and ammunition thereof shall, upon making application therefor and before receiving the license, for the purpose of security, deposit a United States or Philippine Government bond or make a cash deposit with the Postal Savings Bank in the sum of forty pesos for each firearm for which the license is to be issued and indorse the certificate of deposit therefor to the Treasurer of the Philippines, such deposit to bear no interest; or give a personal or property bond signed by two (2) persons or by a surety company in such form as the President may prescribe, payable to the Government of the Philippines, in the sum of one hundred pesos for each such firearms.

2. The bonds existing upon the promulgation of this exec­utive order shall continue as they are or, at the option of the interested party, the same can be renewed in accordance with the provisions hereof.

3. Gun clubs duly organized and accredited by the Chief of Constabulary may be allowed to possess on licenses, for the use of its members at the clubs, not to exceed twenty (20) firearms (rifles, pistols, revolvers, or shotguns). The club shall, for the purpose of security, give one-half (½) of the total amount of the security herein required for firearms issued to nonmembers of gun clubs. In case of loss, the sum of forty pesos or one hundred pesos, as the case may be, shall be forfeited or collected for each firearm lost.

Done at the City of Manila, this 8th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Executive Order Nos. : 335 – 400]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.