MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 222

PRESCRIBING THE OFFICE HOURS TO BE OBSERVED IN THE DIFFERENT BUREAUS AND OFFICES OF THE GOVERNMENT

For the purpose of achieving more efficiency in the service, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, acting under and by virtue of the provisions of sections five hundred sixty-two and five hundred sixty-four of the Administrative Code and upon recommendation of the Commissioner of Civil Service, do hereby prescribe that the office hours of all Bureaus and offices shall be from seven o’clock and thirty minutes in the morning to twelve o’clock and thirty minutes in the afternoon, and from two o’clock to four o’clock in the afternoon: Provided, That on Saturdays throughout the year and during the hot season, from April first to June fifteenth, inclusive, of every year, the period of labor is reduced to five continuous hours which shall be from seven o’clock and thirty minutes in the morning to twelve o’clock and thirty minutes in the afternoon: Provided, further, That in the City of Baguio the short hours shall be observed from July first to September fifteenth, inclusive: And provided, finally, That nothing in this Order shall be understood as obliging the Head or Chief of any Department, Bureau, or office so to reduce the hours of labor in his branch of work but such matter shall be left in his discretion subject to the requirements of the service.

Where called for, however, by the nature of the work of a particular Bureau or office, the hours herein prescribed may be changed upon prior approval of the President.

Overtime work on regular working days to finish work not of a routinary character that must be completed within a specified time, payment for which may be authorized by the President under the provisions of section seven – I (32) of Commonwealth Act Numbered Two hundred and forty-six, shall begin only after the official or employee concerned has performed eight hours of regular work.

Section one, Rule XV, of the Civil Service Rules embodied in Executive Order Numbered five, dated January ninth, nineteen hundred and nine, as amended by Executive Order Numbered Twenty-six, dated August twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and twenty-six, is hereby further amended accordingly.

This Order shall take effect on October first, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirteenth day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 222. Messages of the President, 5 (1), pp. 997-998.