MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 172

REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR OTHER MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION FOR OFFICIAL PURPOSES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations to govern the use of motor vehicles or other means of transportation by officials and employees of the Government, effective November first, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight.

1. Provincial boards and city boards or councils may authorize, subject to the approval of the Department Secretaries concerned, those officials whose duties make it necessary or advisable for them to use special means of transportation for the purpose of supervision, inspection, or investigation, to utilize their privately-owned automobiles for official purposes and to receive reimbursement for the same at the rate of ten centavos for each kilometer of travel on official business: Provided, That the distance covered in going from residence to office and vice versa shall not he included in claims for allowances: And provided, further, That the maximum allowances to be paid during any month shall not exceed those given in the following schedules:

(A) For provinces and cities having 250 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital—

(B.) For provinces and cities having 150 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with provincial capital but less than 250 kilometers—

(C) For provinces and cities having 100 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital but less than 150 kilometers

(D) For provinces and cities having 50 kilometers or more of designated first and second class roads connected with the provincial capital but less than 100 kilometers—

(E) For province, and cities having less than 50 kilometers of improved roads

As above used, the terms provincial treasurers, provincial auditors, division superintendents of schools and district health officers shall be construed to embrace the officials of a chartered city corresponding to those positions.

2. Employees of the National Government and of provincial and city governments, who perform field duties, may be given monthly allowances for providing other private means of transportation for official purposes when properly authorized, with the approval of the Department Secretary concerned, as follows:

(a) For motorcycles, P0.04 per kilometer, or a maximum of P20 per month.

(b) For horses, P0.05 per kilometer, or a maximum of P10 per month.

(c) For bicycles, P0.01 per kilometer, or a maximum of P5 per month.

3. All motor vehicles owned by a province or chartered city shall be kept in a central garage to be operated by the district or city engineer who shall rent such vehicles to officials for making designated trips for official purposes in the order in which applications are received and after taking into consideration the relative urgency of proposed trips. Exception is made of the automobile or automobiles purchased from the Road and Bridge Fund for the official use of a district or city engineer and his assistants, which shall be reserved for their exclusive use, except in case of urgent necessity or emergencies, subject, however, to the condition that, without the prior approval of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, the cost of official transportation thus furnished to a district or city engineer of his assistants shall be limited to the respective allowance for the provincial governor or city mayor of the province or city concerned as authorized in paragraph one hereof. Engineers shall charge the offices concerned for the use of provincial or including those used by other public works officials and employees, at the rate of ten centavos for each kilometer of travel and the income from this source shall be credited to the income of the garage: Provided, That a portion of the gross income from the operation of all automobiles in the garage, not to exceed one-fourth thereof, or two and a half centavos per kilometer of actual travel, shall be credited to a special fund to be used for the purchase of new automobiles to replace old ones upon appropriation by the respective provincial board or city board or council.

4. All orders, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Manila, this eighteenth day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Executive Order No. 172. Messages of the President, 4 (1), 1363-1366.