MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 5

RESERVING A PARCEL OF LAND IN THE BARRIO OF JULUGAN, MUNICIPALITY OF TANZA, PROVINCE OF CAVITE, FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES

Pursuant to the provisions of section twenty-one of Act Numbered One thousand one hundred and twenty of the Philippine Commission, entitled “An Act providing for the administration and temporarily leasing and sale of certain haciendas and parcels of land, commonly known as friar lands, for the purchase of which the Government of the Philippine Islands has recently contracted, pursuant to the provisions of sections sixty-three, sixty-four, and sixty-five of an Act of Congress of the United States entitled ‘An Act temporarily to provide for the administration of the affairs of Civil Government in the Philippine Islands, and for other purposes,’ approved on the first day of July, nineteen hundred and two,” as amended by section three of Act Numbered Two thousand five hundred and nine, Act Numbered Two thousand eight hundred and four and section three of Act Numbered Three thousand three hundred and twenty-three of the Philippine Legislature, and upon condition that the municipality of Tanza shall pay to the friar lands sinking fund the full value of the property hereby reserved, together with the accrued interest thereon, I hereby reserve for school purposes under the administration of the Director of Education lot numbered two hundred thirty-four of the Santa Cruz de Malabon Estate situated in the barrio of Julugan, municipality of Tanza, Province of Cavite, Philippine Islands, as described on plan Swo_14194, to wit:

Lot no. 234 of Santa Cruz de Malabon Estate. —A parcel of land (Lot No. 234 of the Santa Cruz de Malabon Estate, G. L. R. O. Record NO. 6832, situated in the municipality of Tanza, Province of Cavite, Island of Luzon. Bounded on the Northeast, by Lot NO. 235; on the Southeast, by Lot No. 2226; on the Southwest, by a Creek and on the Northwest, by a Road. Beginning at a point marked “1” on plan, being S. 62° 23’ W., 267.70 m. from Monument No. 3, Santa Cruz de Malabon Estate, thence N. 63° 13’ E., 22.90 m. to point “2”; thense S. 31° 32’ E., 37.70 m. to point “3”; thence S. 65° 57’ W., 14.20 m. to point “4”; thence N. 44° 29’ W., 38.70 m. to the point of beginning; containing an area of Six hundred eighty seven square meters (687), more or less. All points are indicated on the plan. All corners are old stakes; bearings true; declination 0° 54’ E., date of survey, June 1907 to June, 1908.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-sixth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

TEOFILO SISON Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 5. Messages of the President, 1 (Rev. ed.), 198-199.