MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 77

ORGANIZING THE TEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICTS IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA INTO FIVE MUNICIPALITIES

Upon the recommendation of the Honorable, the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, the municipal districts of Sindangan, Panganuran, Labangan, Dinas, Sibuko, Sirawai, Margosatubig, Malangas, Kabasalan, and Bañğaan, Province of Zamboanga, are hereby organized into five independent municipalities as follows:

The municipality of Sindangan shall consist of the territory comprised in the present municipal districts of Sindangan and Panganuran, with the seat of government in the barrio of Sindangan;

The municipality of Pagadian shall consist of the territory composed in the present municipal districts of Labangan and Dinas, with the seat of government in the barrio of Pagadian;

The municipality of Siocon shall consist of the territory comprised in the present municipal districts of Sibuko and Sirawai, with the seat of government in the barrio of Siocon;

The municipal of Margosatubig shall consist of the territory comprissed in the present municipal district of Margosatubig and Malangas, with the seat of government in the barrio of Margosatubig;

The municipality of Kabasalan shall consist of the territory comprised in the present municipal districts of Kabasalan and Bañğaan, with the seat of government in the barrio of Kabasalan.

The reorganization herein made shall take effect on January first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of December, in the year of the Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 77. Messages of the President, 3. (2), pp. 592.