MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 31

PROCUREMENT OF MEDICAL RESERVE OFFICERS

Pursuant to section forty-two of Commonwealth Act Numbered One, entitled “The National Defense Act,” the following regulations for the procurement of medical reserve officers of the Philippine Army are hereby prescribed:

1. Medical reserve officers shall be procured in the following manner:

( a ) By voluntary application.

( b ) By compulsory draft, whenever necessary.

2. The Boards of Medical, Dental, and Veterinary Examiners, before issuing the corresponding certificates of registration, shall require all successful male candidates who are citizens of the Philippines to register their names and addresses and complete a questionnaire of a prescribed form for submission to the Chief of Staff of the Army. Necessary registration papers will be furnished by the Adjutant General.

3. Registration papers, once filled, shall be kept in the office of the Chief, Medical Service, separate files to be made for medical, dental, and veterinary registrants.

4. Registrants shall immediately notify the Adjutant General of any change of address subsequent to registration for proper notation in their registration papers.

5. Medical reserve officers shall have the following qualifications:

( a ) They must not be less than twenty-one nor more than forty-five years of age.

( b ) Physically fit for military service, the physical requirements being the same as those of medical officers of the Regular Force.

( c ) Must be of good moral character and excellent reputation.

( d ) For physicians—

(1) Must have graduated from a reputable medical school of good standing and have received a diploma conferring the degree of doctor of medicine or other degree of equivalent standard.

(2) Shall have passed the examination prescribed by law for the practice of medicine in the Philippine Islands and possess the corresponding certificate of registration issued by the Board of Medical examiners.

(3) Must have at least one year of practice after such registration from the said board.

( e ) For dentists—

(1) Must have received a diploma either as a doctor of dental surgery or doctor of dental medicine from a reputable dental school, duly accredited and legally constituted.

(2) Shall have passed the examination prescribed by law for the practice of dentistry in the Philippines and possess the corresponding certificate of registration from the Board of Dental Examiners.

(3) Must have at least one year of practice after such registration from the said board.

( f ) For veterinarians—

(1) Must have graduated from a reputable veterinary school of good standing and received a diploma as doctor of veterinary medicine or other degree of equivalent standard.

(2) Shall have passed the examination prescribed by law for the practice of veterinary medicine and possess the corresponding certificate of registration issued by the Board of Veterinary Examiners.

(3) Must have at least one year of practice after such registration with the said board.

6. From the list of qualified applicants who have voluntarily applied, the President shall commission, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Staff, such reserve medical officers as shall in his opinion be needed. For this purpose the Chief of Staff may, whenever necessary, direct the Chief of the Medical Service to hold competitive examinations on medical, dental, or veterinary subjects, to determine the relative merit of applicants.

7. Whenever the Army is in need of medical reserve officers in excess of those who have voluntarily applied and qualified therefore, the additional number shall be drawn by lot from among the list of registrants on file at the office of the Chief, Medical Service, under regulations to be prescribed.

8. Officers of the Medical, Dental, and Veterinary Reserve Corps of the U.S. Army, who possess the necessary qualifications provided in paragraph five hereof, may be commissioned in the corresponding units of the Medical Service Reserves without taking part in competitive examinations which may be prescribed.

Done at the City of Manila, this eighteenth day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

LEON G. GUINTO Under Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1936). Executive Order No. 31. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 826-828.