MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 243

CREATING A TRAFFIC COMMISSION

Whereas it appears to be necessary and in the public interest to more effectively regulate and control traffic on the public highways and streets, especially in the City of Manila; and

Whereas it is essential that the activities of the government agencies responsible for traffic enforcement should be coordinated for this purpose;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority in me vested by law, do hereby create a Traffic Commission; to be composed of such members as may be appointed from time to time by the Chief Executive from among officials of the Government and other persons, especially interested in traffic problems, particularly from the Bureau of Public Works, the Public Service Commission, the Philippine Constabulary, and the Government of the City of Manila.

The duties of this Commission shall include the following:

(1) To study and recommend improvement of the regulation and control of motor vehicle traffic on public highways and streets:

(2) To study and devise measures that should be adopted for the improvement of traffic conditions in the City of Manila and its environs; and

(3) To study such specific traffic matters as may be referred to it.

The Commission shall meet at such times and places as may be designated by its Chairman and shall submit its report and recommendations to the President from time to time. The recommendations of the Commission shall, upon approval thereof by the President, be furnished the government departments, bureaus, offices, branches, and agencies concerned, and such departments, bureaus, offices, branches and agencies shall see to it that the recommendations are immediately carried out.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-ninth day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 243. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 960-962.