QUEZON I  VoJwme 4
MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 370
PRESCRIBING A UNIFORM PROCEDURE FOR THE INVESTIGATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE
CASES AND REVOKING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 276.
For the purpose of uniformity in the investigation of administrative charges against government
officers  or  employees,  and  supplementing  the  provisions  of Executive  Order  No.  39,  dated June  23,
1936, the following procedure governing the conduct of such investigation is hereby prescribed:
(1 ) Administrative proceedings may be commenced  against a government officer or employee  by
the  head  or  chief of the  bureau  or  office  concerned qgg± prgpig  or  upon  complaint  of any person
which  shall  be  subscribed  under  oath  by  the  complainant:
That  if  a  complaint  is  not  or
camot be sworn to by the complainant, the head or chief of the bureau or office concerned may, in his
discretion, take action thereon if the public interest or the special circumstances of the case so warrant.
(2) The respondent must be notified in writing of the charges against him by the head or chief of
the bureau or office concerned and shall be allowed a period of not less than seventy-two hours after
receipt thereof to  submit  a  detailed  answer  to  the  same  together with whatever written  evidence  he
may  desire to  present  in  support  of his  side  of the  case.  He  shall  also  be  advised  that  if he  so  elects,
a formal investigation of the charges will be made on a given date.
(3) If the respondent elects to be heard on the said charges, a hearing will be held wherein he will
be given opportunity to defend himself personally or by counsel: Provided however, That in  all cases
the  investigation shall  be finished within fifteen days, unless this period  is  specifically extended  by the
President.
(4) The  complete  record  of  the  case,  with  comment  and  recommendation,  shall  be  forwarded
through   the   asked  channels   to   the   Commissioner   of  Civil   Service  within   fifteen   days   after  the
termmation of the investigation, unless this period is specifically extended by the President.
It  shall  be  the  duty  of the  Commssioner  of  Civil  Service  to  see  to  it  that  the  provisions  of this
Order are strictly adhered to in all cases of administrative investigations.
The  foregoing procedure, except that provided  in paragraph  (4),  shall  a.Iso  be  followed whenever
not inconsistent with existing law and in  so far as it may be practicable, in admmistrative cases against
government officers and employees who do not fall under the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 598.
Executive Order No. 276, dated May 26,1940, is hereby revoked.

MESSAGES   OF   THE   PRESIDENT
QUEZON I  VoJwmc 4
Done  at  the  City  of  Manila,  this  29th  day  of  September,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  nineteen
hundred and forty-one, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.
(SGD.) MANUEL L. QUEZON
By the President:
(SGD.) ]ORGE 8. VARGAS
Secretary to the President
Sowroe.' Presidential  Museum  and Library
Office  of the  President  of the  Philippines.  (1941).  /E#ec"£j.I/e  Orc!er  Nos.:  33J  -400/.  Manila:
Presidential Museum and Library.