MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 189

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COMMITTEE ON GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES

By virtue of the powers conferred upon me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby create and constitute a committee to be known as the Philippine Committee on Geographical Names, composed of the following:

The Secretary of the Interior, Chairman. The Commissioner of the Census, member. The Director of Education, member. The Director of Lands, member. The Director of Bureau of Science, member. The Director of Posts, member, The Director of Coast Surveys, member. The Director, National Library, member.

The Committee shall establish a uniform usage in regard to geographic nomenclature and orthography throughout the” executive departments of the Government, and particularly upon the maps and charts issued by the various Departments, Bureaus, and offices. It shall decide all unsettled questions concerning geographic names which may arise in the Departments, Bureaus, and offices and its decisions shall be accepted by them as the standard authority in such matters.

All Departments, Bureaus, and offices are hereby enjoined to give such assistance as may be necessary to enable this Committee to carry on its work and activities, and to bring to the attention of all officers and employees under them, for their information and guidance, the provisions of this Executive Order.

The members of this Committee shall, serve without additional compensation.

Executive Order Numbered Ninety-five, series of nineteen hundred three, Executive Order Numbered Fifty-three, series of nineteen hundred seventeen, and Executive Order Numbered Four hundred thirteen, series of nineteen hundred thirty-three, are hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-eighth day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 189. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 897-898.