MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 270

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 255, ENTITLED “FIXING AND REGULATING THE COLLECTION OF WHARF OR PIER CHARGES FOR THE USE OF PORT FACILITIES”

Section 3 of Executive Order No. 255, dated February 21, 1940, is amended so as to read as follows:

“(3) Vessels in the Philippine Coastwise Trade . — a. Every vessel propelled by steam or internal combustion engines and engaged in the Philippine coastwise trade, excepting boats of five tons gross or less or pleasure or non-commercial craft, which berths at a pier, wharf, bulkhead-wharf, river or channel marginal wharf at any National port in the Philippines provided with cargo sheds or makes fast to any vessel lying at such wharf or pier, for the purpose of loading or discharging cargo or for any other purpose, except when in distress, shall pay a berthing fee of one-half centavo (P0.005) per registered gross ton for the first twenty-four (24) hours or part thereof, and one-fourth centavo (P0.0025) per registered gross ton for each succeeding twenty-four (24) hours or part thereof: Provided , That the maximum charge shall not exceed fifty pesos (P50.00) for the first day and twenty-five pesos (P25.00) for each succeeding day or part thereof, nor shall the minimum charge be less than five pesos (P5.00) for the first day and two pesos and fifty centavos (P2.50) for each succeeding day or part thereof.

“b. Every vessel propelled by steam or internal combustion engines and engaged in coastwise trade which berths at a pier, wharf, bulkhead-wharf, river or channel marginal wharf without a cargo shed at any National port or makes fast to any vessel lying at such pier, wharf, bulkhead-wharf, river or channel marginal wharf for any purpose, except those specifically exempted in the preceding sub-paragraph, shall pay a berthing fee of one-fourth centavo (P0.0025) per registered gross ton of vessel for the first twenty-four (24) hours or part thereof, and one-eighth centavo (P0.00125) per registered gross ton of vessel for each succeeding twenty-four (24) hours or part thereof: Provided , That the maximum charge shall not exceed twelve pesos and fifty centavos (P12.50) for the first day and six pesos (P6.00) for each succeeding day or part thereof, nor shall the minimum charge be less than fifty centavos (P0.50) for the first day and twenty-five centavos (P0.25) for each succeeding day or part thereof.”

This Order shall take effect as of April first, nineteen hundred and forty.

Done at the City of Manila, this 25th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Executive Orders Nos. : 248 – 399]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.