MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 40

WHEREAS, in order to promote efficiency and effect economy in the administration of the Bureau of Justice, it is found necessary and expedient to effect of reorganization of the legal staff of said office by the standardization and adoption of a new scale of salaries therefore, so as to permit the employment of, and retain in the service, duly qualified attorneys, with the experience and ability necessary to properly handle the legal work entrusted to said office; and

WHEREAS, in view of the elevation of the Solicitor General under the Reorganization Act (Act Numbered Four thousand seven), to the position of Head of the Bureau of Justice and principal law officer of the Government, the salary heretofore provided for, and the rank accorded him, is no longer commensurate to the importance and dignity of his office;

Now, therefore, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the existing laws, and in pursuance of the provisions of section three of Commonwealth Act Numbered Five, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, hereby order and decree that:

1. The Bureau of Justice shall have one Chief to be known as the Solicitor General whose salary shall be the same as that of a Judge of the Court of First Instance of the City of Manila, and who shall have the rank and privileges, consideration and honor, of an Under Secretary of a Department.

2. To assist the Solicitor General in the performance of his duties, there shall be in the Bureau of Justice:

P 18,000

10,800

13,500

18,000

15,000

9,600

3. The unexpended balances of appropriations made for salaries of the Solicitor General, the Assistant Solicitors General, and the several assistant attorneys of the Bureau of Justice in the Appropriation Act for the year nineteen hundred and thirty-six are hereby consolidated, and the aforesaid unexpended balances of appropriations are hereby allocated among, and made available for the payment of the salaries of the Solicitor General, the Assistant Solicitors General, and the several assistant attorneys of the Bureau of Justice provided for herein.

4. The Solicitor General, with the approval of the Secretary of Justice, is hereby empowered and authorized to assign and distribute among the several members of the legal staff of the Bureau of Justice such functions and work as may have to be performed by said Bureau. In the absence or temporary incapacity of the Solicitor General, the Secretary of Justice shall designate which of the Assistant Solicitors General shall act as acting Solicitor General.

5. This Order shall become effective immediately: Provided, That, until after the proper adjustments in personnel and appropriations are made, the present members of the legal staff of the Bureau of Justice shall continue to receive the same perquisites, privileges, allowances, and emoluments as heretofore. The Secretary of Justice is hereby authorized and directed to make such adjustments in the appropriations for said Bureau as may be necessary to carry into effect the purposes of this Executive Order.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fifth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1936). Executive Order No. 40. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 842-843.