OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES WASHINGTON, D.C.

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 12-W

CREATING THE DIVISION OF CIVIL AFFAIRS, PHILIPPINE ARMY, IN THE DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE

WHEREAS it is my desire to provide the people of the Philippines with the means towards an early resumption of normal function of government adequate to secure the process of law from the moment the armed forces of liberation land on Philippine soil;

WHEREAS the misery, sacrifices and starvation caused to the Filipino people by the enemy occupation of the Philippines demand that their government, to the full extent of resources, extend to them relief necessary to their sufferings and to provide for their elemental necessities of life as soon as access to them should be made possible by military operation;

WHEREAS a program of government and relief can best be performed by a military agency of the Philippine Government in conjunction with military operations of the United States armed forces entrusted with the task of driving the enemy from Philippines territory;

WHEREAS in the best interest of the Philippines, it appears necessary that the proper agency of official administration be now organized to effectuate the said objectives;

WHEREAS, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby create the Division of Civil Affairs, Philippine Army, in the Department of National Defense.

This Division, attached to and under the direct command of the Commander-in-Chief, Southwest Pacific Area, is empowered  to exercise such functions as may be necessary to accomplish the following objectives:

(a) To effect the necessary liaison between the president of the Philippines, the commander-in-chief of the southwest Pacific  Area and the people of the Philippines during military operations and before normal civil government is re-established;

(b) to execute the plans decided upon for the relief of the people of the Philippines immediately upon the landing of the military forces of the united states.

The secretary of national Defense shall have administrative supervision over this division and shall proceed to organize it for the proper performance of its functions, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines. Within the limit of such funds as may be appropriated for the purpose, the Secretary of National  Defense  will secure the necessary personnel and make provisions for their training.

Any unexpended balance of the current appropriations for the department of National Defense, or any other appropriations which may hereinafter be mad to the said Department, shall be available for the expenses of the Division of Civil Affairs.

Done at the City of Saranac Lake, State of New York,  United  States of America, this —day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1944). [Executive Order Nos. : 1w – 111]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.