MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 115

REQUIRING THE APPROVAL OF THE SECRETARY OF PUBLIC WORKS AND COMMUNICATIONS IN THE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF ANY GOVERNMENT RADIO STATION AND AUTHORIZING THE GRANTING OF GENERAL AUTHORITY TO THE PHILIPPINE ARMY TO ESTABLISH AND OPERATE RADIO STATIONS FOR MILITARY PURPOSES

WHEREAS, section nineteen hundred and thirty of the Revised Administrative Code provides that the Bureau of Posts, subject to the approval of the Department Head, shall have “the exclusive control and management of all telegraph and telephone lines and service, including submarine cables and wireless installations, now or hereafter under the jurisdiction or control of the Government of the Philippine Islands,” except that “upon recommendation of the Director of Posts, approved by the Department Head, the President of the Philippines may authorize the establishment, by a provincial or municipal government or by any branch of the Insular service, of telephone lines to serve local or temporary interests, without being subject to the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Posts;”

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby direct that the purpose of uniformity and efficiency, no branch of the Philippine Government shall construct, install, establish, or operate a radio station, either fixed or mobile, without having first obtained the recommendation of the Bureau of Posts and the approval of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications; and no requisition for radio station apparatus shall be filled by the Purchasing Agent of the Government unless the specifications for such apparatus have been approved by the Bureau of Posts; Provided, however, That the Secretary of Public Works and Communications may grant the Philippine Army general authority to construct, install, establish, or operate radio stations, either fixed or mobile, for military purposes: Provided, further, that requisitions of the Philippine Army for radio equipment and supplies shall be exempted from being coursed through the Bureau of Posts.

All call letters, with the exception of those of mobile stations for military tactical purposes, and frequencies for use of the Philippine Army for fixed and mobile radio stations, shall be assigned by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, who shall be informed of the location of fixed stations, the name of ship or aircraft stations, and the power and the type of apparatus. These stations (fixed and mobile) shall comply with the rules and regulations prescribed by the said Secretary to prevent and eliminate interference between radio stations. The call letters of mobile stations used for military tactical purposes may be allocated by the Philippine Army authorities concerned, such call letters to consist of any group of letters, figures or combination thereof which are not allowed to other radio communication services.

Executive Order Numbered Four Hundred fifteen, dated March tenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-three, is hereby repealed.

Done at the City of Manila, this first day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO Secretary of the Interior

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Executive Order No. 115. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 656-657.