MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 228

CONSOLIDATING INTO ONE POLICE UNIT ALL AGENCIES PERFORMING POLICE DUTIES WITHIN THE HARBOR AND PORT AREAS IN ALL PORTS OF ENTRY

In order to secure and maintain a high degree of efficiency in the organization and operation of all police agencies within the harbor and port areas in the City of Manila and in other ports of entry, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby direct that all police duties and functions now required by law and regulations to be exercised within harbor and port areas be consolidated and placed under the direct control and supervision of the Insular Collector of Customs. To this end, the customs police, customs watchmen and bay and river guards, customs secret service agents doing police duty, Manila Terminal police, members of the city police when on duty within customs premises, and such other persons or employees exercising police authority under section one thousand three hundred twenty-nine et seq. of the Administrative Code as may be assigned thereto by the Insular Collector of Customs, shall hereafter be considered as a consolidated police unit under a single command.

For the purpose of assisting the Insular Collector of Customs in such supervision and control of police duties and functions, the Secretary of the Interior shall, upon previous consultation with the Secretary of Finance, detail an experienced Constabulary officer for duty in the Office of the Insular Collector of Customs. The Constabulary officer so detailed shall, subject to the supervision and control of the Insular Collector of Customs, act as chief of the consolidated police unit, shall take charge of coördinating the activities of the different police agencies operating within harbor and port areas, and shall issue the necessary orders or instructions to the personnel under his command. The Insular Collector of Customs shall, subject to the approval of the Secretary of Finance, issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirty-first day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Executive Order No. 228. Messages of the President, 5 (1), pp. 1005-1006.