MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 144

CREATING A COUNCIL OF STATE

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Council of State whose duty shall be to advise the Chief Executive on such matters of public policy as he may from time to time lay before it. The President of the Philippines shall be the presiding officer of the Council of State. Until otherwise ordered by him, it shall consist of, besides himself, the Vice-President, the Speaker of the National Assembly, the Heads of the Executive Departments, the Secretary to the President, the Majority Floor Leader of the National Assembly, and such other persons as may from time to time be appointed and summoned by him.

The following are appointed members of the Council with authority to sit and take part in the deliberations of the Council at such meetings to which they may be specifically summoned by the President: The Auditor General; the Commissioner of the Budget; the Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army; the Commissioner of Civil Service; the Philippine Sugar Administrator; the National Relief Administrator; the President of the University of the Philippines; the members of the National Economic Council; the members of the Council of National Defense; the Chairman, National Council of Education; and the Managers of the Philippine National Bank, National Development Company, Manila Railroad Company, National Rice and Corn Corporation, and National Loan and Investment Board. The President may name and summon any other person and/or official of the Commonwealth Government to attend any specific meeting of the Council.

Executive Order Numbered One hundred thirty, dated August thirtieth, nineteen hundred and twenty-eight, is hereby revoked.

Done at the City of Manila, this seventeenth day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1939). Executive Order No. 144. Messages of the President, 4 (1), pp. 1306.