MALACAÑANG PALACE, MANILA

SIGNED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 217

PRESCRIBING THE PRINCIPLES OF CITIZENSHIP AND GOOD MORALS TO BE TAUGHT IN ALL SCHOOLS IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, Section 5 of Article XIII of the Constitution provides that all schools shall aim to develop good moral character, self-discipline, a civic conscience, and to teach the duties of citizenship;

WHEREAS, in order to comply with the aforementioned constitutional provision, it is necessary to adopt a Code of Citizenship and Good Morals to be taught in all schools;

WHEREAS, while said code is being formulated by a Board representing various sectors of the community and pending its approval, it is important for schools to immediately take steps to implement the constitutional mandate in accordance therewith;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby direct the Secretary of Public Instruction to cause the teaching of the following principles of citizenship and good morals, outlined by prominent individuals, in all schools:

1. Have faith in Almighty God who guides the destiny of men and nations.

2. Love your country because it is your home, the source of your affection, and the wellspring of your happiness and being. Defending the country is your primary duty. Be prepared at all times to sacrifice and offer your life if necessary.

3. Respect the Constitution which embodies the sovereign will. The Constitution was established for your safety and well-being. Obey the laws and ensure that all citizens comply with them and that public officials fulfill their duties.

4. Voluntarily pay taxes and be willing to pay them promptly. Remember that citizenship entails not only rights but also responsibilities.

5. Keep elections clean and abide by the decision of the majority.

6. Love and respect your parents. Serve them well and be grateful.

7. Value your honor as you value your life. A reputation with dignity is more valuable than wealth without honor.

8. Be honest in thought and deed. Be just and charitable, but honorable in dealing with others.

9. Live a clean and unwasteful life. Do not be extravagant or hypocritical. Be simple in dress and act properly.

10. Live as expected by the noble traditions of our race. Respect the memory of our heroes. Their lives are examples of responsibility and honor.

11. Be industrious, do not be afraid or ashamed of hard work. Diligence is the path to a stable livelihood and the wealth of the nation.

12. Rely on your ability to progress and be happy. Do not lose hope easily. Strive to achieve your goals.

13. Perform your duties willingly. A poorly done job is worse than a job not finished. Do not put off what you can do today.

14. Help the welfare of your community and promote social justice. You do not live alone with your family. You are part of a society to which you are indebted.

15. Make it a habit to patronize our own products and goods made here in our country.

16. Utilize and develop our natural resources and conserve them for future generations. These resources were also inherited by us from our ancestors. Do not make a commodity of your citizenship.

Signed in the City of Manila, this 19th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, in the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the Fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON
President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS
Secretary to the President

____________________________________

Read the original document.

Translated into Filipino by the Commission on Filipino Language on July 31, 2012 for the Official Gazette online.