MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 194

Amending General Order No. 7, dated September 23, 1972; General Order No. 7-A, dated September 30, 1972; General Order No. 7-B, dated January 17, 1973 and General Order No. 7-C, dated February 21, 1973

WHEREAS, General Order No. 7 provides that only officers and men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and police officers in the actual performance of their official mission or duty shall be allowed to carry firearms outside of their residence;

WHEREAS, General Order No. 7-A provides that agents of the National Bureau of Investigation shall be allowed to carry firearms outside of their residence while in the actual performance of their official mission or duty to include guards of the Bureau of Prisons and of Provincial and City Jails provided that they carry their firearms only within the premises of the prison or jail and/or while escorting prisoners;

WHEREAS, General Order No. 7-B provides that officers and enlisted personnel in the active service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines may hold under license a maximum of only one (1) low-powered rifle and one (1) sidearm of any type or caliber; limits the number of firearms to be possessed by each individual and regulates the operations of gun clubs;

WHEREAS, General Order No. 7-C provides that the commissioned officers in good standing of the Reserve Force, Armed Forces of the Philippines who are in inactive status may hold under license only one (1) low powered rifle and one (1) sidearm not higher than caliber .45 pistol;

WHEREAS, the rising threat to peace and order posed by criminality, insurgency, subversion, and the secessionist movement requires the dedicated efforts not only of law enforcement agencies but private citizens as well;

WHEREAS, the present thrust of the PNP is to combat all kinds of criminality while current government programs need the support and participation of the citizenry to effectively prevent and suppress criminality and to maintain public order and safety in the land;

WHEREAS, Section 887 of the Revised Administrative Code, which has not been repealed, provides that any person desiring to possess one or more firearms for personal protection or for use in hunting or other lawful purposes only, and ammunition thereof, shall apply for a license(s) to possess such firearm or firearms and/or ammunition as hereinafter provided.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. General Order Nos. 7, 7-A, 7-B and 7-C which authorize certain individuals to possess and carry firearms, limit the number of firearms to be possessed and regulate the operation of gun clubs are hereby repealed.

Section 2. Henceforth, all citizens of the Philippines may possess firearms of any type and/or caliber; Provided , that such firearms are not classified as crew-served weapons (CSWs), light anti-tank weapons (LAWs), light machine guns (LMGs), anti-tank and anti-personnel recoilless rifles, bazookas, etc; Provided further , that such firearms are test-fired for ballistics, stenciled and properly licensed.

Section 3. Only uniformed personnel of the PNP, officers and enlisted personnel of the AFP and agents of the NBI are authorized to carry their licensed firearms outside their residence while in the actual performance of their official mission or duty. All other firearm license holders have to apply for a Permit to Carry Firearms Outside of Residence (PTCFORs) in order to avail of this privilege.

Section 4. The Philippine National Police shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this order.

Section 5. All orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24 th day of February in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.