MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 118

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF A NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON THE CULTURE OF PEACE

WHEREAS, the Philippines is a signatory to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) constitution on 21 November 1946 which mandates to build lasting peace founded on the intellectual and moral solidarity of humankind;

WHEREAS, the year 2000 has been proclaimed by the United Nations as the International Year for the Culture of Peace;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has staunchly supported the Culture of Peace Programme of UNESCO and has hosted several meetings and fora on the Culture of Peace and also created a government agency responsible for overall management of the comprehensive peace process;

WHEREAS, the establishment of the National Committee on the Culture of Peace (NCCP) will reaffirm and strengthen Philippine support for the UNESCO Culture of Peace Programme, signify the country’s firm resolve to participate in the promotion of global understanding and to attain a genuine culture of peace;

WHEREAS, the creation of the NCCP is envisioned to enhance and complement culture of peace programs in the Philippines and will make a direct contribution to the building, of a culture of peace based on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, the rejection of  violence and all forms of discrimination, and adherence to the principles of justice and solidarity, tolerance, and understanding;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the National Committee on the Culture of Peace. There is hereby created the National Committee on the Culture of Peace, hereinafter referred to as the NCCP.

SEC. 2. Composition. The NCCP shall be composed of the following agencies, through their duly designated representatives, not lower than the rank of Assistant Secretary or Executive Director:

The Committee may invite, if necessary, representatives of other Philippine Government agencies, the private sector, the academe, the NGOs, the media, and such other specialized groups to participate and assist in the formulation and in the implementation of its programs and activities.

The Committee may create sub-committees or working groups to carry out its work.

SEC. 3. Duties and Functions. The NCCP will have the following duties and functions:

1. Prepare the Philippine Programme of Action for the celebration of the Year 2000 as the International Year for the Culture of Peace and launch a campaign for the promotion of the International Year for the Culture of Peace.

2. Lead in implementing UNESCO activities for a culture of peace and develop and provide support for national and subregional culture of peace programmes with the active participation of UNESCO clubs, NGOs, GOs and Associated Schools Project (ASP) networks, and other groups, and coordinate UNESCO’s activities for a culture of peace with those of the UN system and other agencies;

3. Establish, support and promote initiatives for a culture of peace in the country, especially in areas or regions where conflict threatens to occur, has occurred or is in the process of being resolved;

4. Formulate a comprehensive long-term plan, undertake research, and disseminate information about the culture of peace;

5. Regularly monitor and evaluate activities undertaken within the framework of the Culture of Peace Programmes of Action; and

6. Carry out such other actions as may be necessary to fulfill its vision and objective, and implement its duties and functions.

SEC. 4. Administrative Support. The Secretariat of the UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines (UNACOM) shall serve as the NCCP Secretariat. As such, it shall provide administrative support to the NCCP to enable it to discharge its duties and functions.

SEC. 5. Funding. The UNACOM, subject to applicable budgeting, accounting, and auditing regulations, shall provide the NCCP and its Secretariat, the necessary budgetary outlay.

SEC. 6. Effectivity. This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 05th day of JULY, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.