MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 245

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 7 (s. 1998)

WHEREAS , Executive Order No. 7 (s. 1998) created the PARECO System in order to allow greater coordination and more efficient administration;

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize the operations of the PARECO System to enhance its coherence and responsiveness to the development objectives of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me, do hereby amend Executive Order No. 7 (s. 1998), as follows:

SECTION 1. Sections 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8 are hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 1 . Creation — There is hereby created the Presidential Assistant for Regional Concerns (PARECO) System . For this purpose, a Presidential Assistant (PA) shall be appointed, as the representative of the Office of the President, in the following areas:

The regional governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM), the Executive Director of the Cordillera Executive Board (CEB) and the Chairman of the Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA) shall continue to serve as liaison of the Office of the President in their respective areas consistent with their mandate, as provided by law.”

“Sec. 3. Functions, Powers and Responsibilities of the PARECOs . The PARECOs shall have the following functions, powers and responsibilities:

“Sec. 4. Rank and Emoluments of the PARECOs . Each of the Presidential Assistant for Regional Concerns shall have the rank and emolument of an Undersecretary (Presidential Assistant 1) .

“Sec. 5. Operating Principles . The PARECO System shall not be another layer in the bureaucracy and shall not duplicate the regular functions of government agencies, LGUs or existing regional bodies, councils and commissions. They shall, however, be designated as members of the regional bodies existing in their areas of responsibility: Provided, however, That no PARECO shall be appointed or elected as Chairman of the Regional Development Councils (RDCs).

“The PARECOs shall be under the administrative control and supervision of the Executive Secretary.

“Sec. 6. Technical and Administrative Support . The PARECOs may hold office at the regional office of the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA) or any other office deemed appropriate. Each PARECO office shall be provided with adequate technical and administrative staff based on the size and geographical configuration of its area of responsibility.

There shall be a PARECO national secretariat headed by the Chief of Staff of the Office of the Executive Secretary. In addition, the PARECOs may request government agencies, government corporations and LGUs in their respective areas for technical and administrative assistance .

Existing vehicles, office equipment and materials acquired by the OP extension offices shall be distributed equitably among all PARECO offices.”

“Section 8. Implementing Guidelines — The PARECOs shall adopt such implementing guidelines as may be necessary to implement this Executive Order .”

SECTION 2. All orders, rules and regulations and other issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 3. This order takes effect retroactively on 10 August 1999.

Done in the city of Manila, this 15th day of May, in the Year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.