MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 129

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE TO PREPARE AND COORDINATE IMPLEMENTATION OF A LAND ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

WHEREAS, the rational administration and management of the country’s land resources are vital to the optimum allocation and utilization thereof as resources of sustainable economic development;

WHEREAS, there is a recognition of the constraints that hamper the effective allocation and utilization of the country’s land resources;

WHEREAS, prudent land management and administration is vital in fighting poverty, promoting economic growth and managing resources sustainability;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that the efforts of different government agencies be coordinated and consolidated in one body in order to address the problems associated with management and administration of the country’s land resources;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created an inter-agency coordinating committee (IACC) to prepare and coordinate implementation of a land administration and management program (LAMP) to be composed of:

The afore-named members shall be represented by at least an Undersecretary with respect to the Departments and the head of agency with respect to the bureaus and agencies concerned.

SEC. 2. The IACC-LAMP shall have the following functions and duties:

1. Coordinate and monitor all government actions and responses on management and administration of land resources with respect to the preparation and implementation of a long term program of action on land management and administration;

2. Identify specific issues relating to management and administration of the said lands and formulate policies, recommendation and plans of actions to address the same;

3. Coordinate with other government agencies in providing  immediate action to problems brought to their attention;

4. Report to the President the actions taken to address specific issues on the management and administration of the country’s land resources;

5. Create working groups as may be deemed necessary and call on representatives from other sectors to tackle specific issues; and

6. Prepare and adopt implementing/operating guidelines as may be necessary to ensure smooth operations of the committee and implementation of this Executive Order.

7. Perform such other functions and duties as may be necessary to achieve the objective of the committee.

SEC. 3. The Committee shall be provided with an initial budget of Twenty Million Pesos (P20,000,000.00), or such amount as may be allotted and approved by the President, upon the recommendation of the Committee Chairman, subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements. Appropriation for the succeeding years shall be incorporated in the budget proposals of the Office of the President.

SEC. 4. An IACC Secretariat, to provide administrative and technical support to the Committee, shall be created at the Land Management Bureau to be headed by its director.

SEC. 5. The Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of JULY, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.