MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 148

ESTABLISHING THE SOCSKSARGEN FISHING INDUSTRY STEERING COMMITTEE

WHEREAS , Pacific Island Nations, whose waters are traditional tuna fishing grounds, have proposed and imposed laws that would close these waters to Filipino fishermen;

WHEREAS , the rapid growth of the SOCSKSARGEN fishing industry necessitates wider access of Filipino fishermen to major fishing grounds of our neighboring countries and Pacific Island Nations;

WHEREAS , an active government support for the SOCSKSARGEN fishing industry would boost the performance of this national income earner, as well as advance the country’s position as the leading supplier in the approximately US$3 billion a year worldwide tuna market;

WHEREAS , there is a need to create a national level inter-agency committee that will address the policy concerns and needs of the SOCSKSARGEN fishing industry both at the local and international levels;

WHEREAS , the SOCSKSARGEN Area Development Project Office established under Executive Order No. 474 (s. 1991) and reconstituted under Executive Order No. 39 and 39-A (s. 1998) under the Presidential Committee on Flagship Programs and Projects oversees the overall development of major infrastructure projects in and around General Santos;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order:

Section 1. Establishment of the SOCSKSARGEN Fishing Industry Steering Committee . There is hereby established a SOCSKSARGEN Fishing Industry Steering Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Steering Committee.

The Steering Committee shall be composed of the following:

Section 2. Functions . The Steering Committee shall act as the overall coordinating body to oversee policy issues affecting the development of the fishing industry in SOCSKSARGEN. In particular, it shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate an Action Plan for the development of the SOCSKSARGEN fishing industry consistent with the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act of 1997 and Philippine Fisheries Code of 1998, utilizing the results of all studies conducted by the Growth with Equity in Mindanao Program of the United States Agency for International Development, the Office of the President for Mindanao, Department of Agriculture, SOCSKSARGEN Area Development Project Office, and other agencies;

b. Review and recommend policies affecting the SOCSKSARGEN fishing industry, including those which affect bilateral fishing relations and the development of marine industrial facilities in the area;

c. Call on any government agency to assist in the formulation of the industry action plan, and in the review of policies and implementation of projects in the region; and

d. Coordinate with public and private entities who may be affected by the development of the SOCSKSARGEN fishing industry.

Section 3. Technical Working Group . The Steering Committee may create technical working groups (TWGs) as may be necessary in the discharge of its functions.

Section 4. Administrative Support . The SOCSKSARGEN Area Development Project Office shall provide technical and administrative support to the Steering Committee and the TWGs.

Section 5. Repealing Clause . All issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of September, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON B. CARDENAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.