MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 127

CONSTITUTING THE COUNCIL FOR EXTENSION, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN AGRICULTURE AND FISHERIES

WHEREAS , it is a declared policy of the State to promote research and development to attain national development goals;

WHEREAS , the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act of 1997 (RA 8435) mandates the Department of Agriculture (DA), in coordination with the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) and other concerned agencies, to enhance, support and consolidate existing national research and development system in agriculture and fisheries;

WHEREAS , there is a need for an effective mechanism to undertake the integration of all agriculture and fisheries extension and research and development (R & D) efforts of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Constitution of the Council for Extension, Research and Development . The Council for Extension, Research and Development in Agriculture and Fisheries, hereinafter referred to as CERDAF, is hereby constituted.

The CERDAF shall be composed of the following:

The academe shall be represented by heads of national universities specializing in agriculture and fishery.

The representatives from the  academe farmers and fisherfolk organization, crops, livestock and processing sectors, and the R & D experts shall be appointed by the Chairman as recommended by the other members of CERDAF.

SECTION 2. Functions . The CERDAF shall have the following functions:

a. Enhance coordination of government institutions involved in agriculture and fisheries R & D and extension, and pursue the integration of R & D and extension efforts of the government;

b. Encourage the participation of the private sector in the development of a national R & D and extension agenda;

c. Prepare and oversee the implementation of a more comprehensive and responsive R & D and extension program for agriculture and fisheries to enhance and make full use of the National Research and Development System in Agriculture and Fisheries (NARDSAF) and the National Extension System for Agriculture and Fisheries (NESAF), our national network on R & D and extension, respectively, established under RA 8435;

d. Set policies that will promote agriculture and fishery R & D and extension, and govern Philippine relation with international institutions involved in R &D;

e. Approve the allocation of funds from local and foreign sources for R & D and extension programs, projects and activities;

f. Adopt policies to strengthen the institutional efficiency of the national R & D and extension system, including the setting up of a monitoring and evaluation system on the effectiveness and efficiency of its various components;

g. Review and approve national R & D and extension plans and programs developed by the NARDSAF and NESAF;

h. Create committees, technical working groups and commodity items to facilitate the accomplishment of CERDAF’s objectives; and

Formulate implementing rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out its functions.

SECTION 3. Secretariat . The Bureau of Agricultural Research and the Agricultural (BAR) and the Agricultural Training Institute (ATI) shall serve as the secretariat of the CERDAF.

The BAR shall provide technical and administrative support for R & D activities of the CERDAF, while the ATI shall provide assistance on extension and training matters. The specific functions of the BAR and the ATI shall be in accordance with the implementing rules and regulations of RA 8435.

To upgrade the capabilities of BAR and ATI staff, they shall undertake the following:

a. Develop a staffing pattern, based on the science and technology career system for its technical personnel to be approved by CERDAF, and thus entitle its staff to a system of benefits equivalent to those enjoyed by the science and technical personnel of the Department of Science and Technology;

b. Draw from state colleges and universities, institutes and centers, scientists, professors, technical experts, for detail or secondment at BAR and ATI to accelerate the upgrading of their technical competence; and

c. Provide detailed staff an honoraria system based on the Magna Carta for Science and Technical Personnel or at least 75 percent of their basic pay at their mother units for those detailed on a full-time basis.

SECTION 4. Relationship of CERDAF with Other Multi-Sectoral Councils and Other Agencies under the Department of Agriculture . The CERDAF shall collaborate with the Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry, Natural Resources Research and Development (PCARRD), the Philippine Council for Aquatic and Marine Research and Development (PCAMRD) and other concerned agencies and institutions in the following areas:

a. Formulation of R & D agenda and programs;

b. Screening of proposals and monitoring of ongoing R & D projects in the country;

c. Development of methodologies and systems for effective R & D planning in agriculture and fisheries, emphasizing the quality and intensity of participation of farmers, fishers and the private sector in setting the R & D and extension agenda and the allocation of resources;

d. Development of output-oriented performance standards for staff, institutions and programs in agriculture and fisheries R & D;

e. Establishment of an efficient and effective computerized system of monitoring and evaluation of R & D staff and institutions, including database required for the assessment of research excellence, performance and capacity;

f. Development and administration of a career development program and a unified merit promotion system for scientific and technical personnel in agriculture and fishery R & D and extension;

g. Development and administration of an incentive system to support high quality scientific journals in agriculture and fishery;

h. Development of a human resource maintenance system for providing incentives and benefits to technical and scientific personnel in agriculture and fishery to ensure that agriculture and fishery institutions gain and maintain a competitive edge in attracting and maintaining their staff;

i. Provision of technical assistance in the improvement of institutional and staff capabilities; and

j. Formulation of guidelines in planning and implementation of agriculture and fisheries research.

SECTION 5. Funding . The funds required to operate CERDAF shall be drawn from the appropriations of the Department of Agriculture.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause . All other laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.