MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 39-A

STREAMLINING THE SOSKSARGEN AREA DEVELOPMENT PROJECT OFFICE, STRENGTHENING ITS COORDINATIVE AND INTEGRATION MECHANISM, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order;

Section 1. Project Board. The composition of the Project Board under Section 2 of Executive Order No. 331 is hereby reconstituted as follows:

The members shall be composed of the following: Governor of the provinces of South Cotabato, Sarangani, Sultan Kudarat, the Mayor of General Santos City, the Administrator of the Southern Philippines Development Authority, representative of the Department of Public Works and Highways, Department of Transportation and Communications, Department of Agriculture, Department of Trade and Industry, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department of Interior and Local Governments, one (1) representative from Non-Government Organization of SOSKSARGEN Area, one (1) representative each of the Chamber of Commerce of South Cotabato, Sultan Kudarat, Sarangani, and General Santos City, and the Project Director of the Project Management Unit (PMU), who shall be appointed by Chairman of the Board.

Section 2. Powers of the Board. The powers and function of the Board under Section 2 of Executive Order No. 331 are henceforth amended as follows:

a. Formulate policies and guidelines and establish development goals within the context of the Regional Development Plan and the role of SOSKSARGEN in the Mindanao Development Framework;

b. Provide general directions and formulate appropriate policies for the planned creation of the General Santos City Development Authority;

c. Require all concerned government agencies, non-government organizations and private sector groups to coordinate and submit their respective plans, programs, and accomplishments to the Project Board through its secretariat office, the PMU, to ensure complementation of all development initiatives in the area;

d. Advocate, supervise, facilitate, orchestrate and provide over-all direction in the planning, timely implementation and monitoring of all project components and development activities;

e. Pool existing resources and encourage the support and participation of government and non-government institutions by creating task forces or appropriate bodies to expedite implementation of major development projects;

f. Review and endorse to the Regional Development Council (RDC), Region XI, for approval the multi-year and annual plans and investment of programs under the project;

g. Review and endorse, through the RDC, to the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), the annual budget for the Project, including that for the operations of the ADP Office;

h. Review and approve the organization of the PMU;

i. Review and approve contracts;

j. Submit to the President, the RDC, the NEDA Board and the Congress annual progress reports on the project and such other reports as may be required,

k. Formulate implementing rules and regulations pertaining to the internal operations of the ADP Office; and

l. Perform such other functions as the President may direct.

Section 3. Project Management Unit. The Project Management Unit (PMU) shall serve as the technical and administrative secretariat of the Board, and as such, undertake the day-to-day activities of the ADP Office. It shall perform the following functions:

a. Provide technical support and assistance and coordinate with the City and Provincial Planning and Development Offices, regional offices of the National Government Agencies, representatives of financing institutions, non-government organizations, the private sector and other concerned entities to facilitate the implementation of major infrastructure projects, as well as ensure the operation of the completed flagship projects in SOSKSARGEN;

b. Prepare the groundwork for the establishment of the General Santos City Development Authority;

c. Enter into contracts, through its Project Director, as may be necessary for the technical and administrative operations of the ADP office subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;

d. Undertake periodic review and evaluation of projects and shall for the purpose, design and operate a program implementation and project benefit monitoring and evaluation systems, and make appropriate recommendations to the ADP Board;

e. Ensure implementation of plans and programs of concerned government agencies and initiatives of non-government organizations and private-sector groups for the sustainable development of the growth area.

Section 4. Coordination and Integration Mechanism. To promote harmonious working relationship and maintain an effective coordination mechanism among development players in the area, concerned government agencies and offices, such as but not limited to the Air Transportation Office, Philippine Fisheries Development Authority, Philippine Ports Authority, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department of Transportation and Communications, National Telecommunications Commission, Department of Public Works and Highways, Department of Trade and Industry, Department of Agriculture, Department of Agrarian Reform, and the Southern Philippines Development Authority are hereby directed to closely coordinate with and submit to the Project Board through its secretariat office, the PMU, their respective plans and programs as well as their accomplishments on projects being implemented, monitored, supervised and managed by the SOSKSARGEN Area Development Project Office to integrate and ensure complementation of all development initiatives. It is further provided that the said agencies are hereby instructed to attend and actively participate in meetings/consultations and the like, that the ADP Board may initiate.

Section 5. Operational Requirements. The DBM shall allocate from the lump sum appropriations of the General Appropriations Act that amount as may be appropriate and necessary for the operational requirements of the ADP Office based on the work and financial program submitted by the Board and as endorsed by the RDC. However, for the second semester of 1998 and the coming year, CY 1999, the operational requirements of the ADP Office shall be sourced from the appropriations provided for such office in the budget of the Department of Agriculture. The said funds are to be immediately transferred to the ADPO and be exclusively used to accomplish the objectives specified in this Executive Order.

Section 6. Repealing Clause. All issuances or any parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.