MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 58

CREATING A DOMESTIC TRADE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL, DEFINING ITS COMPOSITION, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, it is a standing policy of the government to ensure the development of business sectors that are crucial to the delivery of basic services, and directly affect the livelihood and welfare of our people;

WHEREAS, the government recognizes the need to boost efforts to promote the domestic trade sector in view of its increasing importance to job generation, sustainable economic growth and countryside development;

WHEREAS, the current economic situation warrants a vibrantly functioning domestic trade sector to ensure sustained economic growth and correspondingly address the economic goals of productivity in business, increased employment through systematic countrywide enterprise development on the grass-root level and enhanced income-generating capabilities for our people;

WHEREAS, there is a need to integrate government and private sector efforts to create a business climate that will foster the growth of domestic trade as foundation for sound and equitable economic growth;

WHEREAS, there is a need to make available and to vigorously develop the structure and policy environment that is conductive to value-adding marketing, efficient distribution of domestic products and services;

WHEREAS, there is a pressing need to maintain a comprehensive information system of domestic products and services, and the systematic monitoring of domestic policy trade policy directives at the highest level by both the government and the privates sector;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent reason to establish a high-level body to bring together key decision-makers to provide strategic direction and specific programs, prescribe interventions and coherent guidance to the development and promotion of domestic trade;

WHEREAS, the issuance of this Executive Order is an essential component to the national economic recovery program to study and overcome problems related to domestic trade sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the creation of the DOMESTIC TRADE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL under the following provisions:

Section 1. Composition. The Domestic Trade Development Council shall be composed of the following:

The representatives from the private sector shall be appointed by the President, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Trade and Industry and shall hold office for a period of three (3) years. When a vacancy in the private sector arises due to the resignation, death or incapacity of a member, a replacement who shall serve for the remainder of the member’s term of office shall likewise be appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Trade and Industry.

Other Cabinet Secretaries may be called upon to attend Council meetings and assist the Council resolve issues and problems that concern their respective offices.

Section 2. Powers and Functions. The Council shall:

a. Develop, promulgate and implement programs, projects and measures to promote all aspects of domestic trade geared towards increasing productivity and the efficient distribution of domestic goods and services in the domestic market; and to help bring down the final cost of goods at the consumption level; and attain global competitiveness in this respect.

b. Periodically review and assess the country’s domestic trade performance;

c. Formulate plans and programs that will facilitate the establishment of an integrated market information system and efficient dissemination of relevant and accurate market information;

d. Identify the main bottlenecks, problem areas and constraints in all areas/sectors/activities influencing domestic trade including but not limited to such matters as physical infrastructure, policy framework, finance, specialized support services, production, promotion, marketing and human resources;

e. Provide advice and direction on specific measures required to remove bottlenecks/problems constraining the development of domestic trade in any of the areas mentioned in d as well as to recommend regulatory measures for the purpose of establishing efficiencies in domestic trade;

f. Create such sub-committees and task forces as may be necessary.

Section 3. Secretariat. The Council shall be assisted by a Secretariat based in the Department of Trade and Industry, headed by an official designated by the Chairman of the Council, together with personnel from government agencies and private sectors represented in the Council who shall be assigned to the Secretariat.

Section 4. Meetings. The Council shall meet once a month, and at least once every quarter with the President; provided, that whenever the President and/or the Chairman deem it necessary, either the President or the Chairman may convene the Council.

Section 5. Funding. Funding of activities and operational expenses of the Council shall be supported by contributions from the government and the private sector. The seed capital in an amount recommended by the Department of Trade and Industry, upon consultation with the Department of Budget and Management, and approved by the President shall be taken from the Contingent Fund of the President. Thereafter, the annual contributions of the government shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act after consultations with the Department of Budget and Management.

Section 6. Effectivity. This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27 th day of DECEMBER in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON B. CARDENAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.