MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 202

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF A PHILIPPINE TASK FORCE ON HAZARDOUS WASTES IN FORMER U.S. MILITARY INSTALLATIONS

WHEREAS , on September 16, 1991, the Philippine Senate voted against the United States Military Bases Treaty, ending the presence of permanent military bases in the Philippines;

WHEREAS , the rapid and efficient reuse of these properties is crucial to the economic recovery and development into economic zones of the sites of the former U.S. military bases in the Philippines and is directly dependent upon the efficiency of environmental investigations, clean-up and restoration;

WHEREAS , the United Nations Commission on Human Rights adopted a resolution on February 24, 1995 on Human Rights and Environment, recognizing that the illicit dumping of toxic and dangerous wastes threatens the right to life and health;

WHEREAS , the reuse of the former military installations or portions thereof must ensure the protection of human health and the environment;

WHEREAS , the reuse of these properties is designed to preserve valuable assets such as infrastructure so as to provide a stimulus to the local economy;

WHEREAS , there is a need to formally create a Philippine Task Force on Hazardous Wastes as an inter-agency task force to coordinate and direct clean-up plans of action, programs and projects;

NOW THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of a Task Force on Hazardous Wastes. There is hereby created the Philippine Task Force on Hazardous Wastes in Former U.S. Military Installations, hereinafter referred to as the Philippine Task Force (PTF), under the joint administrative and technical supervision of the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR).

Sec. 2. Membership.

2.1. Composition. The Task Force on Hazardous Wastes shall be composed of the following:

Chairman

Secretary of Foreign Affairs (DFA)

Co-Chairman

Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR)

Members

Secretary of Health

2. Secretary of Science and Technology (DOST)

3. Secretary of Socio-Economic Planning and NEDA Director-General (NEDA)

4. Director of the Philippine Nuclear-Research Institute (PNRI)

5. Chairman and President of the Bases Conversion and Development Authority (BCDA)

6. Chairman and Administrator of the Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority (SBMA)

7. President and CEO of the Clark Development Corporation (CDC)

8. Director-General of the Philippine Information Agency (PIA)

2.2 Creation of a Technical Working Group. There is hereby created the Technical Working Group (TWG) to assist the PTF on technical matters related to the bases clean-up. The members of the TWG shall be composed of the designated official and alternate representatives of the PTF members from the following offices:

2.3 Administrative Support. The DFA shall serve as the Secretariat to the PTF. As such, it shall provide administrative support to the PTF to enable it to discharge its duties and functions.

2.4 Expansion of Membership. The PTF may include other government agencies of the Republic of the Philippines. The PTF may also invite non-government organizations, people’s organizations and other individuals or entities as resource persons in the PTF meetings, as the need arises.

Sec. 3. Duties and Functions. The PTF shall pursue the following duties and functions:

Sec. 4. Funding. The funds for the initial year of operations of the PTF, in the amount of fifty million pesos (P50M), shall be sourced from the President’s Contingent Fund or Social Fund. Thereafter, the Task Force shall submit an annual budget to be incorporated into the annual budgetary allotment of the DFA, providing for, among other things: consultancy fees to experts; honoraria for members and other resource persons; and, participation in specialized training courses, subject to applicable accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Sec. 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18 th day of January, in the year of our Lord, two thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.