Thank you. Please allow me a little bit of informality at the outset. You would realize that the three guys in the elevated portion of Congress are from Mindanao. So, wala na talaga kaming masabi. Senate President Aquilino Pimentel III, Members of the Senate, Speaker Pantaleon Alvarez and the Members of the House of Representatives, Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo, President Fidel Valdez Ramos, President Joseph Ejercito Estrada, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno and the Justices of Supreme Court, His Excellency Papal Nuncio and members of the diplomatic corps. Well of course, I have also to greet the Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea, the members of the Cabinet, fellow workers in government, my countrymen.

We cannot move forward if we allow the past to pull us back. Finger-pointing is not the way. That is why I will not waste precious time dwelling on the sins of the past or blaming those who are perceived to be responsible for the mess that we are in and suffering from.

Except maybe to extract a lesson or two from its errors, we will not tarry because it is the present that we are concerned with and the future that we should be prepared for.

Lest I be misunderstood, let me say clearly, that those who betrayed the people’s trust shall not go unpunished and they will have their day in Court. And if the evidence warrants, they will have their day of reckoning too.

When I decided to seek the presidency of this republic, I knew what the ills of our country were; I knew their causes; and I was briefed on those who caused the causes.

I heard the people on the streets complain that justice had become illusory; that equity and fairness and speedy disposition of cases had deteriorated into hollow concepts fit only for masteral dissertations. It was, and still is, very sad indeed.

As a former prosecutor, I know that there are ways of knowing how fast or how slow cases go. What I did was to look into the number of postponements and the time difference between each postponement and the next setting. It was simple as that. I will appreciate deeply if we all in government attend to this urgent need.

I was determined then as I am now determined and better now positioned, to wage war against those who make a mockery of our laws including those who make life for us all miserable.

I wish to assure everyone though that vindictiveness is not in my system. Just like you and I, all equal treatment and equal protection are what I ask for our people.

But we must have the courage to fight for what we believe in, undeterred by the fear of failing or losing. Indeed, courage knows no limits, cowardice does.

At this point, there are concerns few I wish to convey to all to the end that as I perorate on facts, figures, plans, programs, and solutions, these concerns will not dissipate or get lost along our way.

Thus to our religious, bishops, leaders, priests, pastors, preachers, imams let me assure you that while I am a stickler for the principle of separation between Church and State, I believe quite strongly that there should never be a separation between God and State.

During my inauguration last (June) 30, 2016, I said that the fight against criminality and illegal drugs and corruption will be relentless and sustained.

I reiterate that commitment today, and that is why I call on the Philippine National Police, the barangay chairmen, the Mayors, the Governors and all those occupying seats of power and authority, not to lower their guard. There will be no let-up in this campaign. Double your efforts. Triple them, if need be. We will not stop until the last drug lord, the last financier, and the last pusher have surrendered or put behind bars or below the ground, if they so wish.

To our police officers and other officials, do your job and you will have the unwavering support of the Office of the President. I will be with you all the way. Abuse your authority, and there will be a hell to pay, for you will have become worse than criminality itself.

I order the National Police Commission (NAPOLCOM) to hasten the conduct of investigation and adjudication of administrative cases against police officers involved in criminal activities and illegal activities and prescribe policies on lifestyle checks for PNP members. In this quest, I will put at stake my honor, my life, and the presidency itself.

The DILG is also directed to strictly monitor how LGUs perform their supervision functions over the police and those found not performing will be sanctioned including the loss of police deputation from the NAPOLCOM. Let me repeat my warning to all. I repeat my repeat, my repeat to all, do not do drugs because you will be the solution to the drug crisis that has engulfed, “malawak” the nation.

We will create an Inter-Agency Committee on Illegal Drugs that will integrate efforts and strengthen the partnership of all stakeholders.

The reservists will be mobilized for information campaign against drug use and the dissemination of information regarding drug rehabilitation programs being offered by the government. Let us also strengthen our ROTC Program to instill love of country and good citizenship.

We will also prioritize the rehabilitation of drug users. We will increase the number of residential treatment and rehabilitation facilities in all regions of the country. The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) will facilitate the preparations for the use of military camps and facilities for drug rehabilitation.

There can never be real, tangible and felt development without making our people feel secure. And it is our duty to uplift the people’s welfare.

With this, my administration shall be sensitive to the State’s obligations to promote and protect, and fulfil the rights of our citizens, especially the poor, the marginalized and the vulnerable and

social justice shall be pursued, even as the rule of law shall at all times prevail.

My administration shall implement a human approach to development and governance, as we improve our people’s welfare in the areas of health, education, adequate food and housing, environmental preservation, and respect for culture.

Human rights must work to uplift human dignity. But human rights cannot be used as a shield or an excuse to destroy the country—your country and my country.

Meantime, since our country continues to be confronted with internal security threats aggravated by the existence and activities of the terrorist group Abu Sayyaf Group, the full force of the AFP will be applied to crush these criminals who operate under the guise of religious fervor. The AFP shall enhance its capability to search and engage these rogue and lawless elements.

We have to strengthen our coordination with Indonesia and Malaysia to suppress the kidnapping in the waters of our neighboring countries. We will strengthen our counter-terrorism programs by amending various laws on human terrorism, terrorism financing and cybercrime.

This is our answer to the challenges of the global developments on the non-traditional threats, transnational crimes and fanatical terrorism. Addressing global warming shall also be our top priority, but upon a fair and equitable equation. It must not stymie our industrialization.

We must also endeavor to develop and cultivate partnerships with nations sharing common interests and concerns with the Philippines; maintain and sustain bilateral and multilateral consultations and dialogues.

We will continue to expand cooperation on human assistance and disaster response, maritime security and counter terrorism. We shall deepen security dialogues with other nations to build greater understanding and cooperation.

With regard to the West Philippine Sea, otherwise known as China Sea, we strongly affirm and respect the outcome of the case before the Permanent Court of Arbitration as an important contribution to the ongoing efforts to pursue a peaceful resolution and management of our disputes.

On the aspect of our peace processes relating to our engagement with the international community, the Philippines shall remain committed to continue thorough working with our international partners achieving lasting peace and progress in the country.

We will vigorously address the grievances that have been time and again expressed, not only by the Bangsamoro, indigenous peoples and other groups for security, development, fair access to decision- making and acceptance of identities.

Enduring peace can only be attained only if we meet these fundamental needs of every man, woman and child.

To our Muslim brothers, the Moro country and the members of the CPP/NPA/NDF, let me say this:

All of us want peace, not the peace of the dead, but the peace of the living. We express our

willingness and readiness to go to the negotiating table, and yet we load our guns, fix our sights, pull the trigger. It is both ironic and tragic— and it is endless. While we extol the bravery and heroism of our soldiers, kayo, the rebels, do the same for your members and fighters. What I see instead are the widows and the orphans and I feel their pain and grieve, and no amount of cash assistance or the number of medals can compensate the loss of a human life. Sorrow cuts across every stratum of society. It cuts deeply and the pain lasts forever.

That is why I reach out to all of you today. To our Muslim brothers, let us find, let us end the centuries of mistrust and warfare. To the CPP/NPA/NDF, let us end these decades of ambuscades and skirmishes. We are going nowhere, and it is getting bloodier by the day.

To immediately stop violence on the ground, restore peace in the communities and provide an enabling environment conducive to the resumption of the peace talks. I am now announcing a unilateral ceasefire with the CPP/NPA/NDF effective immediately, and call on our Filipinos in the National Democratic Front and its forces to respond accordingly.

Let me make this appeal to you: “If we cannot, as yet, love one another, then in God’s name, let us not hate each other too much,” so it was said. I say the same to you today.

We will strive to have a permanent and lasting peace before my term ends. That is my goal. That is my dream.

On the macroeconomic management, my administration will continue and maintain current macroeconomic policies, and even do better.

We will achieve this through prudent fiscal and monetary policies that can help translate high growth into more and better job creation and poverty reduction. By the end of my term, I hope and pray to hand over an economy that is much stronger, characterized by solid growth, low and stable inflation, dollar reserves, and robust fiscal position.

On taxation, my administration will pursue tax reforms towards a simpler and more equitable and more efficient tax system that can foster investment and job creation. We will lower personal and corporate income tax rates and relax the Bank Secrecy Law. I became President. I didn't want to interfere with this, with these things. You know. Well anyway, may I continue.

At the household level, there must be sufficient income for all Filipinos to meet the basic food and non- food needs of their families. We shall continue to attract investments that will generate thousands of jobs each year — jobs that are suitable for the poor and less skilled members of the workforce.

Reforms to ensure competitiveness and promote ease of doing business will be mandatory.

Relaxing restrictions on the economy will be needed to make more investments to come and to develop labor-intensive industries such as manufacturing, agriculture and tourism shall be pursued.

We must also invest in human capital and ensure equal access to economic opportunities.

The implementation of the Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Law must be put into full force and effect so that couples, especially the poor, would have freedom of informed choice on the number and spacing of children they can adequately care and provide for,

eventually making them more productive members of the labor force.

When employment is not an option, for instance in extremely rural neighborhoods, entrepreneurship will be advocated.

We shall also enhance local business environment by addressing bottlenecks in business registration and processing, streamlining investment application process and integration of the services of various government offices.

Government Financial Institutions (GFIs) shall come up with out-of-the box financing packages to capacitate our small and medium entrepreneurs.

In the field of tourism, we shall construct more access roads and tourism gateways to service centers and tourist sites.

Road development projects shall complement with the thrust to provide modern agriculture infrastructure, expanding and improving the construction and rehabilitation of road and the irrigation and establishing modern harvest and post-harvest facilities to minimize losses.

We shall also conduct a nationwide soil analysis to determine areas most suitable for rice farming to optimize production with the use of effective soil rehabilitation and fertilization.

We shall strictly enforce fisheries laws, particularly on illegal fishing and promote aquaculture along river banks and in backyards.

On the other hand, we will accelerate infrastructure spending by improving national roads and bridges and implementing the Mindanao Logistics Infrastructure Network and other road network master plans. We shall pursue inter-island linkage projects.

We shall be implementing structural mitigation to address the perennial flooding in Metro Manila and neighboring areas. We shall put up new pumping stations in strategic places.

The revival of the operation of the Pasig River Ferry Service System is a viable option for the severe traffic congestion in Metro Manila. This serves as an alternative mode of transportation for passengers particularly those coming from the east side of Metro to reach specific destinations within the cities of Manila, Mandaluyong, Pasig, Taguig, Marikina and Quezon City.

Our anti-colorum campaign and out-of-line apprehension, including the removal of terminals will be intensified. And my God, it will be done immediately, immediately.

To address lack of road infrastructure in Metro Manila, usage of existing roads will be maximized. Thus, there is a need to cooperate and coordinate with LGUs to map out secondary routes and to consult with various stakeholders, including the public transport operators.

Many in government realistically opine, that I would have to agree, that the worsening traffic situation could be logically addressed, if Congress would also accord emergency powers to the agencies concerned.

You don't want to? That's okay too. We'll show you if you want it done quickly. You all already know everything, to the fullest extent. To the fullest extent. It's up to you. If you give it, fine. If you don’t give, we’ll take the longer route, slowly. And I will accept your insults, just not up close.

That's just how it is… it’s an urgent and immediate situation, a solution. If you want it fast, okay. But if you don’t want it, because you might say it's graft and corruption, then that's okay too.

I assure – this isn't in the script… I assure you, this will be a clean government. If that is the only worry that you have, and I can understand your misgiving.

This is no longer in… the length… this is no longer in the script. You know, I can guarantee, 101% it will be clean. The problem is I can only act through agencies and departments. That’s why I urge you that even a small mistake, I won't know about it… I have no politics anymore, none. I’m through, after this. I just pass on to you the information that, you know, I act through Secretary and everything, I cannot guarantee their honesty and competence at all times. Cabinet members, yes. But those below – procurement, those who bid… but as far as I can relate… really it's very clean.

We discussed behind the scenes about the federal system.

You know, my advice to you is: maintain a federal system, a parliament, but be sure to have a President. No, I won't be part of that, I’m disqualified and by that time I would no longer be here. But I can commit today, to the Republic of the Philippines and its people, if you hurry up the federal system of government and you can submit it to the Filipino people by the fourth, fifth year – because that’s a process. You call for a referendum and after that call a presidential election, I will go. I'll leave. But you must have a president. Copy the France system. Don't let it be purely parliament, that's dangerous. It takes time even for the—like England, because of this bomb on the double deck, it took them time really because there is no one apparatus for the Commander-In-Chief down. You cannot be president, you can elect. Maybe Tito Sotto will be a lucky guy at the time. Oh well, just limit it. Ceremonial powers, power to dissolve, power to offset the resolution or whatever. Mandating you this, do that… or ceremonial powers, except in times of need. If there’s a demand for action, you must have a president. I won't be around then. I said if you can give me that document, I will urge you to conduct, to order a… call for an election the following day, following week. And even if there’s still two years, three years, I will go. Okay with me. Do not worry about me. I am into… too that’s much ambitious. Well, I still won. I don't even know why now, before I was just there. That's true. Who supported me here? No one. Not a single congressman, except for two provinces, the governor. That's it. I don't have a barangay captain, I don't have… nothing. But now…

Processing time in issuing permits and licenses shall be reduced to the barest minimum. In my city, it is always three days for local government. That will bind the Office of the President down to the last barangay. Three days, three days, local government. Business permit, clearances— no, just a moment. No follow up. Give them a stub, be back next week, check your work load and I will require every department, those up there, they must have a logbook. Not on the computer, okay, that can be erased. Put the day, time, I accept the document of Rodrigo Duterte, then go to your computer. You must have an actuarial projection there. Look at the work load, you're so stupid… oh how many work loads do you have, then when you come back here August 3, 3:00 o’clock, give it, give it.

Now I will be establishing 8888 only for, dedicated to corruption. If I hear anything in the Executive Department, even a whisper, even a whisper, we are finished. There are many there, there in the gallery, many of them are unemployed, still applying until now. Not all of them are rich, those are probably your spouses.

While the issuance and distribution of motor vehicle plates at point of sale or through motor vehicle dealers shall be considered. Let's not go through the LTO because until now, since the time of Christ, their first plate hasn't arrived yet. It's already paid for, until now, by the grace of God.

For the driver’s licenses, its effectiveness will be extended from the current 3-year period to 5 years.

To reduce queuing time at ticketing stations, tickets for the trains will be made readily available and easily accessible to the riding public if you buy them at malls, stalls and stores, you sell them at… there you give them, accredited. Not over there in Recto because those fools will surely counterfeit them.

May I address again to the Filipino people. I am twice as tired for you, for the good of the country. I am serious. You who are doing that, issuing tickets and causing trouble, don't do that. This is my warning, that's the last. No more, I won't do it again. Don't destroy the things we are doing for the good of the people. It's good if we understand each other. So don't do it. It's that simple. So that there's no conflict in the government regarding things that are illegal, bad, and wrong, don't do them and we won't fight here. Even the priests, even Pope Francis were affected.

Let us be clear with each other, I am for the comfort and the welfare of the Filipinos. Kayo namang hindi pa bungog dyan, hindi pa pumasok iyang mga droga, kung ayaw ninyong mamatay, ayaw ninyong masaktan, wag kayong umasa diyan sa mga pari, pati human rights, hindi nakakapigil ‘yan ng kamatayan. So, wag ninyong gawin. Eh tapos nandiyan ka nakabulagta and you are portrayed in a broadsheet na parang Mother Mary cradling the dead cadaver of Jesus Christ.

That's how it is. We'll just have a drama here. I'm looking here because the public is here. You know how many times I've said that, for example in Davao, don't do that because we'll have problems.

He who is the cause of the cause is the cause of them all. You started it, you swallow—let me repeat, he who is the cause of the cause is the cause of them all. We are just working. We have a nation to guard. We have millions of people to ensure they are healthy. It’s a question of drugs, it’s a question of public interest, public order. You see lesser crimes, there are no more thieves, no more robbers. Because for that—why throw it away, they say it's just small. Use your brain.

If you are able to contaminate, like the business of the Chinese, they operate wholesale. Even a little bit, if the whole of Tondo is contaminated, that's money. I am not saying…the Chinese practice this wholesale/retail. They go wholesale, even if they only earn one peso there, that's okay. Because it's about quantity. That's what I mean.

I hope the military and the police will not react on this…it’s part of the deep intelligence that we gathered. I am forced to come and speak in public because the priests are doing something. You know, you media people, you were looking for, “Where is the big fish?” Where are the billionaires who are rich, those with cars, with Mercedes. Ma’am, they are there outside, not here. Bring a battalion of police to arrest them there, if we can. They direct the traffic of drugs to them. They have that, they are listening in real time right now. I

I am 100 percent sure they are listening here. Where there? Just there. They will return it to Tondo, or you throw it there, then leave and get the bag or package from the store. Didn't you say the media sees that… you are the only one branding them as drug lords? Those are not the drug lords, they are lieutenants, delivery boys. They are like LBC, and DHL, Federal.

Even what they call trash, that's the street… don't look for it. I want to tell you, let's go there. I will give you the names. I’ll show you the intelligence paper. But give me the guarantee that you will do something. Because I will give you the name, I’ll give you the country, if nothing is done we will have a standoff—that's why we are not just… We do not get too personal about our work here. I am saying that I—here, let's go back. Because those who don't understand Tagalog, what is, it takes so long for them to…

Passenger capacity congestion shall be addressed by increasing the number of running trains from the current 16 trains with a total of 48 cars per hour, to 20 trains with a total of 60 cars per hour; increase train speed from 40 (kph) to 60 (kph).

The problem with this is, the railways—this is no longer included there; don't believe this. Two-thirds of this are mine, the other third is—my grammar is correct. They just don't want to.

Sixty kilometers per hour, the problem with this is, and you must agree with me that the rails are quite aged. Most of the rails maybe. That has been there since the time of Marcos, Imelda. It's still there. Now, Tugade said, “Sir, give me, tell me 40 to 60 kilometers per hour.” I said, “Art, are you sure the rail can hold that? It might break, the train will go straight to Cavite. Go straight to Cavite, fly, go to Tolentino, ‘Why is there a train here in Tagaytay?’ It’s quite fast, quite fast, 60 kilometers per hour and you’re pulling something that is heavy. When it really moves … it loses… it moves with the speed at a heavy thing at a great speed, it’s hard to… it gets stuck because it’s heavy. And reduce headway time from 5 minutes to 3 minutes. We are only weak compared to—Tugade’s plan, we are only one minute behind Hong Kong. Two minutes, his three minutes. Art, you are ambitious. Can you do this?

Specifically for the LRT, the operating hours shall be extended from 9:30 to 10:30 PM. So many more children will be going home then. And to absorb more passengers, delays in the procurement of additional trains shall be addressed soonest.

Now, that's what I'm saying. If you want to know me, fine. I have no problem. You say that there… we go the normal way. If you’re able to make purchases.

What's good about this is, I have signed the Executive Order for our FOI. I beat you to it. Yours—is already with me. Yes, I'm finished so I will release it. It will be out today. You know, I said, I will beat Congress, they are all boastful there. We grab the… stealing one’s thunder. Let's do it first.

So we shall also pursue rail projects in Metro Manila and the major key-points in the country including the Mindanao Rail Project. I am not bragging but this is really true. We’re in the—depending on the federal but six years, this will really come out I assure you because it’s going to materialize. Rail projects, Davao Transit System, the Cebu Transit System, the North and South Luzon Railways and the Panay Railways project.

Hey! So where is he from, isn't he from Panay. We're giving Panay for—Senator Drilon said, you're being backbit about. They say they'll put a train on the island. There was laughter too. You're being backbit.

Here. They can file a complaint. Look, look over there.

Different approaches are also being considered to decongest NAIA including the possible transfer of general aviation.

My style is like this, I'm not… I am not steeped into formalities. This trans- general aviation, you know who that will affect? You rich people. You with helicopters, even airplanes, I will move you. You know general aviation, those Lear Jets, those of companies, I will put you in Batanes so there isn't much air traffic. No. I’m offering Sangley Point. Because I will build a runway there. I can make a new runway there. Aviation experts say, but it points to the Merville Subdivision. I can make another runway here in Metro Manila. But if not there, it’s going to be Clark but on a condition that you have a fast rail. I said to Art, it is something like thirty. One hour of travel, I said to Tugade, is not acceptable. Make a rail there, before, there are many more. The trend of the day is bullet train. Put that in Filipino driver, in my point, dizzy. You'll overshoot here. The Clark Airport can be utilized to shift some operations of our domestic and international airlines.

Moreover, a one-stop shop will be established within the Clark civil aviation complex for the benefit of the Overseas Filipinos. This will happen. To fully utilize the Clark Airport, it is necessary to establish those… you have a rail to connect.

In the area of environment, the military is directed to intensify its –listen to me, they're laughing there – its support role against illegal logging, illegal mining – Gina Lopez is still there – and other destructive practices that aggravate the devastation of our natural resources. I have to protect the country. Many are complaining against the appointment of Gina Lopez. But Gina, even me, we share the same paradigm: the interest of the country must come first. But I'm not saying—there’s a law allowing mining. Gina Lopez and I are just telling you, follow government standards. Do not destroy the environment. Follow it to a T, we won't have any problems. Just pay the correct taxes; follow the standards.

Gina Lopez is just doing her job. You know she is really a crusader. That is… that is how I describe her persona: Crusader. That's why I said that's right. Why? Is Secretary Lopez, Ma’am Gina Lopez, here?

It's like this. She went to Davao, it was late, around 1 o’clock, because in the early days of my… when I won but I hadn't taken my oath yet. Many people came—solicitation, congratulations. But Ma’am, she came twice. Every time, she shows me the degradation of… this is it. Then for two hours, it seemed like it would never end. I said, “Ma’am, don't be offended.” It's true, don't get angry, it’s the truth. So it was already 3 o’clock, “Rody, this one ‘no.” Then it was extemporaneous, like a congressman. I said, “Ma’am, it's almost 4 o’clock, Ma’am. What if you were the DENR?” She suddenly replied, “Are you serious?” I said, “Umm…” Not “yes.” She, she, “I will ask the”…you know, “I’ll consult my family and ask my… what they say.”

The following day, she called my aide, Bong. She said, “Bong, it’s okay, it’s accepted. My family said it’s okay.” I said, “Haay, be careful… But you know, I would not be appointing somebody who is alien to my thinking. I would take in somebody who shares my horizons in life, especially the degradation…. That's right, she’s a crusader and she will continue.

The DENR is likewise directed to review all permits granted to the mining, logging and other

environmental sensitive activities, ensure compliance with government standards and if warranted — this is the best thing — amend, suspend or revoke permits. Go ahead.

I’d like to thank God that I had this opportunity, really. I never… there’s nothing, I never thought I would reach this point. I’ve always had that worry in my mind that this would be difficult.

Like Laguna Lake, it’s been depleted of… the fishermen are gone. That’s the only difference between one big fish pen to the other, that’s all that’s left for the people. You can see… from the plane, every time I go to Davao and I pass by that place there. Every time, I really see that there’s nothing left. And the fishermen are complaining about the loss. They really are gone. Because the small area, that’s all they have. So I just passed this along in a diplomatic way that the Laguna Lake shall be transformed into a vibrant economic zone showcasing ecotourism by addressing the negative impact of a watershed destruction, land conversion and pollution. This is what I put in. This is what I’m telling you — the poor fishermen will have priority in its entitlements.

Order to Gina is, “Fix it, Ma’am.” Don’t squeeze them, but they have to reduce the areas of occupation. They cannot have their cake and eat it too. They are the ones with the money, this must stop. If you are asked who owns it, it’s simple — Generals, Mayors, Governors, maybe Congressmen. I mean, this is not personal. This is something which I feel that I must do, because it is the right thing to do.

To have adequate disposal facility for the Metro Manila garbage, the final closure and rehabilitation of the Carmona Sanitary Landfill shall be pursued while the adoption of appropriate waste-to-energy facilities will be explored. Marami iyan, the technology is coming and very fast. In the area of governance there is a need to strengthen our efforts along this line.

To better manage public information, a law should be passed, I’m addressing to Congress, to create the People’s Broadcasting Corporation, replacing PTV-4, the government-run TV station, which now aims to replicate international government broadcasting networks. Teams from these international news agencies – I’d like to mention that, those interested, BBC – are set to visit the country soon to train people from the government-run channels to observe – this is what I want, it’s the people’s money anyway – to observe editorial independence through innovative programs and intelligent treatment and analysis of news reports, as well as developments of national and international significance.

The government’s Bureau of Broadcast Services, better known as the Radyo ng Bayan, shall also undergo upgrading to make it financially viable and dependable for accurate, independent, and enlightening news and commentary. Radyo ng Bayan will be integrated with the PBC.

As we are presently setting up a Presidential Communications Satellite Office in Davao City, PBC will also put up broadcast hubs in the Visayas and Mindanao. Davao City will also be the first site of the first Muslim channel, called as Salaam Television, and the first Lumad channel.

The PCO shall coordinate with the Office of the Executive Secretary and the Presidential Legal Counsel in implementing the recently approved EO on the Freedom of Information. This Executive Order is out. As an example, on the part of our Executive Branch to make transparency and integrity as yardsticks in government performance, savings and expenses while engaging the public to a vigilant and to participate in government programs and projects.

The PCO, in coordination with the Office of the Executive Secretary, is drafting the

Administrative Order on the Presidential Task Force on media killings.

This government does not condone violence and repression of media. The bona fide media, bona fide media, sometime they pronounce it bona feed. But whatever that thing is, the bona fide media has always been our partner for change. It’s a little unclear. No, what do you do with the non-bona fide media? That’s the problem.

To address backlogs and low prosecutorial effectiveness and efficiency, the investigation and case management processes shall be streamlined, including those for illegal drugs and heinous crimes.

To eradicate the prevalent cultures of fear and silence that have hounded our justice system, I ask Congress, you, to enact the Whistleblower Protection Law while the present Witness Protection Program shall be strengthened.

It’s hard to be President, even just with this.

The number of lawyers and support staff in PAO, that is the Public Assistance [Attorney’s] Office, regional and district offices shall be increased to provide indigents more access to counsels.

At this stage, I also have directed the DILG to undertake nationwide information and campaign on federalism in partnerships with various alliances and with LGUs, civil society, grassroots and faith- based organizations.

I’ll stop here for now, regarding federalism.

I don't know if I'm right. You know this country of ours, if I may just repeat, I know that you know it. In 1521 or 1526 Magellan landed in Leyte—She's my relative, thank you ma'am.

Mindanao was already Islam by 100 years. So what is this? It’s an imperialism thing. There is a historical injustice committed against the Moro people. We have to correct it, but it is, well, impossible now. So you, my Moro brothers and sisters, you know—I’m mixed, my father was a migrant there, so I’m mixed blood, Moro and Christian. But you know, let's just understand this: that we cannot return to you all that was taken by the Americans, the Spanish, and also the Filipino capitalists, those who exploited Mindanao with that thing, sloganeering, “Go to Mindanao because it is a land of promise.” With the vast entry of so many people, basically coming from the Visayas, we had… we cannot solve it the way you want it to be. You have to understand each other, then you have to live with each other, but we will try.

What I'm saying is, I will return, because with federalism, both Misuari, Sema and all – at least the political leaders of Mindanao will agree to it. We do not, remember that I'm not pushing too much on Abu Sayyaf because it is really connected with the first talks between Misuari, the Presidents – subsequently, from President Marcos and now. Until now, until now. The only way they said that we can have this [is] to give the BBL minus the things that you do not want, remove the constitutional issues first. I will give the area, it's already there. So I ask you, pass it minus the constitutional issues that are contentious. Let's give it and when the federal system comes, include it in the package together with Misuari. That is the solution for Mindanao, nothing else. Believe me, nothing else will do. Please sleep on it, ponder on it, because that is the only way to proceed.

On the clamor of our citizens for timely issuance of Philippine passports, the government shall work towards amendment of the 1996 Passport Law to lengthen the validity of the passports from the current 5 years to 10 years. You are the ones who will make the law, you’re the ones who will pass the law, even if you make it good for 30 years, I’m okay with that. It's up to you. Just stretch it a little bit because 5 years is just really simply on a regular basis. The passport takes a long time. I apply for about 10 days—

You know, I’d like to call the attention of Secretary Yasay. If you go to Davao, look back at… look at the back, behind this mall, the big mall. Okay, let's name it – SM. There, the people are sleeping on the pavement. For the many times I've passed by even without rain, they are there, because first come, first served. And the only outlet there, the outlet of your department is at SM. So those—have pity on them, like here on this side of Cotabato, all of Cotabato in Davao. Most of them don't have houses. You know, if you’re an applicant in Davao City, fine.

You know, if there isn’t—it’s difficult because what. It reminds me of the Moroanon, lying on the pavements, it really hurts me. It's painful. They wait all night until that SM opens, because first come first served. So I said—I’m addressing to all the Cabinet members: make use of the computer. I do not want to see people lining up under the heat of the sun. I do not want to people lining up under the rain with those situations.

And I want the Labor—this is no longer in the script. The prompter is probably sleeping there, just pressing buttons. You know, it's there. I said what I want is a journal. When the applicant presents the documents, give them a shopping list. Do not add or get anything away from it. That's it, final. And when he complies with that, that is good. Don't make them come back. Because if they call 8888, my God, I will really go to you. That's my vice when I was mayor. It makes no difference if I'm mayor-president. I will really go to you and embarrass you in front of many people. And I would publicly ask you what the hell happened to the procedure. I will really go to you.

Local barangay, police, military, all, give them a shopping list, don't make them come back. Because if they call 8888, and I see that the grievance is valid, you're in trouble. What, no time. I will go to your office and I would ask you, “why?”

Give him a stub. You have to employ actuarial ability, that’s easy. But when you accept someone—I’m addressing myself, under me—a journal, have him sign it, put it there, check the computer, connect to the actuarial… it doesn’t need a stupid person there. Because that will probably be finished next month, it’s done. It’s just projections. Come back here August 15, 3 o’clock. When you arrive, give it to me.

Now if he goes to Malacañang and opens it up—for those who have valid reasons to complain about graft and corruption, the gates of Malacañang will be open. That’s where you go. File a complaint, and I will be briefed by my military or aide or that one – the one who gave the water, “Sir, there are many here…”

And the reason why I do not go out, I do not accept invitations — I do not accept — because every time I travel around Manila it causes a huge congestion of traffic. Because even my return trip is… they also go by projection — when the President goes out, what is it, picture taking, that’s it and they start to block the… the roads access to the… that’s how it is every time the President goes out, that’s how it is. So they will stop it, they will say it will pass by this time, in

the meantime it’s closed, but when I go out, it’s like Good Friday, there are no vehicles there. But actually, the traffic is exponential, the tail-end of the traffic is somewhere, five kilometers—and it would take about two to three hours to normalize. That’s why I do not accept—and I hate to travel. Because it really needs to be cleared. This—the President’s entourage is so big, from end to end there’s an ambulance. It’s not just an entourage, it’s like a cortege. I said two, three is enough, just in the middle with me. But the truth is I just take a taxi here in the back, I just follow. Are they afraid that… what will you get if you kill me? What for? There’s an ambulance there, just add a funeral parlor.

I have also ordered the DFA to streamline documentary requirements for passport applications and open additional Consular Offices in strategic locations to decongest Metro Manila sites and avoid queues that have caused hardships and suffering to our passport applicants.

I have also ordered the newly-created DICT, Information and Communication Technology, to develop a National Broadband Plan to accelerate the deployment of fiber optic cables and wireless technologies to improve internet speed. This is for… I know, my dear countrymen, you will be happy with this. How about my Tagalog, because… well, you don’t know how to speak Bisaya, do you.

Wi-Fi access shall be provided at no charge in selected public places including plazas and parks, public libraries, schools, government hospitals, train stations, airports and seaports. Right? Everyone is happy.

All government agencies are instructed to enable their clients to submit applications for coordination, other agencies combined. You raise it, that’s it, you don’t want to speak. And national portal, yes because it’s our… like a website.

This: We shall intensify… I’m really hot here. I place it in parity to drugs. We shall intensify our war against human traffickers and illegal recruiters that prey on our migrants.

To help ensure that the hard-earned money of our Overseas Filipinos are put into productive use, a mandatory financial education for all migrant and their communities shall be pursued along with incentives to encourage entrepreneurship among them.

I may now also ask on Congress to consider drawing up bills consolidating and merging agencies and offices all having to do with Overseas Filipinos to have a department that shall focus on and quickly respond to their problems and concerns.

You need one. Now I have asked… I don’t know, Secretary Bello is here? Bebot. Isn't he there? He's really absent. Even in the Cabinet he's absent. I want him to rent or lease some buildings to be near… for overseas only. And I will direct all… BIR, everything. Everything to do with the clearances of the police, in one building, just a booth. I said, “my God make use of the computer.” So they will just go around in one building. Filipinos won't have to go to Statistics, won't have to go to that office. Use the computer and you can get the results right after. Why does he have to travel to Malate, then has to cope with the traffic, he can only accomplish one document at one time.

NBI clearances, you should give those there. Everything there. And if it's necessary… Bello has compassion, feed the people there, especially those from the province. If you see they're from the province, finish it right away. Make use of the computer. If you don't use it, just throw it away.

Just throw away your computers and I understand that. Make use of the computers.

To help avoid squatter-like conditions in relocation sites, we urge utilities like Meralco and electric cooperatives to exercise their corporate social responsibility by making direct connections to relocation sites and depressed areas.

You know why? They didn't put electricity there. That’s why I had to talk to you like this. Why? It’s because there's no electricity if you're poor. You don’t own the land, the City Engineer will not—that is my experience 23 years as mayor. They won't give a direct connection, because you don't own the land. But that squatter there has been there for 20 years. So they connect, they connect. When they connect, they use the cheapest wire. So, it overheats because they just keep connecting to whoever… sometimes they steal.

You know, we’ll have to make the adjustments. It is not for these people to make the corrections, because they are not in a position to do it. You have to adjust to the needs of our people. Tutal iyan namang… iyang namang squatter na iyan, as long as I sit here as President, there will be no demolitions without relocations. Hindi talaga ako papayag. Hindi naman aso iyan na—just like in Davao. I’d like to make a dialogue with the businessmen, “Sir, how much are you investing in this land, you have bought with the squatter?” So I bought it at about 60 million? Dagdagan mo ng 20 million, ako na ang bahala.

I will tell the people, “let’s buy a relocation site or I will provide.” Government will expropriate. I will make use of the expropriation powers. That’s what I did in Davao. I have 20 hectares there. I will expropriate some land there, nearby. Then I will say, “this 20 million will help your journey to a new land.” And I will urge everybody, the new factories to build there.

Just bear with it for a while. In the meantime, to mitigate the hardships of these people – that’s the only way to do it. But instead of demolition, people have nowhere to live. Since you sat on your rights for many years, why force me to have a problem like that. Some people let it go for ten, twenty years and do nothing. And when the time comes to sell it, we're the ones disturbed. Oh, just spend a little more to make it easier, just add a little bit more and there will be at least peace. If not, there will be another fight between government and the… they call them squatters. They really are squatters. People will get hurt, die for no reason at all. But if you're rich, give them a little something, provide a relocation and I will be glad to talk to the people and say, “go, it is not yours.”

I have directed the concerned regulatory agencies to prioritize the issuance of required permits for power development – Okay, I agree with that. The problem… just a moment. It's like this. The environmentalists, we have something because… there's a lot of coal, and also—this energy emissions, I don't have a problem with that. But don't tell me that if you— you're an ambassador and then you tell me that you're only up to there, because we're only up to here too. What? You reached there. You are now in the apex of your industrial might, but along the way you were the first — America, China, Europe. You were very powerful, but until now it only contributes something point zero.

So if you put so much restrictions doon sa treaty na iyan, the treaty which we are trying to… it’s still here in the Senate. Let us be very clear on this. We need to industrialize. We need the power, and therefore the emissions would also be considered. I just can’t say it. I established five economic zones here and you start to say that—you have spoken so much, carbon

footprints, mahirap iyan. I mean, it’s hard.

I cannot just agree on anything that will delay – I’m only good for six years. I intend to be something during my term. Now, I’m sure that the heavy machineries would come in and even the power. Cheapest is coal. So this locally, you get into trouble with Gina. So, we’ll just talk in the Cabinet. Gina is a very fine lady. Just don’t frown at her. She’ll give you a permit even for five. Frown at her, zero. All that she is today is just be gracious to her, that’s all. It’s a matter of talking and explaining with her. But if it is the— you are using the state-of-the-art technology, and I’ve seen it several times in the other power plants in this country, if it is really a good one, then we will consider. I said because we need the energy to power our industrialization.

To strengthen the delivery of social services, the government will intensify its social protection programs so it can use its resources and expertise to make a dent in the country’s poverty levels.

What we want is genuinely to reduce vulnerabilities of our people, build resiliency and empower individuals, families and communities.

The beneficiaries of 4Ps shall be made to become independent and self-reliant after they have graduated from the program. We aim to present them with other forms of assistance so that they can stand on their own two feet.

But now, I have decided to direct the DSWD to provide the rice subsidies to the poorest of the families – at least so they can eat every month. That sack of…

We are planning to increase spending for basic education and incorporate mandatory education about the evils of drugs.

We will also intensify and expand the Alternative Learning System programs. The government will also provide universal health insurance for all Filipinos benefits… Just enroll in PhilHealth.

The professional competence and operational capabilities of government hospitals and health facilities will be strengthened.

Consistent with our international obligations and in keeping with national mandates, this administration vows to protect women’s rights and human rights abuses against our women because it is unacceptable… to beat a woman.

Thus, I order all agencies, oversight bodies and local government units down to the barangay level to fully implement the Magna Carta of Women. By doing so, we will ensure that man and woman will truly be partners in the pursuit of the country’s economic, social, cultural and political development.

To our Lumad brothers – and they are here, maybe outside. … outside I’m sure. I told the security to let them come in if they want. Sa kanila man ‘to. To our brothers I have this to say: The government has issued to you Certificates of Ancestral Domain Title covering vast tracts of land especially in the Island of Mindanao. You have the Indigenous Peoples’ Rights Act and the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples to protect and assist you.

The government has given you the legal tool to improve yourselves financially, economically and socially. Make use of your ancestral domain. Do not let it remain idle.

While the government is always ready to help you, you must first help yourself. We cannot legislate financial and economic progress for you. It is you and you alone who can do that. You can chart your fate, but do it within constitutional and legal means.

After being devastated by natural and man-made calamities these past few years, we are still to recover emotionally from the loss of our loved ones, and materially from the loss of our homes and income sources.

There are many among us whose emotional wounds are still fresh and painful to the touch. We cannot erase the images of death and destruction from our minds. We cannot wash away the stench of rotting flesh from our noses. And there are many of us who are still waiting for the help that was promised. The enormity of the problem of drug addiction has been made manifest by the number of surrenderees which grows by the hundreds each day that passes. Since July 1, we have already made 3,600 drug- related arrests. 120 (120,000) drug dependents have already surrendered and 70,000 (7,000) of them are pushers.

You think this is just a… it would take the entire resources of this government to fight this war. I have nothing but the interest of my country. But in its wake — because the PDEA say is that— it’s about— that was a statement made by the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency. Two years ago, PDEA came out with a statement that there are 3 million drug addicts in this country. That was two or three years ago. How do you think would the number, incrementally, if we count now. Give it a liberal addition, maybe… lagyan mo ng seven thousand. So, 3 million 7 hundred thousand. The number is quite staggering and scary. The drug lords that you desperately want to strangle are not here. Walang mga bilyonaryo dito. The ones that you catch, running after are just the lieutenants. They do it by technology. They’re cooking it in the international waters. Tinatapon nila iyan bulto, by the drums, dikitan nila ng GPS. So, makikita agad.

We are hard put on intelligence, because they’ve invented this direct satellite. It won’t go through… all they have to do is to triangulate where the… its rotation. And there’s so many… and they’re in coves. If we do not help from our friends here in Asia and America and Europe, the sheer number and problem, believe me, will drown us as a republic.

You, look at this. How can I solve the problem now by arresting [them]? I’ve been looking for [a solution]… I’ve been President for a long time. I want to kill [them], the problem is I’ll have to go there, then I’ll ask the permission from this country that I will be in because I have to slaughter these idiots for destroying my country. That’s how it is. It’s just that they don’t understand—they don’t want to let go, because the military and the police don’t want to either.

But you know, I said, I’ll be talking in front of the Republic through its representatives, for the people. So I have to tell you how do we solve this problem? Tell me. Ako naman okay lang eh. Make it public, fine. Make it confidential, if you go to mayor, go to you, to your house, okay. But that is really the enormity of the problem. It’s so enormous that you are intimidated even just to make a move. Because you know you cannot stop it anyway.

If you bump into one of them here, drop them into the sea, there are many cooking there. It’s a free for all enterprise for the criminals at this time. If it were me, if I had just the plane and time I could—I told the military, ‘when you see them, just blow them up. Even if they surrender, with a white flag, that’s for war, not for criminals, blow them up.’

Show no mercy to them, because they are not doing any mercy to us anyway. Why would I… that’s the problem.

But we should not despair. Like someone wrote, it is when the night is darkest that dawn breaks.

We are imbued with resiliency that has been tested and proven more difficult times as in the past. We have to bond and act together. We have to help each other. For then and only then can we truly prevail.

And the Filipino, disciplined, informed and involved, shall rise from the rubbles of sorrow and pain so much so that all the mirrors in the world will reflect the face of a passion that have change this land.

DAGHANG SALAMAT!