Kindly sit down. Thank you for your courtesy.

When I was a member of Congress, I —- my seat was over there. The seat… The lady with a violent – — not violent but rather violet dress — seated. But I was always absent together with the Speaker and Tonyboy Floirendo, who is still absent until today.  And that started… Ay nandiyan ba? Sorry. But his propensity started almost 17 years ago when we were members of the 11th Congress.

Senate President Aquilino Pimentel III and the members of the Senate; Pantaleon Alvarez, the Speaker and the members of the House of Representatives; Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo; Former Presidents Fidel Ramos, Joseph Estrada, and former President Gloria Arroyo; Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno of the Supreme Court and the members of courts; Archbishop Pinto and the distinguished guests of the diplomatic corps; Secretary Salvador Medialdea and the members of the Cabinet; my fellow workers in government; my countrymen.

When I took my oath of office a year or so ago, I knew that our country was reeling from a multitude of problems. That day, there was euphoria in the air resulting from a successful campaign and the thought that dominated my being was to make good on my promise to the people to bring [about change] — change in government, not a change that is passing but a change that can survive the test of time.

Although I still had to know the magnitude and gravity of the problems, my feeling then was that, equipped with political will and braced by a concerned citizenry, those problems would eventually be bested by us. It was only a matter of determination and collective action. It was only a question of time.

For as I saw it then as I see it now, there is no problem in the world which can stop the march of a people with unflinching and tenacious determination. That was how euphoric — euphoric it has been.

Early on, I felt that if change was to be meaningful, it had to start with those occupying the highest positions in government because change that comes from below is more transitory than permanent. And I was aiming for permanence. Let change trickle down from [top to] bottom.

It has to be a change that is not confined merely to the replacement of people by people, but a change in the people‘s attitude, disposition and work ethic.

Sadly, although we knew years ago that what was needed or ought to do, we did not do [them] because our idea of government was parochial and we could not rise above family, ethnic and

clan loyalties as well as loyalty to friends and co-workers. No one wanted to be a snitch. That is why we are one in saying that genuine change is what this country truly needs.

I believed then, as I believe still, that progress and development will sputter if criminals, illegal drugs, illegal users of drugs are allowed to roam the streets freely, victimizing seeming with impunity, the innocent and the helpless. Worse yet, there were times in the past when the protectors of the people were themselves the perpetrators of the very crimes they were tasked to prevent or suppress. It is ironic as it is madness.

I have learned that economy surges only when there is peace and order prevailing in places where investors can pour [in] their capital and expertise. I have learned from my experience in Davao City that investor confidence [is] bolstered and fortified only if a potent force and mechanism for [the] protection of local and foreign investments are in place.

That is why, I have resolved that no matter how long it takes, the fight against illegal drugs will continue because that is the root cause of so much evil and so much suffering  that weakens the social fabric and deters foreign investments from pouring in. The fight will be unremitting as it will be unrelenting.

Despite international and local pressures, the fight will not stop  until those who deal in it understand that they have to cease, they have to stop because the alternatives are either jail or hell.  And I will make sure, very sure that they will not have the luxury of enjoying the benefits of their greed and madness.

I do not intend to loosen the leash in the campaign or lose the fight against illegal drugs. Neither do I intend to preside over the destruction of the Filipino youth by being timid and tentative in my decisions and actions.

To the critics against this fight, your efforts will be better spent if you use the influence, moral authority and ascendancy of your organizations over your respective sectors to educate the people on the evils of illegal drugs instead of condemning the authorities and unjustly blaming for every killing that bloodies this country.

But don‘t get me wrong. I value human life the way I value mine. Each life that is snuffed out translates into future generations lost. It is like cracking the acorn from which an oak tree grows – which, in turn, produce the seeds to complete the cycle of [life in] perpetuity.

There is a jungle out there. There are beasts and vultures preying on the helpless, the innocent [and] the unsuspecting. I will not allow the ruin of the youth, the disintegration of families and the retrogression of communities, forced by criminals whose greed for money is as insatiable as it is devoid of moral purpose. Neither will I be immobilized into inaction by the fear that I will commit an act that will expose me to public condemnation or legal prosecution. You harm the children in whose hands the future of this Republic is entrusted, and I will hound you to the very gates of hell.

That is why I ask you to join me in this fight against illegal drugs and all forms of criminality.

The government, equipped with legal authority, and you, with the moral ascendancy over the sector you represent, can do so much, and hopefully eradicate this social scourge that plagues us no end.

Look beyond your biases, your prejudices, your ambition [and] your political agenda. The search for change will begin and end only when we look into ourselves and find it within.

Today, a multitude of problems confront us. No sooner is one problem solved [when] another surges forth in its place. But we will not be disheartened; we will not be cowed; we will not be overwhelmed.

It is during trying times and troubled events that the resilience, perseverance and determination of the people are tested. The Filipino is no stranger or neophyte to situations like the one we face today. We can, and we will, overcome as we did countless times in the past, [but] only if we work together towards a common goal.

Sad to say, despite all efforts, peace, especially in the Island of Mindanao, continues to elude us. But of course, it is not the peace of the dead but the peace of the living that we seek. Peace flits away like a butterfly when you try to snatch it by the wings. And our pursuit of peace continues.

The red insurgency has been with us for decades; the Muslim issue, for centuries.

So much time has lapsed, so many lives have been lost and so much destruction has been wrought but peace eludes us still. Sometimes I am almost tempted to conclude that peace might not be able to come during our lifetime.

But believe me, it will not be for want of trying. And I will persist in our goal of attaining peace [up] to the last day of this administration and maybe even beyond although in a different capacity.

There is rebellion in Mindanao. The extremists have declared it their purpose to establish a caliphate within Philippine territory along the teachings and beliefs of [the] Islamic State of Iraq and Syria or otherwise known as ISIS. The battle of Marawi has dealt a terrible blow to our quest for peace especially now that an alien ideology and a radical shift in purpose have been injected into the local setting.

I declared Martial Law in Mindanao because I believed that that was the fastest way to quell the rebellion at the least cost of lives and properties.  At the same time, the government would be adequately equipped with the constitutional tool not only to prevent the escape of rebels who can easily mingle and pretend to be civilian evacuees only to re-group in another place to fight another day, but also to prevent them from spreading their gospel of hate and violence in the rest of Mindanao.

Martial Law and the suspension of the Writ of Habeas Corpus enable the military to arrest, detain and question suspected members and sympathizers of the rebellion similar to what happened to the parents of the Maute brothers.

As president, I am reiterating my unwavering support and commitment to the soldiers of our Armed Forces and the members of our police force —  those who are on the ground and in the battlefields and those who are risking their lives for our country and our democracy. I have your backs. To those who oppose and think that all these efforts are out of order, I hold myself — me and me alone should be responsible.

The people of Marawi need help. Caught in the crossfire between government troops and Muslim extremists, they have been through hell and we need to help them rise and move forward.

If we cannot provide for the poor and the needy who are many, then we will not be able to keep from harm the rich who are few.

At the vanguard of our struggle for peace and order are our Armed Forces and Police. They are the silent heroes who risk their lives everyday for our country‘s security. In recognition of their valor, we have crafted a program to provide them with comprehensive social assistance, including financial, should they meet harm in the performance of their duty. For the family left behind by those who fell or are rendered totally disabled in the line of duty, we shall provide shelter, health care assistance, education, and employment. That is my way of telling our troops: never fear, do your duty. I stand behind you. So does this government and all its agencies.

To decisively address insurgency and terrorism, we are working doubly hard towards [achieving] a stronger and more credible national defense system for the country. We continue to strengthen the defense capability of the AFP as a deterrence against terrorists, lawless elements, and other threats.

My fellow citizens, what I have said so far about the events in Marawi and its neighboring environs is only a part of a looming problem, which will cut across all classes and all sectors of society and eventually affect the entire country from north to south, from east to west, given the fact that Mindanao supplies a great part of our country‘s food requirements. I refer to climate change, which could bring drought and long dry spells affecting food production in Mindanao, given the fact that Mindanao is unusually warming. I ask all agencies involved in food production to look into this and act accordingly.

Also, I am appealing to all our legislators to immediately pass the National Land Use Act or NALUA  to ensure the rational and sustainable use of our land and our physical resources, given the competing needs of food security, housing, businesses and environmental conservation.

Ours is a rich country. Wealth that this country is endowed with [is] a gift from God to be utilized for the [people‘s] welfare and the common good. I do not believe that this gift was given to us to be merely viewed or appreciated, but to be extracted from the earth and utilized to make life worth living.

That is why I say that it is not enough that we mine this wealth. What is more important is that we convert the raw material thereof into finished products for international and local purposes. That way, it will not only be the few who are the rich but also the poor who are many who will benefit therefrom.

Therefore, I call on our industrialists, investors [and] commercial barons to put up factories and manufacturing establishments right here in the Philippines to process our raw materials into finished products.

At this point in my administration, if possible, we shall put a stop to the extraction and exportation of our mineral resources to foreign nations  for processing abroad and

importing them back to the Philippines in the form of consumer goods at prices twice or thrice the value of the original raw materials foreign corporations pay for them.

However, in the extraction and utilization of these resources, extreme care must be exercised  that we do not recklessly and needlessly harm the environment.  Responsible, regulated and sustainable development is what we advocate and require. The protection of the environment must be made a priority ahead of mining and all other activities that adversely affect one way or another. And this policy is non-negotiable.

I sternly warn… I am warning all mining operations and contractors to refrain from the unbridled and irresponsible destruction of our watersheds, forests, and aquatic resources. You have gained much from mining, we only get about 70 billion a year, but you have considerably neglected your responsibility to protect and preserve — and even the tax, it‘s about five percent

— environment for posterity.

I am holding all mining companies and its officials responsible for the full and quick clean-up, restoration [and] rehabilitation of all areas damaged by mining activities, and the extension of all necessary support to the communities that have suffered mining‘s disastrous effects on their health,  livelihood, and environment, among others.

So that's how it is. I need to step away from there for a bit… My eyes will get strained looking at that damn thing. You know, you have the mining. I have to grant you a mining because you have complied with all the requirements of the law. And I cannot… I’d be subject to a mandamus if everything is perfect and you have every right to mine. But in doing so, you destroy the rivers, you destroy the streams, from which the poor people fish — mudfish — and that is protein for the day for them.

Now you see that not only Gina Lopez gave you a clear picture of what was happening horrendously. You saw it on Ted Failon — Ted Failon’s program, I really watched it, twice. And I realized that I have to do something about it as a Filipino.

You know, the mining is okay. You are just a subsidiary of another giant corporation or you’re a sister company of a telecommunication, you won’t go hungry. But look at the picture shown to you. For once, they behaved correctly, ABS-CBN. Look at Ted Failon’s documentary. I salute him for coming up with it.

You see the rice fields… The rice fields are drying up and the soil is cracking. So the farmers cannot eat anymore. They are reduced to scavenging for garbage, salvaging anything and selling it as scrap. That’s what happened to the Filipino. I’m not your enemy. As a matter of fact, you give the government almost 70 billion. But actually, that’s just a small amount.

Now, you see these rice fields drying up and the rivers with no more fish. The only source of protein. You can’t go hunting. If you see an eagle there, shoot it, you’ll go to jail. Feed it to… Where will you even…?

Try to go out, let’s go together — you come with me. And try to see how hard it is for them to survive. Now this is… You want this to happen, since you have so much money, honestly. I was a mayor, I can look at your corporate earnings, your sister company, I can pierce the corporate identity, it’s you too. And even in the newspapers. When you are not supposed to

to… You know, ̳pag newspaper ka you are supposed to be 100 percent

Filipino. And yet when you start to pierce their identity, it is pala fully owned by Americans. Ganun ang nangyari eh. It‘s just a matter of piercing the…

So I don’t have much… ABS, Rappler, are you there? Have you tried to pierce your identity and it will lead you to America? Do you know that? And yet the constitution requires you to be 100 percent — media — Filipino. Rappler, try to pierce the identity and you will end up with American ownership. You are rich, mining companies. This is my deal with you, either I will raise the taxes, and I will reserve the earnings from that to compensate for those who are suffering and in agony.

You have to come up with a substitute, either spend to restore the virginity of their source or I will tax you to death. Because the taxes I get, I will really pour them in. Now, if you can make an arrangement, an inventory of the — what was destroyed — the people who went hungry and their rivers with nothing left to get because… You know guys, we from Davao are not new to it, you want to see horror in your lifetime? I’ll take care of it. NPA, don’t start anything yet, let’s go to the conflict areas, I’ll join them. You stop your

You're all just boasting. Let's go to Diwalwal, to [inaudible] and I will show you the river. Up there at the source, it’s so pristine. But down there – right at the start of the boundary where the millings are started, the water there is not clear, it is not brown, it is black. Your one peso will win one million from me if I am lying. If you want, I’ll take you there tomorrow. Now, if we are targeted by those d*** NPA, that’s all of our problem.

Let's do it all at once. The presidency is vacant, the Senate is vacant, as is the congress. But that’s true, you should visit the… Even the first spade, even the first spade full of earth that you extract and throw it away as useless. Just set it aside there because it’s an open pit, you dig and dig and dig, and already the first spade is the decreasing of Mother Earth.

You know what else people are angry about regarding mining? The Speaker. He comes from a mining town but he hates mining. As for me, my friends, some of my classmates are vice presidents of mining companies, they come here… But it reduces to something – the damage that you have caused. It’s not about our friendship. It’s not about years of being in the same room. It’s not about being fraternity brothers. But it is something that… [raises his right hand] That’s how it is.

You know about martial law, I’m not so concerned if you say you won’t give it? Okay. I have no problem with that. Even if you say it’s enough? Okay. Then I will still fight. The way I will fight the war. If it is not acceptable to the normal standards of civilian conduct, then I am sorry because I am not fighting a civilian war, I am stopping violence and rebellion. I really…

Whether you give it or not, it doesn’t matter to me. Because I, I do not intend to go beyond my term. As a matter of fact, I’d rather be shot in the back. I don’t really believe in this job? I thought I did. When I got here, oh s***, a headache.

True. You are listening. I haven’t signed a single thing, d*** it, for food. Food – food in the office, you pay for that. I’ll issue it. I do not collect anything. I do not remember. I do not sign anything there until now. I have no allowance, I don’t receive anything except my salary. Then two families share it. What’s wrong with that? [applause and cheers] Go ahead, applaud. We all do. I can count my… Not even with two hands, just one hand is exempt from that rule. Two, three, four, five. Don’t fool me, why would we even fool each other? Just because this is Congress it has

to be a secret, secret. Do you believe these things? We are all the same. They don’t even want to laugh, pretending. [laughter and applause]

So I will increase the taxes. Then I will think of something that will compensate or make up for the damage or at least the income restored. Otherwise, I’ll have to stop mining. I will ask you to stop it. It’s not good. We are a small group of islands, not many. The coastline is extensive because it’s winding, but we are in a contiguous territory, we are just small.

You must remember that there are so many billions of future generations waiting in this stratosphere. What you want so that you won't be involved, stop whatever it is you're doing. Then let us go to… Because this will not end here. How about the billions and billions and billions of Filipinos who will come after us? It's pitiful. They’ll have to scratch Mother Earth to eat. By this time if there is no upheaval, no regeneration will occur, we are almost like really doing that to them—they will only get a little. But have some compassion. You’ll see your grandchild if that’s how it is… If that’s how it is—you embrace your grandchild with your second wife. The other one is the same. Right? Right, sir? I’ll punch you there now, you liar.

Finally, let me make this appeal to those directly engaged in mining. Declare your correct income [and] pay your correct taxes. Believe me, your failure to do so will be your undoing and eventual ruin.

I can no longer run, I am already old. I don‘t think I‘ll even survive the five years. But if I say I’ll beat you up, I will really beat you up.

To our employees and officials of the LGUs tasked with monitoring these mining operations within their territorial jurisdictions, do your job without fear or favor. I [hold] you absolutely responsible for any misdeed or failure [by] the mining entities to comply — do not comply or comply with the guidelines, rules and regulations governing mining operations and activities within your area of responsibility. I mean it. Do not try to test my resolve. Absolutely I have nothing to lose except my life.

While we can control the acts of man, no one can control [or] stop the fury and rampage of weather gone wild. When nature fights back, it does so with a vengeance.

We have seen the terrible toll that Super typhoon Yolanda and the succeeding typhoons exacted in terms of human life and property. And we still have to recover from the beating that we got both during and in the aftermath of those mega-typhoons.

Aside from droughts, tempests and other problems taking shape which, according to DOST- PHIVOLCS — it is no longer just a distant possibility but a probability: Earthquakes.

The series of damaging quakes in Leyte, Surigao and nearby provinces and islands attest to this. We were told that it is no longer a question of ―ifǁ but a matter of ―when.ǁ

Thus, we need to act decisively and fast because the threat is huge, real and imminent.

Come to think of it really, they say that there is no perfect instrument or human acumen can really predict earthquake. I hope it will not come. Because if the “Big One” comes, as they say, I

hope it will be just in the mountains and in the rural areas. Because if it’s right—they say

they are scaring people… Media because… It’s here in the speech, I reviewed it last night. I am calling [on] both houses of Congress to expeditiously craft a law establishing a new authority or department that is responsive to the prevailing 21st century conditions and empowered to best deliver [an] enhanced disaster resiliency and quick disaster response.

While the law is [being] crafted with extreme urgency, we need to undertake immediate action to ensure disaster resiliency and effective response in the greater [Metro] Manila area, which is our country‘s seat of governance, center of business, commerce, and the academe. Disaster resiliency of Metro Manila and the surrounding provinces is a matter of urgent [national ] concern.

That’s here, they are scaring people here because of the high-rise buildings and… How many people live there? If… Can this withstand a sinkhole? I mean if it cracks and it goes down, can we still manage to go up? God, not now while I’m here. Just wait for them, they’re just arguing here.

I am directing the Cabinet Cluster on Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management to immediately work hand in hand with the concerned LGUs, the private sector and the affected communities themselves, in undertaking disaster [resiliency] measures, antidotes.

We all need to act fast. With all the foregoing said, what then is the state of the nation today?

I will mince no words and neither will I window-dress the situation [that] we are in. Let me answer in two brief sentences. We are in — for trouble — because we live in troubled and uncertain times. And I fear that things might get worse before they become better. But like I said I hope we will cope, we hope and pray.

The West Philippine Sea issue and Federalism are matters that we have to tackle sooner or later.

On the other hand, despite our recent gains in improving the peace and order situation in the country, there is still so much to be desired and if we are to completely eradicate the menace of illegal drugs, criminality and corruption, we must do it.

I therefore ask Congress to act on all pending legislations to reimpose the death penalty on heinous crimes — especially on the trafficking of illegal drugs.

There is a shortage… No, no, no. There is a short clip of CNN about people in Massachusetts, was it there? Their clip was shown. It was looked at… Please look at it… It’s repeated for almost every week, those short clips. Look at the people there who they let… They are there, they live under the bridge, they are getting thin, they are doing nothing. They are just like that and then they pose for… And there are aplenty of them there. They do not work, nothing.

Then the UN said… Is he here? Are you there, the UN representative? That you said shabu will not affect the brain? Are you here? Raise your right hand, if you’re here. Do not worry. I will just… Do not—the word “delude” as into you… Your things—but we

You know everyday that one family was raped, two and all are dead. Then you trivialize it with human rights and due process. I’m okay with that. When you go into an anger, when you burst with rage, that’s okay. But with so many killings as brutal and as cruel as what happened, if you add human rights and due process, you stink and your mouth smells. If you want to criticize, criticize, condemn the act, stop there. But do not give the excuse or do not make it trivial by saying human rights at least we’ll be protected… That is the most b***** thing a person can do. When you criticize, stick to one topic. Then you find an event where you can talk about human rights and due process, but do not talk about it at the same time when there is a carnage and you begin to blabber, talk about human rights. People get even angrier. Eh p****** i**, someone died there, you act like you’re someone important. What have you done in the name of human rights? Seventy-seven — you have the records. You can summon the police. Seventy-seven before I became president. All drug-related, 77,000. And you trivialize that with a conference… And then people come here to ask those in jail who were imprisoned because of… just imagine…

I challenge you, you want a debate in public? Okay, we‘ll have it. I will challenge you how also you trivialize the thing by — ̳yung binibigyan niyo ng importansiya si De Lima. You all know, you were all here. You conducted the investigation. You heard the witnesses. You saw the videos. Is she a credible woman? Can she be a moral person?  Puro kayo drama diyan sa…

When you talk about an incident, talk about it, then condemn, condemn the police. But do not connect it with due process and human rights. You’ll look like a g*** in front of the Filipino people. You know why I get this rating? I could not be brighter than you and my work is not more important or your vocation is not less than mine. But when you talk in public carry the proper message. That’s why you get an 82 or you bombard me with that. People will say, “Eh that’s right. That’s right, Duterte.” Because it’s happening. But you are at the forefront of that kind of thing, but when many people die in a massacre, women and children are raped, you don’t speak up. Then, when these Western experts arrive [applause and cheers] when these Western experts arrive, you give them so much premium and importance. Where is your brain? Why do you believe the white people? Look at the white people, during Obama’s time, his spokesman from the State Department. He acted like he was someone. They thought they were smarter than me. Then the staff of the President, then Obama. “I would like to remind Mr. Duterte that the policy of…” And then I was in trouble. When Trump came, “Oh yes, Mr. President, I’ve been expecting your call. You are doing it all right…” And this G*******… I’m going home. T**** i*** that.

So? That’s the value of the country that you value. Ambivalent. Like an electric fan. Okay here or not okay, it’s vacillating. And you all believe them. I really don’t understand the Filipino people. It takes an American to say that I’m a son of a b****. And it takes an American to say, “Oh you’re great. You’re a hero in your country.” Where am I going with this now?

It is time for us to fulfill our mandate to protect our people from these crimes that have victimized… You know, don’t scare me with the prisoners, the international court of justice. S***, I am willing to go to prison for the rest of my life. What’s important to me is that I do what I want.

Alam mo kasi in this country it is a rule of majority. I did it for the 50 plus one because in a vote of 100, I get 51, 50 plus one. Fifty is one-half, one, that is majority of one, I win. ̳Yung 49, ̳yon ̳yung mga… I do not have to make them happy. But when the time comes, eh kung malasin

I, I will go to prison, don’t worry about me. I can take it. When I was young, I went in and out of… There wasn’t even Pangilinan’s law yet. I went in and out of prison. Get the record from the police in Davao. Scare me, “He will be prosecuted.” Hey, I’m a lawyer because I will…

I said, everybody is entitled to come here and question me, but I have to question you also. And to be good, let us make it official. We go to court and we tell the judge that we are hearing by an international body, can we have it judicially recorded? And I will place them under oath. I will really catch them. I killed someone, that’s right. When I was mayor, a little over… I was mayor of Davao for 23 years. Look at Davao now, you have been LGUs before. What city is now hitting nine growth percent? Even though we are still in Mindanao, we are being bombed in Davao. Davao is nine growth. Then you say… Now, how can you make it nine, you’re about to hit six, they say. But

if you just let me, it will reach 21, the highest in the world. You are the only ones holding it back.

It is time for us to fulfill our mandate to protect… Tapos na ̳yan. Kindly… For so long… We have to act decisively on this contentious issue.

Capital punishment is not only about deterrence. It is also about retribution. Make no mistake about that.

Iba kasi ako eh. Let us understand each other including the international community. Ang aming — our criminal system uses the Revised Penal Code. That is a law that was given to us by the Spaniards, the original Revised Penal Code. Though it was translated into English and in this two books, three books, there are the definition of crimes and the penalties and everything. And the thrust of that Revised Penal Code, ladies and gentlemen, is the essence of retribution. That is why you have penalties. There is also the word ―positivist theoryǁ that you can nurture a criminal into goodness provided he goes to prison for two years, three years, he‘s released, he‘s a sex offender. When he goes out, he rapes again, kidnaps another girl and makes her a hostage for so many years. Ganun kayo eh. Admit it, ganun kayo. You are so too lenient about this son of a b****, a human being that has a virulent brain and his enemy is society.

And many at times, there were sex offenders in America released only to rape and kidnap again and kill in just a few months after release. In the Philippines, it is really an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. You took a life then you must pay for life. That is the only way to even. You cannot place a premium on the human mind that he will go straight. Nobody can. Not even your best scientist. No one has ever fathomed how a person would react especially in committing crimes. That‘s the only way to do it to instill fear, that if you do it, you will die. That‘s the advantage of criminals and rebels and terrorists because they think that you are afraid to die.

That‘s why when I went to Marawi, I was asked by the media, ―Why are you here?ǁ ―I am here because my soldiers are here and I came here to die also.ǁ  Because any battle, any fierce encounter, you have to be of equal equanimity. Gusto siyang mamatay, eh ̳di gusto ko ring mamatay.

They say that they use the name of God, and the Christians say, ―we have the same thing.ǁ I read the Ecclesiastes 3. What does it say? Even during elections, there is a time to be great and a time for defeat. A time to be in the skies, emblazoned there and a time to be [inaudible] somebody. A time to have money, a time to be hard up. A time to just walk so many kilometers

to school and a time for graduation and being a lawyer. A time to be… I don‘t know what I am now. There ̳s always a time. [laughter and applause]

That’s how it is. So I’ll match you. If you say, “I want to die.” Son of a… We’re two. This bully, you know I had dinner with them in Bayan. This NDF because I used to be friends really with the NDF. I was crossing the ideological borders before. I was the one who could enter their territory and we were friends really. But times have changed because God placed me here and I take care of a Republic. They say there I’m a bully. T******* you, I really am a bully. [laughter and applause] P***** i**. I really am a bully especially to the enemies of the state, I really am a bully.

Furthermore, I told the soldiers, regarding human rights, you are flying everywhere, anywhere your minds go. I said, ―Take no prisoners.ǁ Which is [garbled] — ―kill themǁ. Which is correct? But you don‘t listen to my speech. This media — especially this ABS — they will just take that, ―kill them.ǁ

That is your problem, that’s why I cursed at you. No President curses you because you are not behaving. Now you’re asking me for talks… [applause and cheers] When you publish in the newspaper or quote us in media, these reporters would only quote ―kill them.ǁ

I said, ―Kill them in a fight. If you have to shoot them, shoot them at the heart or the head.ǁ I said. Why? Because they will be detained here in Marawi, we don't have prisons. now, and the courts will always insist that they will be — that’s the law — that they will be tried and detained in the place where they committed the crime. So don't you — really kill them, because we’ll put them in our barracks there, in our Mechanized Division. If they escape, we’ll bring our cannons and fire on ourselves. Many. How many jail — [what’s the term?] — jailbreaks in Mindanao, in Cotabato alone? Six.

Cotabato City, four. The jail there is raided and they are released.

Alam ba ninyo ̳yan? Because you do not publish. Or itong mga taga-Maynila… Hindi kayo, mga bright kayo, bilib ako. Mga g****g****. Sabi na ―Why do you…?ǁ Why? What happened last April in Davao? It was bombed. How many were killed? Twenty-seven. Few years ago, the church was bombed twice. How many died? Fifty-nine. The airport just as the people were coming out of the departure — ah arrival — it was bombed. How many died? Thirty-two. In the war, three nuns were lining up there. I had to scoop the brain of the nun to put it in a can because the face was shattered. Zamboanga. And you say that the violation is only in Marawi? Torpe. Talaga kayong… Mag-usap tayo ngayon. Dalhin ko kayo doon sa mga biyuda. Kailan lang ̳yun?

Don't say that ―It's only in Marawi.ǁ Rebellion has been going on in Mindanao. It spares no one there. You just don't read it thoroughly. What’s the… It’s very porous. If they were separate islands, maybe. If they were separate — very porous, they can go… And Mindanao – — this is not to… The Moro has nothing to do with it, we are the same. We are both Maranao, so just shut up. Don't you… This is the truth.

There are many Muslims in Mindanao. All… There are even in Abra. In this fight… Well, where do you think the Moro would side? If it’s a killing spree. Will they side with the government? If I were there now, if I were living there, my mother didn’t take me out. I’ll be a resident of Marawi, what do you think will be my sentiment? Sulu. Davao, those are all Muslim enclaves, there are enclaves, like small villages. When sentiment erupts, it will erupt all at once.

On another thing, I’ll talk about it in the conference. The Left has gone too far. You build a house — they steal it. I told the soldiers, ―Do not force the issue. I will just build yours. Just give it up.ǁ

There’s a project now, and they want to take it again. Do not commit that mistake. Here and now, I will tell you, including the Congress of the Republic of the Philippines: You do anarchy, I will order the soldiers and the police to shoot. Even if I have to bury a thousand Filipinos. Don't do that to me.

Either you‘re… Either… Let us understand this beginning today, either we have laws in this country or we do not. We enforce the laws against the miners and the rich, but I will also enforce laws against anarchy, disturbance, and create trouble. Kayo rin, natatakot din eh.

You try to scare me into letting you occupy the streets? Son of a gambler. You stay there, you ask for two days, I will give you six months. Don't leave there. Eat even your own waste there.

You threaten the government. I’m sorry I’ve exceeded my time, but… Well, I need to say it. So they can understand too. I'm here with the media anyway. Everyone is listening. You, those on the Left, I will not talk to you. Why should I? Don't force me to build things for the pro-poor, shut up. Wait for two years, because I have…

You know, this is my proposal. I may be totally wrong and I will accept it, but this is mine. From now on, I will save money for the Armed Forces of the Philippines. We have lost so many soldiers. And there are thousands already incapacitated to fight. Even my police, you ambush them every day. Even my convoy, because that's where I ride, they ambush it.

Even me – damn it. Damn it all, even me, they want to kill. Well, I'm far from there. But that was my convoy. I was just waiting there for… You know, they used a machine gun. It was armored though.

You congressmen, senators who don't want to – maybe you have enemies. Is your wife the one living with you now? Or did you steal her? Get yourselves armored. Seriously. Proven, M60. Senator Drilon, M60, sir. This really can't be removed. Because they already blocked it. It just damaged the – they really didn't. And the soldiers inside were all there all the time, being machine-gunned, it wouldn't penetrate.

You damn people, ambush even my convoy. They don't know I've already escaped. That's why you want to talk to me, no, you've gone too far. You, Sison, you… Drink Tang orange. You're old. You, the Philippines, listen, the entire Philippines. You young people, you Lumad natives, these old people, Sison is sick. He has colon cancer. The

cost in Norway, he surrendered. Because it became a political issue. This government who sponsored those – who provided the good offices. They will lose the election because of that issue. Because these b****s keep going back and forth, like they're tourists. Nothing is being discussed.

When they come here, they want this, they want that, oh son of a b****. Don't tell the visitors the meaning of that. Am I already exhausted? What am I really, sir. Too demanding, you haven't even won an election once. You cannot even hang on into a

barangay. And you keep on killing people, not just the police, but also the civilians who don't want to join them.

So I said what – I really said, “You’re crazy.” And I really said it. Pardon me for… I really cursed him the other day in Davao. Who are you trying to scare? You are already old. And all of us will die. You who are left there on the streets, it’s better for you to go home. You won’t get anything from the communists.

Do you think that if the ISIS prevails in this country that you will have a place in their society? You must be awfully stupid, as stupid. You won’t get anything. We will all suffer. Thank you for allowing the exhaust here.

In our sustained effort to achieve just and lasting peace[laughter and applause]… Class, be courteous. Do not make a noise. The visitors are listening.  Just and lasting peace for a [unified] nation, we are pursuing an inclusive peace process, promoting the participation of all stakeholders, including those conflict-affected areas.

We took steps to promote inclusiveness in the Bangsamoro Transition Commission (BTC) by expanding its membership through Executive Order Number 8 which I signed in November last year.

By giving representation to indigenous peoples, women, children, and sultanates, and key stakeholders in the drafting of the Bangsa[moro] Basic Law, we ensure a Bangsamoro government that truly reflects the aspirations of our Muslim brothers and sisters as well as our indigenous brethren.

We have embarked on various initiatives to advance our national interest in the global community. We pursue good relations with all nations anchored on an independent — on an independent foreign policy  — and the basic tenets of sovereign equality, mutual respect and non-interference.

As an independent nation, we will uphold and promote our national interests in the international community. We will strengthen and seek partnership with those who share our values. We will engage nations with full respect for the rule of law, sovereign equality, and again, non- interference. These are the principles that we are upholding as we advance to this year for the meeting as the Chair of the ASEAN.

We have cultivated warmer relations with China through bilateral dialogues and other mechanisms, leading to easing of tensions between the two countries and improved negotiating environment on the West Philippine Sea.

At this point, allow me to take a step back in time, in 1901. In 1901, there was known as Balangiga, and that is Eastern Samar. It was the time for Philippine-American War.

A combined group of Filipino villagers and guerrillas, in an effort to defend Samar Island from the alien invaders, attacked and overwhelmed a U.S. — a United States infantry garrison. Forty- eight American officers and men were slain in the attack. On the Filipino side, the casualty count was twenty-eight killed and twenty-two wounded.

In retaliation, U.S. gunboats and patrols were sent to Balangiga, Samar with the order to ―…make a desert of Balangigaǁ and to reduce Samar Island into an island of ―howling wilderness,ǁ where every male citizen from the age of ten and above, and capable of bearing arms, would be put to death. The Church bells of Balangiga were seized by the Americans as spoils of war.

Those bells are reminders of the gallantry and heroism of our forebears who resisted the American colonizers and sacrificed their lives in the process. Krag against bolo — krag was the standard rifle issued to the American troops. And that is how the historians describe.

[You went first, go down. No, go down, it goes up.] It’s really difficult if you’re a director, you’re the one giving the speech. Many historians describe – [okay] the Philippine-American war. That is why I say today; give us back those Balangiga bells. They are ours. They belong to the Philippines. They are part of our national heritage. Please return them. It hurts us.

We now talk about our Overseas Filipinos. They are our heroes. They and their families have sacrificed much to the — for the country. We all know how a large part of our economic — economy comes from their remittances. That is why to ensure that their rights are protected, I ordered the increase of our assistance to the OFW from 400 million pesos to more than 1 billion.

We have been hard at work in securing the rights and welfare of our OFWs.

A year ago, I also warned government officials and employees that I will never tolerate corruption in my administration, not even a whiff of it. Let the dismissal of several high-ranking officials — whom I myself appointed — serve as a warning to all that I will never back down on my commitment to cleanse this government and corporation.

In order to bring government services closer to the people, we established hotlines [and] government centers that receive public concerns, one of which is the Hotline 911, which allowed us to receive and immediately respond to emergencies.

We also launched Hot — launched Hotline 8888, the Citizen‘s Complaint Hotline. This is a public hotline facility that receives feedbacks or concerns on government services.

Since we launched this hotline, we have received numerous complaints from the public on government — slow government processing, unclear or changing procedures and requirements, centralized issuances of clearances and permits in Metro Manila and discourteous government employees, among others.

That’s how it is. Time and again, the – the transaction of ordinary – no, the ordinary people who contract business in government. In the last ASEAN Ministerial Conference, I don’t know why Malacañang has to – my office has to do some work for – or the others, like these barongs. It’s always the – that outfit takes care of the attires that will be given to the ministerials, this time, to the heads of state.

You know, I’d like to address this myself to government. That payment, you make people go back and forth. I know… I know that because I’ve been mayor for 23 years, I never allowed it in my city.

But here, you know those tailors there in Parañaque up to Cavite – those tailoring shops – their business only involves boy scout [uniforms], teachers’ uniforms, girl scouts, they chase after those contracts.

And they are just the — the stores that you find along the way until Cavite. They group together during times of ganito, may ASEAN. And they look for a person to represent them.

This is not — no offense intended but — usually, they look for beautiful women, young, who would do the talking, arrangement. You know, because it‘s the… Well, it‘s the reality of life, that the beautiful women get the attention always.

Tapos, ̳pag na-deliver na nila, nasukatan na, pabalik-balikin ninyo. And right there in Malacañan, it happened. So, I will fire the lady, whoever was connected with her, as I have fired everybody else. A Cabinet member for buying an 18-million truck in Austria. That was not our contract. It was a contract of the previous administration. Fourteen of those 18 million were already delivered.

This Cabinet member was… I was informed about and I said the legal — his legal office — to stop it. You know what? He went just right ahead, traveled there, signed something for the — another tranche of delivery. So right there at the meeting — right in the Cabinet meeting I said, ―Were you able to read the opinion of your law — your own law office?ǁ He said, ―No.ǁ But Sonny Dominguez was already passing to me the — ̳yung sa iPhone. So I was reading it while I was talking to him. Sabi ko, ―P***** i** mo, you‘re fired. You‘re lying.ǁ And so I fired him, ―Go out of this office. I do not want to see your face again.ǁ Ganon ako ka-istrikto.

So ̳yung — the Cabinet members — and they are here — they‘re only given, noon, one year, two years — one month. The directors, makinig kayo sa gobyerno, bantay kayo. Directors, you‘re only given 15 days. And I do not want directors out of their office, you eat your lunch there, lahat kayong taga-gobyerno, so that you can resume to work immediately.

Now, this is my deal with the public. There is the 8888. I cannot stop corruption and wrongdoings if you do not cooperate. You text me. It’s free – 8888. You name the public official, name his sins in that bulletin, and I will take it from there. Do not be afraid about libel, I will take care of that.

That is your task. I have to have your help. Because if you don't do anything, there's nothing we can do. Everything. Police, military, everything, even me. If you think that I have done something wrong, tell me. Do not be afraid.

We are all workers of government, kayo ̳yung employer namin.  We get the money from your pocket to our pockets. Kami — kailan pa… Since when have you heard me talk about government and officials? I always address everybody, ―workers of government.ǁ

I seldom mention ―Malacañan Palaceǁ. It is not a palace, it is just a house of wood. So, why should I call it a palace? Maybe something like the European-style. I just call it office. Palace, palace ka diyan eh.  And besides, all the rats of Pasig are there.

It’s just beside Pasig River. So all the rats there, from everywhere, land there. It has a wild field, and they are not killed because they are Presidential mice.

That's what he said—that soldier. “Sir, they say you shouldn't shoot the Presidential mice.” Damn it, it's better to be a mouse here because they aren't killed, but you slaughter people.

The people‘s patience is wearing thin, so is mine.

I am reiterating my directive to all government agencies [with] frontline services to our people — from womb to tomb — to further streamline their respective services to make these truly efficient and people-friendly.

We want to ensure that our people receive the quality services that they surely deserve minus the delays by the bureaucratic red tape. I expect speedy reforms along this line.

We‘ll rightsize the national government. Let us trim the excess fat and add more muscle through the expeditious passage of ―The Act Rightsizing the National Government to Improve Public Service Institute.ǁ

I therefore urge Congress to pass this at the soonest.

For the Government Owned and Controlled Corporations — isa pa kayo — the implementation of the existing Salary Standardization Law pending review in the Compensation and Position Classification System. Excessive, extravagant, and unconscionable salaries and allowances, incentives, benefits and bonuses across the Government Owned or Controlled Corporations at this time, in crisis.

You‘ll have to pass by my office and I am not inclined to increase your allowances, bonuses, and salaries at this time. Wala ̳yan.

You cannot do it on your own. You have to direct it to the Executive Secretary. And I‘ll just tell you, I am not inclined to give increases right now. Maybe seven years from now, when Drilon makes it to the presidency.

I also appeal to the Supreme Court to seriously consider the national interest and our development goals before issuing TROs and injunctions on critical government projects and cases involving government assets.

I am just a co-worker also, ladies and gentlemen. May I be allowed to be also just as frank? Tutal wala naman akong ina-ano, eh. I do not need to offend you.

But I cite, for example, the Supreme Court TRO that prevents the Department of Health from distributing subdermal implants, which caused a wastage of P350-million worth of taxpayers‘ money. I also note that since its issuance two years ago, this TRO has impaired the government‘s ability to fully implement responsible planning — family planning methods in the RH Law.

It is time that we put an end to the practice of some parties of resorting to technicalities in our laws to prevent the government from fulfilling its mandate.

Ganito ̳yan, ma‘am, eh. Tutal, this is as good as any other time to talk to you. And may I be understood by you — I am sorry to say this, really, I am — I do not intend to do it. But if we have

to talk about government and our sins, which I am not an exception, all our—you know—delays, we all make mistakes.

That's how it is, two things. I really don't have any time left. I’ll just stay… I don’t know if I can make another SONA again in the future. It’s—it’s not for me to tell.

This TRO has been the bane of projects. And even Consunji, those Ayalas, they are fighting. Just to make you understand that you are not alone. Then, that TRO would delay the projects. Now God—and I’m asking Congress, find me a law that if there was a bidding and it was regular, the court or somebody else should not be messing it up.

Because it can delay the projects, which has been the case in the provinces. You know, they file a case—either it is really the truth and the COA will find out or he wants a share—“I will withdraw the case and dissolve the TRO of course. But just give me a few—10 percent.”

That's the attitude of Filipinos. That's why that TRO is the bane of our efficiency, and I really do not know whether… I will not attribute anything, ma'am, to the Supreme Court.

Maybe I am at fault so I am sorry if I misquote or I did not have the complete facts. But itong Congress na ito passed the Reproduction Law. It was already a law na dapat i-implement because we are really going into a family planning. I am not for abortion. I am not for birth control. But certainly, I am for the giving of the freedom to a Filipino family the size ng pamilya niya.

How many children would he be able to support and send to school? What happened with this TRO, sir, ma‘am, someone filed it with you—the Supreme Court—and then you issued a TRO two years ago. In the meantime, the—the government bought medicine—this subdermal and these pills worth 360. It was not really a reckless purchase. It was in preparation for the implementation of the law.

Hindi naman akalain na mag-TRO and it has been two years. The medicines will expire next month. I told Ubial, the Health Secretary, to find out if there is a nation who — which would allow it and i- donate na lang rather than go to waste.

That is what happened. I do not blame you. You might have been very busy or something. Nothing. I, I’m just… I am below you, actually. But I’m just saying. There’s one more.

Don't bother with this speech, it's worthless, you won't get anything from it. The bane—there’s another—the Congress and us in the government, including the judges and justices, should understand that by this time, the lowest bid, that’s what promotes graft and corruption in our country.

COA, you are here. Just know that I have a violation. In the military, I do not allow them to bid and just to buy the weapons from everywhere, because almost all countries are making arms. They call it, small arms industry. We’re just fighting a rebellion. True, we do not need the armaments.

But there in Marawi, you have to hit hard because they are prepositioned inside buildings. And until now, we cannot proceed fast because there are 300 hostages. I said, “Do not assault. If necessary, we’ll just have to wait. Wait it out.”

But we have to give food. You do not — I do not care if they are Moro or Christians. It‘s not… We do not have that luxury. Kasi ̳pag — there is a distinct possibility that we attack, they will just behead everybody.

So, find a way to do it. If you cannot find a way to do it then just I said, “Wait it out.” They were the ones who lasted. They might say that the soldiers don't know what they're doing. I’m the one who’s stopping them. Initially, I said bombs. “But sir, it really can’t be delivered, sir.” Every window is occupied, the high-rise. And we were losing because of the snipers. And in there, they hurry, I said, “Slow down.”

When I was — hindi ako nagyayabang — when I was in the camp sa Ranao, while I was briefing — I was being briefed by the military and was giving the instructions, I heard about 16 pumutok at tsaka ̳yung bala na, ―Weng, weng, weng!ǁ Iyong mga reporter nandoon sa likod ng stage kasi semento ̳yun eh. We will ano… Sabi ko, ―If this is how we should wait, then we‘ll wait. Unless you can find a solution — somebody here who has a good, even a horse sense to negotiate for the release of…ǁ

Here’s another one. I’ll go back to the lowest bid. You know how it is, right? Those who submit the lowest bid are those without money. Those who submit the lowest bid will say to them, “I will give you something.” To all sorts of officials. So, the lowest bidder will win. So, with no capital, he will give money. Then give, give to everyone—connected—everyone. After that, if it is a 100-million project, he has to pay so many guys, what’s left to him is 100—out of the 100, only 40 million, so that is the cost of the project.

So, when I was campaigning for the Presidency, I was all over the Philippines. My God, I could see a — the appropriation, pero ang airport nila, three meters long. So ginawa na lang basketball court.

And there is a province here. Not you. If you look into the records back in time, all the roads there are complex. Really roads here, roads there. But when you go there, it’s only one road. It’s only one highway. That is how corruption destroys the nation.

Now, last. I have to say this. I need to say it, sir. I was elected June 30, I took my oath. So, in July I went to Davao — to the AFP Medical Center. Have I told you this already, not yet? Then I said — it’s quite familiar, because I signed a letter when I was mayor. I said, “Do you have an MRI?” They said, “None, sir.” I said, “Do you have a state-of-the-art X-ray?” They said, “None, sir.” I said, “Do you have a hyperbaric chamber?” That’s the chamber where you are placed inside if you suffer the bends, when you deep dive. But it is also high-pressured that can arrest gangrene, especially those who are extracted from the field of battle about two days later, gangrene sets in. So, they are placed there. And it can work miracles for a wounded soldier. So, in one sitting, you did this…

Then, I saw the building and I went inside. Iyong drainage nila, bumabalik. So I said, ―You know, I am really surprised. You‘re military men, why would you allow that kind of…ǁ The dirt is going back to… How do you expect the sailors to — the soldiers to get well?

Tapos, that‘s the only building. The old — the oldest. I said, ―Okay, you rehabilitate it. I‘ll give you a new one in the meantime.ǁ But last month I went to the back of my office, doon sa barracks ng Presidential guards. So, we were groundbreaking for the hospitals of the soldiers. And I asked the soldiers who were there also from V. Luna, ―Are you now using the equipment?ǁ

You know what they answered to me, “Sir, let’s just talk amongst ourselves, don’t mention them. T**** i**, it’s not yet here. It hasn’t been delivered.” Ugh.

Sinabi ko, ―If this is the way how you treat our soldiers and they are dying now and that machine was ordered a year ago, and then a coup d‘état, a mutiny is not a surprise to me.ǁ

So I told Ubial, it’s not her fault, it’s because of the procurement. But that’s how it is… Is Secretary Ubial here? Are you here Secretary? Change the procedure because I will change you.

They will really stage a coup d’état. Many… We are losing about… By this time there are, every – — everyday we lose about 10? Everyday. Sometimes I say it’s a useless war. There is a rebellion. I said even if I were your soldier and there was a machine already ordered that could have saved my leg, and there’s nothing, ma’am, oh p**** i**, I will stage a coup d’état.

And let us get the machine by ourselves. I will not be surprised if it‘s already in their minds. Ako, I am only be too willing to step down.

But as a long-term solution, I urge Congress to thoroughly review our existing procurement laws and come up with legislation that will ensure the prompt delivery of quality goods and services to the people, especially medicines and hospital equipment.  Kasi itong military ang sabi ko do not mind COA about I will answer for that. Since COA is here I limit it to three places where the military can buy the equipment. Because I‘m sure that we will work and they can kill the enemies and make even our forces stronger or in parity with what they have on the other side.

I said don’t follow that regarding these arms. I will explain to COA why. Don’t make me buy from those places in South America and all those in mid-European — Eastern European countries are also… There are good ones but I limited them to — especially equipment for listening because if you buy from others, they also listen, and you’re all listening together. Three of you are communicating. In Bisaya, it’s called “brin.”

Our laws should support, and not impede, national development in a speedy and sustainable manner.

In our bid to accelerate human capital development, we seek to ensure lifelong opportunities by enhancing the quality of and access to education and training programs.

We have sustained investments in higher education and committed to the full implementation of the K to 12 Basic Education Program. We have widened the reach of skills training and increased the number of out-of-school children and youth who have availed of the Alternative Learning System.

To ensure that Filipinos are given equitable access to quality and affordable health services, we expanded health insurance coverage and benefits. The destitute and the indigents, or those who just could not afford hospitalization, can now be provided with free services by government- operated, public hospitals as we have strengthened the implementation of the No Balance Billing Policy. You Filipinos who are listening to me now, get yourselves hospitalized, I will pay for it, they can’t sue me anyway. Just go there, occupy the hospital, just say — true ————————- go to the hospital and say that Mayor

Duterte said we will get treated and he will take care of the payment. We have many treasurers here. [Ah, never mind, it’s different with those at the top.]

I have signed Executive Order No. 26 imposing a ban on smoking in public places to mitigate its consequences.  We want to minimize access to tobacco products, and provide a more supportive environment for those who are attempting to quit tobacco use.

Alam mo bakit? Tinamaan ako ng … ̳Di ba ito, I have been very frank with you. I have a Barrett and I have a Buerger‘s disease, caused by smoking. So ang problema niyan — in a survey in the Philippines and all over the world, why is it that the women force — workforce in an office and the men have acquired in equal, almost in parity in numbers sick of cancer.

And it was found out because the poor girl has also to — inhale your smoke. Kaya [inaudible] ko sa Davao… In Davao you cannot see a person there walking with a cigarette. Foreigners, they are very – — they can argue with you, say that, ―This is my money not your money.ǁ Sabi ko, ―Then, okay. Eat your money or I will shoot your b****.ǁ

Investing in the health sector is never a cost to be endured but an opportunity to be explored.

If we are to embrace the vision of a prosperous Philippines, we have to start putting value to our people‘s well-being – because the success of every Filipino‘s pursuit in life, liberty and happiness directly mirrors the fulfilment of our aspirations as a Filipino.

I would like to reiterate my personal and this administration‘s commitment to fully implement the Magna Carta of Women to the barangay level tapos na ito.  To this effect, an executive order will be issued to local government units institutionalizing gender and development programs and services.

We are targeting to increase Government spending on infrastructure from 5 percent of GDP in 2017 to 7 percent of GDP by 2022, amounting to a total of 8 to 9 trillion pesos or 160  to 180 billion dollars in infrastructure projects. We will make the next few years the ―Golden Age of Infrastructureǁ in the Philippines to enhance our mobility and connectivity, and thereby spur equitable growth and development in the country. In other words, we are going to Build, Build and Build.

To improve our sea connectivity, we launched 15 brand new RORO vessels to ply major nautical routes all over the country. We also opened an ASEAN Ro-Ro Shipping Route connecting the ports of Davao and General Santos, Philippines to Bitung, Indonesia.

To address the congestion in our sea ports, we modernized the Ports of Iloilo, General Santos and Cagayan de Oro and Zamboanga. We shall complete strategic road and bridge projects and some of the road sections shall be widened and improved to address the worsening traffic.

Alam mo si Ma‘am Grace, you are pushing for… You know, when I became President, EDSA was already horrendous as it was a horror of the other administrations.

Now, I brought in Tugade because Tugade to me is a bright boy. He‘s a billionaire. He was my classmate. Ewan ko kung nandito siya. He was our valedictorian in the law class. Talagang mahusay.

But we needed money and we tried to get your help to raise money. You didn’t want to give it. So, EDSA is still there until now. It’s okay, at least we’ll leave something ugly. We will not make it all smooth in the Philippines. We leave a little alley known as EDSA as the road to perdition.

But anyway since I could not get any funding. I traveled to China and make friends with them, and the ambassador is here, Ambassador Zhao, thank you for the help. And as a matter of fact  willing… He said, ―If your Congress has no money, we will give you the money.ǁ And China has committed to build two bridges to span Pasig River, free of charge.  So that you will be comfortable in crossing Pasig.

Anyway, all of these strategic road and transport projects shall go to naught if we cannot free our streets, which continue to be obstructed by illegally parked vehicles, ̳yang EDSA na ̳yan traffic obstructionists or undisciplined drivers who stop in the middle of the road, and unsanctioned barriers in some areas.

I am directing the MMDA and the LGUs of Metro Manila, as well as the LGUs of Metro Cebu and of all our regional centers, to ensure the free flow of traffic, and immediately clear our roads and thoroughfares of all unnecessary obstruction, including vehicles parked on the streets and barriers —  [not] sanctioned by the Government, and penalize all traffic obstructionists regardless of stature…

Sometimes don't mind that because the police, it’s a Cabinet member. But may I have not – — authorized my Cabinet member to utilize the low plate. Is it not for us to, you just use an ordinary plate, so that people won't say anything. I do not want you parking there when there‘s no parking. Please remove…

Airports, we are building new airports. We might get some money also from China and will have new airports in the coming days.

We are now accelerating the implementation of the Communications, Navigation, Surveillance and Air Traffic Management System project, which will result to on-time arrivals and departures, better managed air traffic, reduced flight operating costs, and safer and more convenient travel experience.

Revenues are the lifeblood of the government, which enable us to provide for the people‘s needs.

Last May 31, 2017, we achieved the first step towards more equitable taxes to fund better services for the people. I commend the House of Representatives  for heeding my urgent certification of the tax reform by passing the first of five packages of the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program with an overwhelming 246 votes, representing almost [90] percent of the Filipino people.

The fate of the tax reform is now in the hands of the Senate. Ano bang gustong ninyong gawain, mag-luhod ako niyan? Well, really I‘ll leave it up to you. We are all Filipinos. If you think that‘s a waste, fine. If you think it‘s not good, it‘s okay with me. I can survive.

[Next] I call on the Senate to support my tax reform in full and to pass it without haste. They don't want to clap—ah, even so-and-so isn't, they are not clapping. Angara also doesn't want to clap. Just watch him during the election.

These reforms are designed to be pro-poor, especially when the people understand how the revenues will be spent.

The passage of the Tax Reform Law is needed to fund the proposed 2018 budget which I am submitting here and today.

The poor and vulnerable  are at the heart of my tax reform. Your full support will ensure that the benefits of the tax reform can be felt immediately by them.

In the meantime, the Department of Finance and Bureau of Internal Revenue are strengthening and running after tax evaders.

I have directed the Department of Finance and the BIR to accept Mighty Corporation‘s offer of P25 billion to settle its tax liabilities.  After the settlement, Mighty will no longer engage in the tobacco business.

This will be the biggest tax settlement on record.  It will produce a windfall for government, which is significant, since we face the unexpected costs of rebuilding Marawi and Ormoc.

The acceptance of the tax settlement offer does not preclude other criminal charges against the company that the BIR may decide to file. A settlement will allow government to avoid a long [court] battle that, as we saw in previous cases, could take years to resolve.

Let this be a lesson to others. This administration will spare no one found cheating the government of its due.

We view Information and Communications Technology or ICT as an effective medium to implement positive and meaningful changes in our society.

To this end, my Cabinet approved the National Broadband Plan of 2017 to begin the work of bringing affordable Internet access to every community and improving broadband connectivity in the country.

We have also installed free Wi-Fi Internet in almost 400 public places around the country.  We hope that the public will use them to access important information and services.

The National Government Portal, which we launched recently, will allow faster and easier delivery of public services and reduce the number of visits of the public to agencies for government transactions.

The Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting Migration Plan has also been launched. The switch to digital from analog transmission will not only give a better TV viewing experience but also provide effective and reliable information to Filipinos in times of calamities.

The government-owned Salaam Digital TV, the first Muslim TV in the Philippines, is now already on test broadcasting.

There are some of the things we have done for the past twelve months. A more detailed narrative is contained in my Report to the People, will be released soon. Whether or not my first year of administration was a year of gains or a year of setbacks is not for me to say but for the people to judge. I defer to the people‘s judgment .

My fellow citizens, much remains to be done. Corruption persists like a fishbone stuck in the throat. It pains and it is disconcerting. We need to pry corruption from the government corpus [where it] is deeply embedded. We also need to put an end to squabbles and bickerings within agencies [and] focus fully on the speedy provision of quality public services to our people.

Believe me, it is easier to build from scratch than to dismantle the rotten and rebuild upon its rubble.

Nevertheless, let us work together and lay a new foundation upon which a better Philippines can be reconstructed. Help me build a better tomorrow.

Let me end… Do you want us to go home now? Or do you want a story? I still have many stories to tell you.

Let me end by wishing everyone in the language of the old: ―May God keep us forever sheltered in the hollow of His hand.ǁ

Salamat.  — END —