H. No. 1222

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 143]

AN ACT APPROPRIATING TWENTY-FIVE MILLION PESOS FOR PUBLIC WORKS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary, are appropriated out of the General Funds, in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to be at the disposal of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications and subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth, for the purposes mentioned hereunder:

A. MISCELLANEOUS

For the investigation, survey, construction, repair, improvement, extension, and completion of public works projects, including the purchase of school sites in provinces, chartered cities, and municipalities, to be distributed among the Representative Districts

P12,500,000.00

B. PUBLIC BUILDINGS

For the maintenance, alteration, reconstruction and repair of national public buildings and monuments, including necessary repairs and alterations of private buildings and lots rented by the National Government, and upkeep of adjacent grounds, and of the mausoleum of Filipino heroes and martyrs at the “Cementerio del Norte” of the City of Manila, in an amount not to exceed P200, including the purchase of necessary supplies, materials and equipment

3,700,000.00

C. HIGHWAYS

500,000.00

D. SANITATION

E. FLOOD CONTROL AND DRAINAGE

For the investigation, survey, construction, reconstruction, repair and improvement of river control and drainage works, including the purchase of necessary supplies, materials, and equipment

600,000.00

F. IRRIGATION

800,000.00

G. INVESTIGATIONS AND SURVEYS

H. AIRFIELDS

SEC. 2. The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary, are hereby appropriated out of the “Port Works Fund” under Act Numbered Three thousand and ninety-two, as amended by Commonwealth Act Numbered One hundred and thirty, not otherwise appropriated, to be at the disposal of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, and subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth, for the purposes mentioned hereunder:

SEC. 3. No amount appropriated in this Act shall be set up in the books of the General Auditing Office or otherwise made available for expenditure unless previously authorized by the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 4. The President of the Philippines is authorized to suspend or otherwise stop the expenditures of any amount herein appropriated for any purpose, or any portion thereof, whenever in his opinion the public interest so requires, or when funds shall not be available for the purpose, and thereupon the funds affected by such action shall become available for any other public works expenditure authorized herein as the President may determine.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved, June 14, 1947.

Source : Supreme Court Library