MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 96

CREATING PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT’S POLIOMYELITIS COMMITTEE

Whereas every January of each year, since nineteen hundred and thirty-five, the celebration of President Roosevelt’s Birthday Ball is held in the Philippines for the purpose of raising funds to control and combat infantile paralysis; and

Whereas, in accordance with the regulations, recently amended, of the National Committee in the United States governing the use of the funds collected in these balls, fifty per cent of the proceeds goes to the National Committee in the United States for research work in poliomyelitis and fifty per cent is retained in the Philippines;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a committee to be known as President Roosevelt’s Poliomyelitis Committee, for the purpose of handling the funds realized from the holding of such balls. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

Director of Health, Chairman.

Director of Public Welfare, member.

Executive Secretary of the Associated Charities of the Philippines, member. Medical Officer in Charge of Poliomyelitis Work, in the Bureau of Health, Secretary.

This Committee shall decide the manner in which the fund retained in the Philippines shall be expended and shall report to the President of the Philippines at least once a year the details of such expenditures. The funds from the proceeds of the President Roosevelt’s Birthday Ball now deposited with the Philippine National Bank under the name of the Commissioner of Health and Welfare shall be turned over to this Committee.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirtieth day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Administrative Order No. 96. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 1311.