MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 28

ORDERING THAT SIX MONTHS OF THE SUSPENSION BEING UNDERGONE BY GOVERNOR FELIPE L. RAMOS OF ZAMBOANGA BE WITHOUT PAY, AND RESTORING HIM TO DUTY.

This is an administrative case against Governor Felipe L. Ramos of Zamboanga against whom a series of charges have been filed, the most serious ones of which being the following:

( a ) Trafficking or selling of office by entering into an understanding with deputy provincial warden Felixberto D. Jaldon whereby the brother of the respondent, Melecio Ramos, would receive a share in the salary of Jaldon as deputy provincial warden without rendering any service to the Government, and by requiring Jaldon on several occasions to pay him (respondent) part of his salary;

( b ) Extorting money from his subordinates and requesting loans from commercial firms and merchants with many of whom he had or has had official dealings; and

( c ) Using his office or taking advantage of his official position to hinder the administration of justice.

The findings of fact contained in the report of the special investigator of this case and confirmed after a later inquiry by the Honorable, the Secretary of the Interior, have been carefully reviewed and there is evidence that the above-enumerated charges have been, to some extent, substantiated. It has not been proven, however, that respondent governor has actively participated in this extortion, but he has thru his indifference I the discharge of his duties made possible the commission of these serious offenses.

In view of the foregoing and pursuant to the powers in me vested by law, I hereby order, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior as a punishment, that six months of the period of suspension at present being undergone by respondent governor shall be without pay with warning that any future misconduct on his part will subject him to separation from the service. Governor Ramos is hereby ordered restored to duty effective immediately.

Done at the City of Manila, this tenth day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 28. Messages of the President, 2 (1), 956.