MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 26

REMOVING JUSTICE OF THE PEACE CRISPIN LABARIA OF OROQUIETA, MISAMIS OCCIDENT, FROM OFFICE

The report of investigation in the administrative case against Justice of the Peace Crispin Labaria of Oroquieta, Misamis Occidental, discloses the fact that the respondent was found guilty of abuse of authority, partiality, and falsification of public document.

The evidence is conclusive that respondent justice of the peace has made use of his office to wreak vengeance upon a certain person with whom his family had had a controversy of a personal nature. That he has ordered the arrest of the person in question late during business hours of a Saturday, at another time just before Christmas day to cause unnecessary annoyance and hardship on complainant who could not, on such short notice, furnish bond for his release. That the grounds for such arrest did not seem justifiable. That he tried a case which because of his personal interest therein, respondent should have inhibited himself from trying. That he changed the dates on a public document to serve his own questionable designs. All of these acts make respondent’s continuance in office highly undesirable.

In view of the foregoing, and considering the danger of entrusting the administration of justice to the hands of officials who abuse the power given them by law, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Justice, Crispin Labaria is hereby ordered dismissed from the office of justice of the peace of Oroquieta, Misamis Occidental, and, under the provisions of section two hundred twenty-nine of the Administrative Code, disqualified from holding any public office.

Done at the City of Manila, this second day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Administrative Order No. 26. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 954.