MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 13

RE CHARGES AGAINST DR. JACOBO FAJARDO, DIRECTOR OF HEALTH

The papers submitted to this Office and the verbal statements of the witnesses in connection therewith, having established prima facie that Dr. Jacobo Fajardo—

(1) In the case of the leper Antero Azaña has, through the improper use of his authority as Director of Health, permitted members of his family to obtain financial advantages from the said leper, including the sale of an insurance policy by his son, the indirect sale of jewelry by his wife, and the obtaining of contributions from said leper for newspaper subscriptions for the purpose of getting votes for his daughter in a newspaper popularity contest; and has furthermore received certain sums of money from the said leper in consideration of certain undue privileges granted by him as Director of Health;

(2) In case of Mrs. Evarista Vda. de Roque, has made improper use of his influence over the said party who is the widow of a former subordinate, for the purpose of inducing the latter to part with the retirement pay received by her upon the death of her husband by means of a loan given to a son of the respondent, without the said loan having been paid to this late date, and, instead, has compelled the said party to accept onerous conditions in the payment of said loan by himself; and

(3) In the case of the Health Officers’ Association has failed to account to this late date for the funds of said association turned over to him by the treasurer in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-seven, notwithstanding the fact that said association has long ceased to exist;

The Director of Civil Service is hereby ordered to conduct the immediate investigation of all these charges and to report to the President the results of said investigation.

The Director of Civil Service is hereby further ordered to investigate the charges contained in the communication of Dr. Jacobo Fajardo, Director of Health, addressed to the Secretary of Public Instruction, dated June eighteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and referred by the Secretary of Public Instruction to this Office on June twenty-third, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, said communication being attached to the record of the case. It should be noted that the request of Dr. Fajardo for investigation was made on June eighteenth, whereas, the investigation ordered by this Office was started on May sixteenth, and the report thereon, which served as basis for this Order, was submitted by the special investigator to this Office on June seventh, nineteen hundred and thirty-six.

In the interest of the public service, pending the conduct of said investigation, Dr. Jacobo Fajardo is hereby suspended from his position as Director of Health, effective immediately.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Administrative Order No. 13. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 934-935.