MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 54

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO SELECT SITES AND STUDY PLANS FOR THE PROPOSED ARCHIVES AND MUSEUM BUILDINGS AND THE TRANSFER OF THE AQUARIUM TO A NEW SITE.

In order to determine upon the advisability of constructing a building to house both the National Museum and Archives as contemplated by plans prepared by the Bureau of Public Works or separate buildings for those purposes and the advisability of transferring the Aquarium from its present location to Fort San Antonio de Abad in Harrison Park, there is hereby created and constituted a Committee to be composed of the following members:

(1) Mr. Arthur F. Fisher, Adviser to the President on Natural Resources, Chairman; (2) Mr. Eulogio B. Rodriguez, Assistant Director of the National Library, member; (3) Dr. H. Otley Beyer, Professor of Anthropology, University of the Philippines, member; (4) Dr. Eduardo Quisimbing, Chief of the National Museum Division, Bureau of Science, member; and (5) Mr. Antonio Toledo, Supervising Architect, Bureau of Public Works, member

The Committee shall study and submit its recommendations on the following propositions:

1. The advisability of housing the art and historical exhibits with the Archives as contemplated by preliminary plans prepared by the Bureau of Public Works for a building to be erected at Plaza McKinley, or of constructing separate buildings for the Archives and National Museum, and in the latter case, as to whether the building intended for the National Museum should house not only the art and historical exhibits but also the natural history exhibits which are now a part of the Bureau of Science.

2. In case it is found advisable to construct separate buildings for the National Museum and Archives, recommendations are desired as to whether the site which would utilize the old foundations in Plaza McKinley may be considered a suitable location for the proposed Archives Building, and as to whether it is considered necessary to construct such a building in the near future, taking into consideration that valuable records of the Government are now being stored in the Ice Plant Building which is a fire-proof structure.

3. The desirability of transferring the Aquarium from its present location to Fort San Antonio de Abad in Harrison Park with an estimate cost of such transfer.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and shall submit its report on the above matters at the earliest practicable date.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL.L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 54. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 1187-1188.