MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 141

PRESCRIBING REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE HANDLING OF RETIREMENT PAPERS AND DELIVERY OF WARRANTS COVERING THE PAYMENT OF RETIREMENT GRATUITIES

In order to protect the interests of persons retiring under existing Retirement Acts, I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, do hereby promulgate the following regulations governing the handling of retirement papers and warrants , covering the payments of retirement gratuities due persons under said Acts:

1. All officers and employees of the different branches, subdivisions, agencies, and instrumentalities of the Commonwealth Government are directed to assist in every possible way, any applicant for retirement who may solicit their aid in connection with the preparation and presentation of applications for retirement gratuities.

2. The offices or bureaus concerned shall not deal with persons who act in behalf of applicants for retirement gratuities. All papers regarding retirement shall be given preferential attention in order to avoid delay.

3. Persons applying for retirement gratuities shall be required to state their past services and the highest salary received by each.

4. No warrants covering the payment of gratuities or letters of assignment of gratuities to the bank shall be delivered to any person other than the retired employees or their heirs. In case of inability of the retired employees or their heirs to receive such warrants or letters of assignment in person, the same should be mailed without delay.

5. Documents and other papers relating to applications for retirement gratuities shall be considered confidential.

Done at the City of Manila, this 10th day June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1941). [Administrative Order Nos. : 117 – 168]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.