MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 14

SUSPENDING HONORABLE SEBASTIAN T. GENEROSO, PROVINCIAL GOVERNOR OF DAVAO, FOR ACTS OF MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE

The respondent governor is charged with ( a ) conduct unbecoming a public official in that he had been habitually appearing in public places and social functions under the influence of spirituous liquor, and regularly visiting in her room in the Awad Building one Nicolasa Eugenio, a bailarina who is reputed to be his mistress, during office hours and while the pupils of the Davao Institute were attending their classes in said building; ( b ) of meddling and unduly interfering in the assignments of members of the municipal police vice-squad of Davao despite the warning by the Department of the Interior not to do so, thus giving rise to suspicion that he is protecting gambling dens and prostitution houses in the municipality; ( c ) of unduly influencing, through threats, members of the municipal council of Davao to pass resolutions and ordinances according to his wishes; and ( d ) of improper use of the provincial government automobile by giving transportation to persons who are not entitled to official transportation.

A careful review of this record by the Secretary of the Interior leads him to the conclusion that the respondent governor is guilty of the above charges. The cases herein treated are serious enough to warrant Governor Generos’s removal from the service, especially when it is considered that some time ago, he had already been suspended from office as a result of a previous investigation against him. The extreme penalty of removal is not imposed in this instance because I am convinced that in the main, these faults were committed while the governor was under the influence of liquor. I am, therefore, concurring in the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior that the respondent governor be suspended from office immediately for a period of two months, with warning that any irregularity committed by him in the future will be sufficient ground for his removal from the service.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fifth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Administrative Order No. 14. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 936.