MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 9

APPOINTING AN EXPERIMENTAL STATION COMMITTEE

Whereas, the task of diversifying our agricultural production rests in a large measure upon the work of the experimental stations under the Department of Agriculture and Commerce and other similar entities;

Whereas, from first hand information received of the workings of some of these experimental stations it has been found that they are not accomplishing the desired results due to lack of funds; and

Whereas, it is far more desirable to have fewer stations that are properly run and doing efficient work than a large number of small ones each doing poor work because of lack of facilities;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby create an Experimental Station Committee to look into the workings of these stations and the related scientific and technical work of the Government and to report to me its findings and recommendations within a month from the date of this Order. This Committee shall be composed of the following:

Dr. Manuel L. Roxas, technical assistant in the Office of the President, Chairman; Dr. Vicente Aldaba, Bureau of Plant Industry, member; Dr. Nemesio Mendiola, College of Agriculture, U.P., member; Dr. Jose K. Santos, University of the Philippines, member; Mr. Luis J. Reyes, Bureau of Forestry, member; and Mr. Hilarion S. Silayan, Department of Labor, member. Dr. Patrocinio Valenzuela of the National Research Council shall act as secretary of this Committee.

All officials and employees of the departments, bureaus, and offices concerned and all others who may be consulted by this Committee are hereby enjoined to extend to the Committee their full coöperation.

Done at the City of Manila, this twelfth day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Administrative Order No. 9. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 929.