MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 55

REQUIRING THAT REQUESTS FOR AUTHORITY TO FILL NEW POSITIONS BE SUPPORTED BY DATA JUSTIFYING THE NECESSITY THEREFOR

In submitting recommendations for authority to fill new positions provided in the General Appropriation Act for nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, Commonwealth Act Numbered Two hundred forty-five, pursuant to the provision of section seven thereof, Heads of Departments and/or chiefs of unassigned Bureaus and offices are hereby required to furnish the Office of the President with the following data:

( a) Item number of the position, designation, salary authorized and salary proposed;

( b ) Proposed assignment of the employee to fill the position, stating division or section;

( c ) Nature of duties to be performed;

( d ) Whether the employee is needed for a newly established service or for meeting the requirements of an expanded activity;

( e ) Whether the new personnel is needed to eliminate excessive overtime service heretofore rendered, in which case the amount of overtime work performed during the last six months as shown in the official time records should be indicated;

( f ) Whether needed to take care of work that cannot now be attended to for lack of personnel;

( g) Whether the new position is needed to perform work that has heretofore been done by borrowed personnel, in which case full explanation should be given as to why such borrowed personnel cannot be definitely retained.

New positions requested to be filled must be given in the order of their preference or relative necessity.

All such requests should be coursed through the Commissioner of the Budget, who shall forward the same to the office of the President with his comment and recommendation.

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-seventh day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the third.

MANUEL.L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 55. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 1189.