MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 38

DISMISSING JUSTICE OF THE PEACE FELIX B. PANIS, OF TIGAON AND SAGNAY, CAMARINES SUR, FROM OFFICE

After a thorough and careful review of the report of investigation in the administrative case against Felix B. Panis, present Justice of the Peace of Tigaon and Sagnay, Camarines Sur, it appears that the respondent committed the following irregularities in the performance of his duties while he was justice of the peace of Goa, same province: (1) That the respondent convicted the accused in criminal cases numbers two thousand two hundred sixty-four and two thousand two hundred fifty-one which, being civil in nature, were later dismissed upon appeal to the Court of First Instance; (2) that in said criminal case number two thousand two hundred fifty-one and in criminal case number two thousand two hundred fifty-eight he imposed excessive penalty upon the accused; (3) that he failed to sign his decisions ordering the exclusion of the names of the several voters from the electoral census in Goa, Camarines Sur, during the election in September, nineteen hundred and thirty-five; and (4) that he dismissed the complaint for theft filed by one Sinforoso Avila against Faustino Elorde et al., without any legal ground for such dismissal.

In view of the foregoing and considering the danger of entrusting the administration of justice to the hands of officials who are ignorant of the elementary principles of law, and upon the recommendation of the Undersecretary of Justice, Felix B. Panis is hereby ordered dismissed from the office of Justice of the Peace of Tigaon and Sagnay, Camarines Sur,for the good of the service.

Done at the City of New York, U. S. A. (for the City of Manila), this fourteenth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 38. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 1162.