MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 6

AMENDING THE ORDER OF ISSUE OF METROPOLITAN WATER DISTRICT THIRTY-YEAR 5 PER CENT BONDS

Whereas, J. R. Hayden, former Acting Governor-General of the Philippine Islands, on the twenty-third day of February, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, in the name and on behalf of the Government of the Philippine Islands, issued an order authorizing the issue, pursuant to the provisions of Act Numbered Three thousand seven hundred eleven, of Insular bonds in the amount of two million five hundred thousand pesos for the purchase of equivalent par amount of bonds of the Metropolitan Water District for the purpose of obtaining funds for the completion of the extension of the water supply and sewerage systems of said district;

Whereas, said order of issue requires that the Insular bonds should bear the following dates:

And whereas, the Metropolitan Water District Board on the thirteenth day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, by Resolution Numbered Five, series of nineteen hundred and thirty-six, duly adopted, has requested the undersigned to authorize the postponement until November, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, of the sale of the third lot of the Metropolitan Water District bonds valued at five hundred thousand pesos scheduled to take place on May first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, which resolution was duly approved by the Secretary of Finance, pursuant to section five of Act Numbered Two thousand eight hundred thirty-two, as amended by Act Numbered Four thousand seventy-nine;

Now, therefore, pursuant to the provisions of Act Numbered Three thousand seven hundred eleven above mentioned, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, in the name and on behalf of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, hereby amend the order of issue of February twenty-third, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, so that the said Insular bonds, should bear the following dates:

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Administrative Order No. 6. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 925-926.