MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 16

DESIGNATING THE PLACE WHERE BIDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS SHALL BE FILED AND PRESCRIBING THE PROCEDURE FOR OPENING OF SEALED PROPOSALS

Whereas, the practice now followed of allowing contractors to submit bids either at the Manila Office of the Bureau of Public Works or at the office of the district engineer of the province where the work is located has resulted in complaints to the effect that such practice has given occasion to fraudulent bidding;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby direct that bids for insular projects be hereafter opened only at the Manila Office of the Bureau of Public Works, and the opening of bids or proposals by the chief clerk of that Bureau should be witnessed by two responsible officials should also be required to certify as to the correctness of the proposals received.

In the case of provincial and municipal projects where it is considered advantageous to open bids both in the Manila Office of the Bureau of Public Works and in the district engineer’s office of the province where the work is located, it is likewise directed that the opening of bids by the chief clerk in the district engineer, and that these three officials certify as to the correctness of the bids received in telegraphing and transmitting by mail the bids to the Manila Office of the Bureau of Public Works. The same procedure in witnessing and certifying as to the correctness of bids should also be followed in the case of bids opened only in offices of district engineers.

Done at the City of Manila, this thirtieth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). (Rev. ed.). Administrative Order No. 16. Messages of the President, 2 (1), pp. 938.