MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 130

IN RE ADMINISTRATIVE CASE AGAINST ASSISTANT CITY FISCAL DELFIN A. VIOLA OF MANILA

This is an administrative case against Assistant City Fiscal Delfin A. Viola of Manila, arising out of a complaint filed by Encarnacion L. Santos, charging the respondent with having seduced and abducted complainant’s daughter, Bella David, a schoolgirl of about nineteen years old.

The investigation of the charges conducted by the Honorable Alejo Mabanag, City Fiscal of Manila, revealed that respondent became acquainted with complainant and her daughter when complainant filed a criminal case with the City Fiscal’s Office in 1939; that taking advantage of his official position, respondent, a married man, was able to ingratiate himself with complainant and her daughter; that because of the confidence reposed in him by complainant partly by reason of his official position, respondent was allowed to visit frequently complainant’s home, during which he won the affection of complainant’s daughter; that pretending later that he had quarelled with his wife and that his life was being threatened by her, respondent was able to persuade complainant to give him temporary shelter in her house during which time respondent succeeded in having illicit relations with complainant’s daughter; that upon learning of these relations, complainant told respondent not to see her daughter anymore, in view of which the daughter ran away with the respondent; and that when asked about the whereabouts of complainant’s daughter, respondent professed ignorance thereof, when as a matter of fact respondent kept the girl in a house in Antonio Rivera Street for a number of days and for about a month in a certain house in Callejon Unido, Baclaran, Parañaque, where he made false representations that the girl was his wife.

Upon the facts thus found, respondent has shown himself unworthy of the office he holds and, concurring in the recommendation of the Honorable, the Secretary of Justice, Assistant City Fiscal Delfin A. Viola of Manila is hereby ordered dismissed from the service for cause.

Done at the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and forty, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1940). [Administrative Orders Nos. : 117 – 168]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.