MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 49

CREATING A LANDED ESTATES SURVEY COMMITTEE

Whereas, one of the most important problems facing the Commonwealth Government is the agrarian question which has been the root of past and present serious troubles in the Philippines during the last fifty years or more;

Whereas, the only practicable means to end agrarian controversies would be for the Government to purchase the landed estates and subdivide them into small parcels and then convey them to the actual occupants thereof; and

Whereas, before taking any definite step towards the acquisition of the landed estates, it is important that the necessary data regarding such estates be first gathered;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by law, do hereby constitute and create a Landed Estates Survey Committee, to be composed of the following:

Honorable Ramon Fernandez, Chairman; Mr. Ramon Soriano, member; Mr. Zoilo Castrillo, Chief, Public Lands Division, Bureau of Lands, member; Mr. Eduardo Quintero, technical assistant, Office of the President, member; Dr. Andres Castillo, Executive Secretary, National Economic Council, member; Mr. Jose Domingo, Technical Assistant, Department of Labor, member; and Mr. Mariano B. Raymundo, Chief, Plant Propagation Division, Bureau of Plant Industry, member. Dr. Frederic C. Howe, Adviser to the President, shall act in an advisory capacity to the Committee.

The Committee shall study all the problems pertaining to the acquisition of the landed estates, including the determination of the area of each estate to be purchased, the price at which it should be acquired, the manner of its disposition, the terms at which it should be sold to the occupants, and such other data or information as may be necessary to enable the Government to carry out its plan to purchase the landed estates in the interest of the people.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any Department, Bureau, office, instrumentality, or agency of the Government for such information as it may deem necessary, and shall submit its report and recommendation not later than November fifteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven.

Done at the City of Manila, this seventh day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the second.

MANUEL.L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Bureau of Printing. (1938). Administrative Order No. 49. Messages of the President, 3 (2), 1180-1181.