MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 109

CREATING A JOINT EDUCATIONAL SURVEY COMMITTEE

Whereas the Constitution enjoins upon the Government the duty of establishing and maintaining a complete and adequate system of public education;

Whereas every year the Government has been confronted with the problem of adequately financing the public schools as shown by the fact that the National Assembly has to appropriate annually emergency funds for school purposes; and

Whereas it is for the best interest of the public service that a definite program be adopted regarding the support and maintenance of our public schools;

Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby constitute and create a committee, to be known as the Joint Educational Survey Committee, which shall be composed of the-following and such other officials or persons as the President may designate from time to time:

The Secretary of Public Instruction, Chairman; The Secretary of Finance, member; The Chairman, Committee of Public Instruction, National Assembly, member; The Chairman, Committee on Appropriations, National Assembly, member; The Chairman, Committee on Ways and Means, National Assembly, member; The Commissioner of the Budget, member; and The Director of Education, member.

It shall be the duty of the Committee to make a thorough survey of existing educational methods, curricula, and facilities, to formulate plans and measures to enable the Government to maintain a public school system in accordance with the – mandate of the Constitution, and to recommend such changes and modifications in the present ways of financing public education as the economic resources of the country may justify.

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any Department, Bureau, office, instrumentality, or agency of the Government for such information and assistance as it may deem necessary and to conduct public hearings.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman at such times and places as may be designated by him and shall submit its report and recommendations to the President of the Philippines at the earliest practicable date.

Done at the City of Manila, this third day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the fourth.

MANUEL L. QUEZON President of the Philippines

By the President:

JORGE B. VARGAS Secretary to the President

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Bureau of Printing. (1941). Administrative Order No. 109. Messages of the President, 5 (1), 1331-1332.