MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 40

PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF INTERIM TRANSPORT TERMINALS IN PREPARATION FOR THE INTEGRATED TRANSPORT SYSTEM UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER (EO) NO. 67 (s. 2012)

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 67 (s. 2012) provides for the establishment of integrated transport systems in the North and South of Metro Manila which are projected to be established and fully-operational by 2016 (ITS Project);

WHEREAS, the Department of Transportation and Communication (DOTC), as the designated lead agency in the planning, implementation and monitoring of the ITS Project, proposes that one method of immediately decongesting traffic in Metro Manila is to restrict provincial buses and Asian utility vehicles (AUVs) from entering EDSA;

WHEREAS, in preparation for the full implementation of the ITS project, there is a need to establish interim transport terminals (ITTs) to provide a convenient, efficient, and systematic transport system; to decongest roadways; to promote road and commuter safety; and, to reduce pollution in EDSA; and,

WHEREAS, the LTFRB has issued Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 13-2008 which prescribes standards for the establishment, construction, and maintenance of facilities for the safety, protection, comfort and convenience of persons and property within terminals.

NOW THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Interim Transport Terminals. ITTs shall be established for the loading and unloading of passengers by buses and AUVs plying provincial routes entering Metro Manila, and their efficient transfer to city buses and AUVs operating within Metro Manila.

The DOTC and the LTFRB shall promulgate guidelines on the definition and identification of the provincial buses and AUVs affected by this Order.

SECTION 2. ITT Sites. ITTs shall be located in the following areas:

a. North Interim Transport Terminal. For provincial buses and AUVs originating from provinces north of Metro Manila, and entering via the North Luzon Expressway, MacArthur Highway, Mindanao Avenue, Quirino Avenue, and/or Commonwealth Avenue; b. South Interim Transport Terminal. For provincial buses and AUVs originating from provinces south of Metro Manila and entering via the South Luzon Expressway; and, c. Southwest Interim Transport Terminal. For provincial buses and AUVS originating from provinces south of Metro Manila, entering via Coastal Road and/or Manila Cavite Expressway.

SECTION 3. Implementing Agencies. The Inter-Agency Committee created under Section 6 of EO 67 (s. 2012), tasked to fast-track the implementation of the ITS, shall assist the DOTC in the implementation of the ITTs, specifically as follows:

a. The DOTC shall be responsible for the development of the North Interim Transport Terminal; b. The DPWH, in coordination with the DOTC, shall be responsible for the development of the South Interim Transport Terminal; and, c. The MMDA, in coordination with the DOTC, shall be responsible for the development of the Southwest Interim Transport Terminal.

The DOTC shall be the coordinating and lead agency in the implementation of this Order.

SECTION 4. Maintenance of the Interim Transport Terminals. The ITTs shall be maintained in accordance with the standards prescribed in MC No. 13-2008 issued by the LTFRB. Such maintenance will include, among others, providing sanitation, security, repair and other administrative services.

The DOTC, with the assistance of the MMDA, shall maintain the ITTs, without prejudice to such other arrangements that can be made with the affected bus and AUV operators or owners. Appropriate fees for the maintenance of the ITTs may be collected by the DOTC, MMDA, the bus operators/owners, or a designated private entity, subject to the provisions of applicable laws, rules and regulations.

SECTION 5. Amendment and Adjustment of Routes and Areas of Operation of Affected Buses and AUVs. The LTFRB is hereby directed to amend the routes and areas of operation of affected provincial buses and AUVs such that their routes shall end on the ITTs that will be established pursuant to this Order. The LTFRB is likewise directed to adjust the routes and areas of operation of city buses, AUVs and jitneys in Metro Manila to enable them to bring and pick-up passengers and goods to and from the ITTs.

SECTION 6. Period of Operation of the Interim Transport Terminals. The ITTs shall cease to operate within sixty (60) days from the date that the DOTC has determined that the permanent ITS Terminals are fully-operational.

SECTION 7. Funding. Funds required for the implementation of this Order shall be sourced from funds appropriated for the ITS Project, as well as from funds identified by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), subject to existing government accounting and auditing laws, rules and procedures.

SECTION 8. Separability Clause. Should any part of this Order be declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 9. Repealing Clause. All previous issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Thirteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2013). Administrative Order No. 40: Providing for the establishment of interim transport terminals in preparation for the integrated transport system under Executive Order (EO) No. 67 (s. 2012). Manila: Malacañang Records Office.