MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 10

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON ZOONOSES, DEFINING ITS POWERS, FUNCTIONS, RESPONSIBILITIES, OTHER RELATED MATTERS AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREOF

WHEREAS, new infectious agents and diseases affecting humans have emerged at the rate of more than one per year for the last thirty (30) years. Seventy five percent (75%) of these have been zoonoses and some, such as Influenza A (H1N1), Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI), Rabies and Nipah virus, have had devastating effects on populations, economies, and livelihood systems of the Asia Pacific Region.

WHEREAS, the emergence of zoonotic diseases are attributed to changes in the earth’s climate and ecosystems that are affecting the animal population, impacting human health such as issues on globalization characterized by travel and trade, urbanization where the human population occupies more and more natural habitats of animals and increasing demand for food due to increasing human population;

WHEREAS, to prepare the country for the early detection and rapid response to diseases, a collaborative mechanism must be developed to synergize and harness the strengths and capabilities of the concerned departments and bureaus of the government for efficient use of resources in the control and eventual elimination of existing zoonoses.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct and order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of Committee. A Philippine Inter-agency Committee on Zoonoses (PhilCZ) is hereby created. It shall be composed of the Department of Health (DOH), Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and their respective agencies as members. The Secretary of each Department, or his duly authorized representative shall serve as Chairperson of the PhilCZ on a two-year rotational basis.

The members of the PhilCZ shall be composed of, but not limited to the following agencies.

1. Department of Health

a) National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC) b) Health Emergency Management Staff (HEMS) c) National Epidemiology Center (NEC) d) National Center for Health Promotion (MCHP) e) National Center for Health Facilities Development (NCHFD) f) Bureau of Quarantine (BOQ) g) Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM)

2. Department of Agriculture

a) Bureau of Animal Industry (BAI) b) National Meat inspection Service (NMIS) c) Agriculture and Fisheries Information Service (AFIS)

3. Department of Environment and Natural Resources

a) Protected Areas and Wildlife Bureau (PAWB)

SECTION 2. Objectives. The PhilCZ shall endeavor to: a) develop a national strategy on prevention, control and elimination of zoonoses; and b) establish a functional and sustainable mechanism to strengthen the animal-human interface for the effective prevention, control and elimination of zoonotic diseases.

SECTION 3. Functions of the Committee. The PhilCZ shall undertake the following:

1. Ensure that the animal and human health sectors’ plans, programs and activities are consistent with the National Strategic Work Plan;

2. Review and develop policies, programs and guidelines to ensure the proper implementation of the prevention and control program on zoonoses;

3. Develop and coordinate capacity building programs and prioritize activities towards improving national and local capabilities;

4. Foster cooperation and commitment between the animal and human health sectors through coordination of activities and exchange of advice and assistance whenever possible;

5. Provide recommendations to the President of the Philippines through the Secretaries of the DA, DOH and DENR in times of crises or as may be deemed necessary (i.e. epidemics of zoonotic nature);

6. Recommend research priorities and ensure dissemination and use of research findings;

7. Organize a pool of experts who will provide technical advice on zoonotic diseases;

8. Coordinate and collaborate with other sectors/organizations as may be necessary, to carry out its duties and responsibilities; and

9. Monitor and evaluate proper implementation of programs and policies.

SECTION 4. Responsibilities of Agencies

1. All agencies shall:

a) Develop and disseminate policies, guidelines and issuances on zoonotic diseases;

b) Provide epidemiologic data on zoonotic diseases as basis for policy formulation and decision-making;

c) Provide accurate and timely information to specific target audiences;

d) Undertake research priorities and ensure dissemination and use of research findings; and

e) Serve as chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretariat of the committee.

i. DOH shall serve as Chairperson and Secretariat of the PhilCZ for the first two (2) years and DA shall serve as the Vice-Chairperson.

ii. DA shall serve as Chairperson and Secretariat of the PhilCZ for the next biennium and DENR shall serve as the Vice-Chairperson.

iii. DENR shall serve as Chairperson and Secretariat of the PhilCZ for the third biennium and DOH shall serve as the Vice-Chairperson.

2. The DOH shall serve as the lead agency on the prevention and control of zoonotic diseases in humans. It shall:

a) Conduct pro-active response to public health concerns on matters pertaining to food safety, sanitation and vector control; and

b) Adopt appropriate measures upon the recommendation of the PhilCZ to be undertaken in the health facilities for the prevention and control of zoonotic diseases

3. The DA shall serve as the lead agency on the prevention and control of zoonotic diseases in livestock, poultry and other domestic animals. It shall:

a) Conduct pro-active response to public health concerns on matters pertaining to food safety, sanitation, vector control and proper disposal of animals; and

b) Adopt appropriate measures that may be recommended by the PhilCZ to be undertaken in animal facilities to include, but not limited to, farms, slaughterhouses, markets, feed establishments and pharmaceuticals/drugs/biologics outlets for the control and prevention of zoonotic diseases.

4. The DENR shall serve as the lead agency on zoonotic diseases in wild fauna. It shall adopt appropriate measures upon the recommendation of the PhilCZ to be undertaken in protected areas, in wildlife facilities such as, but not limited to, zoological parks, wildlife rescue centers and in identified risk areas for the control and prevention of zoonotic diseases.

SECTION 5. Implementation. The Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Environment and Natural Resources shall provide the guidelines for the operationalization of the PhilCZ through a Joint Administrative Order, and promulgate rules and regulations, as may be necessary, related, incidental or consistent with the purpose, intent and objective of this Order.

All instrumentalities of government are directed to support and assist the PhilCZ when deemed necessary.

SECTION 6. Funding. Each concerned department shall appropriate at least two million pesos (P2,000,000 00) annually for the operations of the PhilCZ.

SECTION 7. Separability Clause. Should any of the provisions contained herein be declared unconstitutional, the rest or other such provisions not so declared shall remain valid and effective.

SECTION 8. Repealing Clause. All orders, rules, regulations, and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. Effectively. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of April, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2011). Administrative Order No. 10: Creating the Philippine Inter-Agency Committee on Zoonoses, defining its powers, functions, responsibilities, other related matters and providing funds thereof. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.