MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 25

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE ON THE HARMONIZATION OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE MONITORING, INFORMATION AND REPORTING SYSTEMS

WHEREAS, in line with its commitment to accountability and effective governance, the current Administration is focused on achieving the outputs and outcomes in its Social Contract with the Filipino People and the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016;

WHEREAS, performance monitoring, evaluation, information and reporting are essential components of an effective and efficient performance management system;

WHEREAS, performance monitoring and reporting in the public sector vary across departments, offices and agencies with oversight functions that monitor, evaluate and report performance of government agencies and instrumentalities;

WHEREAS, many deficiencies and duplication have been noted in the present performance monitoring systems and processes used by government agencies within the Executive Branch of Government that have resulted in redundant data, reports in different formats, delay in submissions, inaccurate results, and inefficiencies in performance monitoring, evaluation, and reporting;

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize, harmonize, streamline, simplify, integrate and unify the efforts of government agencies mandated to exercise broad oversight of government agencies’ performance relative to the National Leadership’s Agenda, the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016, agency mandates, commitments and targets; and

WHEREAS, towards this end, a collaborative mechanism must be developed among these oversight agencies that will establish a unified and integrated Results-Based Performance Management System (RBPMS) across all departments and agencies within the Executive Branch of Government incorporating a common set performance scorecard, and at the same time, creating an accurate, accessible, and up-to-date government-wide, sectoral, and organizational performance information system.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Task Force. There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Task Force that will harmonize, unify, streamline and simplify all existing monitoring and reporting requirements and processes consistent with the RBPMS that will be created. The Inter-Agency Task Force shall be chaired by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and co-chaired by the Office of the Executive Secretary (OES), with the following as members:

a. National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA);

b. Presidential Management Staff (PMS); and

c. Department of Finance (DOF).

Representatives to the Task Force shall have a rank not lower than an Assistant Secretary and duly authorized by the secretary concerned.

SECTION 2. Functions. The Inter-Agency Task Force shall undertake the following:

a. To develop a Common Set Performance Scorecard;

b. To design a Government Executive Information System, and

c. Such other powers and functions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order (AO).

SECTION 3. Harmonized RBPMS. The Organizational Performance Indicators Framework (OPIF) and the Results Matrix (RM) shall be the underlying frameworks for the proposed RBPMS, which will be used by all government agencies mandated to exercise broad oversight over the performance of all agencies in the government.

The harmonized RBPMS shall likewise be used as basis for determining entitlement: to performance-based allowances, incentives, or compensation of government personnel.

SECTION 4. Involvement of Other Government Oversight Offices. The Task Force shall involve the Civil Service Commission (CSC) and the Career Executive Service Board (CESB) in order to align the Strategic Performance Management (SPMS) of CSC and the Career Executive Service Performance Evaluation System (CESPES) of CESB to the proposed RBPMS. Other government departments, offices or agencies, such as the Commission on Audit (COA) and the Office of the Ombudsman, may be invited by the ; Task Force to provide their respective insights on the harmonization process.

SECTION 5.  Private Sector Involvement. The Task Force shall likewise involve the private sector, through the National Competitiveness Council (NCC), for the purpose of providing inputs and aligning other advocated performance management systems with the proposed unified RBPMS.

SECTION 6. Secretariat and Technical Support, The Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP) shall serve as the Secretariat of the Task Force as well as its technical resource institution.

SECTION 7. Reporting. Within a period of six (6) months from the issuance of this AO, the Task Force shall submit its recommendation on the RBPMS to the President, through the Executive Secretary.

SECTION 8. Funding. The DBM shall provide for the funding requirements of the Inter-Agency Task Force.

SECTION 9. Separability Clause. If any provision of this AO is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 10. Repealing Clause. All orders, rules, regulations, and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SECTION 11. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 21st day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2011). Administrative Order No. 25: Creating an inter-agency task force on the harmonization of national government performance monitoring, information and reporting systems. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.