MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 18

CREATING A PHILIPPINE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION TO THE INTERNATIONAL EXPOSITION YEOSU KOREA 2012

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, in its drive to further enhance the promotion of the Philippines and sustain its presence in Korea, which currently is the Philippines’ top source of tourists from Asia, as well as in the global market, has committed to participate in the International Exposition Yeosu Korea 2012 (Expo 2012) to be held from 12 May to 12 August 2012 in Yeosu, Korea;

WHEREAS, the Philippine participation in Expo 2012 provides an excellent opportunity for the Philippines to present itself, and create awareness about its rich natural resources and cultural heritage, its colorful history and people, and its progressing economy and technology to a wide audience across the world;

WHEREAS, the relevance of the Expo 2012 theme on “The Living Ocean and Coast: Diversity of Resources and Sustainable Activities” to the Philippines as an archipelagic state, will bolster the country’s strong foothold as a leading dive site and center of marine biodiversity in the world;

WHEREAS, in addition to trade and tourism benefits, and the goodwill that will be generated from participating in Expo 2012, it will also enhance the efforts of both government and private sectors in addressing various concerns and issues on achieving a sustainable balance between development and preservation of our marine environment (ocean and coasts); and

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a Philippine Organizing Committee, with the Department of Tourism (DOT) as the lead implementing agency, for the conduct of the Philippine participation in Expo 2012.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Philippine Organizing Committee (POC). A POC for the Philippine participation in Expo 2012 in Yeosu, Korea, is hereby created to be composed of the following:

A majority of the total POC composition shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, provided that the presence of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson, or their authorized representatives, shall be required.

The Members of the POC representing the government sector may designate their respective alternates to represent them at the committee. Said designated representatives must be duly authorized in writing with full authority to represent and decide for and on behalf of their principals. They shall submit the names of their representatives and/or alternates to the POC Secretariat.

SECTION 2. Authority and Functions of the POC. The POC shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities:

a) Formulate and implement a work plan and budget for the proper implementation of the Philippine participation in Expo 2012, and to monitor and supervise all activities and programs in relation thereto;

b) Act as the coordinating body between the private sector and other government agencies/instrumentalities to ensure that all directives subsequently issued to the said agencies for the planning, operation and management of the Philippine participation in Expo 2012 are enforced;

c) Ensure that the benefits of the Philippine participation are maximized through a concerted and cost-effective country approach;

d) Formulate an appropriate theme, concept and message of the Philippine participation in line with the overall theme of Expo 2012;

e) Ensure the safety and protection of government properties, exhibit materials and equipment needed for the Philippine participation;

f) Accept or receive sponsorship and gratuitous title of funds, materials and devices essential for planning, implementation and management of the Philippine participation in the Expo 2012, subject to existing government accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

g) Call on any department, bureau or office of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, for any assistance that may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Administrative Order (AO);

h) Through its designated representative, enter into agreements/contracts necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this AO; and

i) Undertake any or all other measures necessary for the successful participation of the Philippines in Expo 2012.

SECTION 3. Executive Committee. The POC, through its Chairperson, may create an Executive Committee composed of representatives from the government and private sectors as enumerated in Section 1 hereof.

SECTION 4. Commissioner General. The POC, through its Chairperson, shall designate an official of the DOT or its marketing arm, the Tourism Promotions Board (TPB), to act as Commissioner General for the Philippine participation in Expo 2012 who shall, among others, act as the contact person of the Expo 2012 organizers, attend all activities that will be required by the Expo 2012 organizers, and perform such other functions as may be necessary to ensure the successful participation of the Philippines in Expo 2012 in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bureau of International Expositions (BIE).

SECTION 5. The Secretariat. The Commissioner General shall establish a Secretariat that shall undertake and oversee the day-to-day operation and overall preparations of the Philippine participation in Expo 2012.

Personnel of the Secretariat shall be sourced from various units of the DOT and TPB who shall be provided with honoraria or allowances as may be allowed and at a rate consistent with those prescribed by law.

SECTION 6. Funding. The required funding of P 70.3 Million shall be charged against available resources for calendar years 2011 and 2012 from the following agencies:

The financial subsidy to be given by the various members of the POC shall be recorded in their books as subsidy to National Government Agencies. The receipt of subsidy shall be recorded by the lead implementing agency as subsidy income. The lead implementing agency shall then issue a corresponding official receipt to acknowledge the subsidy.

All funds to be solicited for this purpose shall be placed in a separate bank account that will be opened by the POC Secretariat in accordance with DBM rules and regulations and as authorized by the DOT Secretary, with the account name: Expo Yeosu 2012. A separate book of accounts shall be maintained by the POC Secretariat for this project.

Balance of savings from operations and income generated from commercial activities, and other donations or grants from other sources at the Expo 2012, shall be held in trust by the POC in accordance with existing government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SECTION 7. Report to the President. Relative to the performance of its mandate, the POC, through its Chairperson, shall submit periodic reports to the President, and a final report within sixty (60) days after the closing of Expo 2012.

SECTION 8. Cessation of the POC. The POC shall cease to exist sixty (60) days after the submission of its final report as provided in Section 7 hereof, unless otherwise ordered by the President.

SECTION 9. Repealing Clause. All administrative orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this AO are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 10. Separability. If any provision of this AO is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 11. Effectivity. This AO shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 6th day of September in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2011). Administrative Order No. 18: Creating a Philippine Organizing Committee for the conduct of the Philippine participation to the International Exposition Yeosu Korea 2012. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.