MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 34

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR LAND MANAGEMENT AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, the alleviation of poverty in the country, particularly in rural areas where most of the indigents and marginalized sectors of society reside, is a priority concern of government;

WHEREAS, the national government agencies presently involved in rural development need to streamline their efforts in the delivery of support services in the countryside to speed up the development of the Philippine rural sector and to review their functions with the end view of simplifying protocols and procedures to optimize the use of government resources;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9700, the implementation of the land acquisition and distribution component of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP) is to be completed by 30 June 2014;

WHEREAS, the delivery of support services, agrarian reform beneficiary development, and the smooth transfer of the mandate of the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR) to the Department of Agriculture (DA) are continuing concerns of the government to ensure that the gains of land distribution under the CARP are sustained;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a committee to undertake a study on the institutional arrangements that will ensure the continuity and streamlining of land distribution and management, the delivery of agricultural support services, and the resulting reorganization and rationalization of concerned government agencies; and,

WHEREAS, Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of EO No. 292, or the Administrative Code of 1987, vests on the President the continuing authority to reorganize the Executive Department.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation and Purpose. There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee on Institutional Arrangements for Land Management and Agricultural Support Services Delivery Across Rural Development Agencies (hereinafter referred to as the Committee).

The Committee shall facilitate the implementation of reforms in the institutional arrangements for land distribution, management, and delivery of support services to farmers and fisherfolk as a means of enhancing the development efforts of government for the rural sector.

SECTION 2. Composition. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The members of the Committee may delegate such responsibilities and authority to a designated representative who shall hold a rank of Undersecretary or its equivalent.

The Chairperson may invite other members to the Committee as the circumstances and exigencies may require.

Specifically, the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP) and the Career Executive Service Board (CESB) are enjoined to provide their full support and assistance to the Committee in the study and crafting of the reorganization and rationalization plans as may be called for to effect the institutional arrangements and transition.

The Cabinet Cluster on Economic Development and the NEDA Board are hereby enjoined to review, study, and endorse the results of the study as well as the executive issuances and legislative measures that may be formulated.

The Committee shall also constitute a Technical Working Group (TWG) and a Secretariat, through a Joint Special Order, to provide technical and administrative support to the Committee.

SECTION 3. Functions, Duties, and Responsibilities. The Committee shall perform the following functions, duties, and responsibilities:

a) Conduct a study on the continuity of land distribution and management as well as provision of support services for the agriculture and fisheries sectors, in consideration of the following:

i. Streamlining the approval of land surveys and issuance of land titles with the objective of creating a system that shall ensure stable property rights;

ii. Consolidating and rationalizing all land management and distribution functions of the government;

iii. Pursuing/completing the mandate of CARP, including: distribution of the remaining land acquisition and balance under the program; stabilization of collective titles; and, payment of distributed but not yet documented or unpaid land;

iv. Rationalizing the provision of support services to farmers and fisherfolk;

v. Ensuring the seamless interplay among the institutions involved in agricultural extension services provided for in RA 7160, or the Local Government Code of 1991, and those that may be provided under the proposals of the Committee; and,

vi. Formulating a transition plan for the post-CARP scenario;

b) Formulate appropriate executive issuances or legislative measures for the required institutional arrangements, based on the findings of the study that will be undertaken;

c) Engage the services of consultants and/or consulting firms to conduct the study and other related studies; and,

d) Conduct information sharing and exchange with the end view of achieving consensus among all stakeholders and arriving at a well-studied and unified plan to implement the necessary institutional arrangements, with due consideration to the welfare of affected employees.

SECTION 4. Funding. The members of the Committee are hereby authorized to charge against their current appropriations such amounts as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order, subject to the usual government and accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Additional funds may be allocated, subject to the approval of the President through the General Appropriations Act (GAA).

SECTION 5. Reports. The Committee shall, within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Order, submit a report to the President on the implementation hereof.

Thereafter, the Committee shall submit quarterly reports to the President on its activities and accomplishments.

SECTION 6. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions unaffected shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 7. Repealing Clause. All other issuances, rules, and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 22 nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2012). Administrative Order No. 34: Creating an inter-agency committee on institutional arrangements for land management and rural development. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.