MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 16

DIRECTING GOVERNMENT ENTITIES TO COORDINATE WITH THE NATIONAL MAPPING AND RESOURCE INFORMATION AUTHORITY IN THE ACQUISITION OF DATA FROM AIRBORNE AND SPACEBORNE PLATFORMS FOR USE IN THEIR RESPECTIVE PROJECTS

WHEREAS, topographic base maps and other thematic maps are important tools in the planning and implementation of various national development programs,

WHEREAS, acquisition of data from airborne and spaceborne platforms, such as satellite imageries, aerial photographs and other related products and services, is an essential and major cost component in the production of topographic base and thematic maps;

WHEREAS, uncoordinated mapping activities of various government agencies result in wasteful duplication of expenses and effort in the acquisition of satellite imageries and aerial photographs, and in the production of various topographic base and thematic maps, and result further in incompatibility and sub-optimal use of geographic information;

WHEREAS, the rationalization of the mapping activities of government is part of cross-cutting strategy under the Philippine Development Plan 2011-2016 for research, development, extension, and knowledge management on the environment and natural resources; and

WHEREAS, the National Mapping and Resource Information Authority (NAMRIA) is mandated by Section 22(a) of Executive Order (EO) No. 192 (s. 1987) to be the central mapping agency of the government.

NOW THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Scope. This Administrative Order shall apply to all government agencies, local government units (LGUs), government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), Government Corporate Entities (GCEs), Government Instrumentalities with Corporate Powers (GICPs), Government Financial Institutions (GFIs), and State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), herein after referred to collectively as ‘Government Entities’.

SECTION 2. Mandatory Coordination. Government Entities shall coordinate with NAMRIA regarding the acquisition of data from airborne and spaceborne platforms such as aerial photographs and satellite imageries, and other related products and services for mapping purposes. Government Entities shall submit to NAMRIA a complete inventory and index of all their data holdings within one month from the effectivity of this order.

Pursuant to Section 22(a) of EO No.192, NAMRIA shall take into account the requirements of other agencies in the formulation and implementation of a nationwide development program on data acquisition, aerial photography, topographic base mapping programs, and other remote sensing mapping activities.

SECTION 3. Procurement. Data from airborne and spaceborne platforms, such as satellite imageries and aerial photographs, and other related products and services for mapping purposes shall be procured from the Procurement Service (PS) of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), except for projects funded from foreign grants and other official development assistance for which procurement can remain with the procuring entity.

SECTION 4. NAMRIA Clearance. A Government Entity intending to procure data from airborne and spaceborne platforms and other related products and services for mapping purposes shall secure a clearance certificate from NAMRIA as one of the supporting documents for the procurement.

The clearance certificate shall state the following:

a) The technical specifications and standards of the proposed procurement are appropriate, taking into consideration the requirements of other user agencies; and

b) The requirements of the procuring entity could not be fully or economically satisfied by the:

i. Inventory; and

ii. On-going procurement of other government entities.

NAMRIA shall advise the procuring entity within 15 days on the compliance or non-compliance of the Government Entity to the foregoing conditions, recommend changes in specifications and scope, resolve overlapping procurements in consultation with the procuring entities concerned, or issue a conditional clearance certificate, as may be appropriate.

SECTION 5. Maintenance of Database. All government entities shall, as far as practicable, furnish NAMRIA metadata and copies of all imageries, aerial photographs, and map outputs for integration into the latter’s database.

SECTION 6. Repeal. All orders, issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Separability. If any provision of this Administrative Order is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 5th day of July in the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2011). Administrative Order No. 16: Directing government entities to coordinate with the national mapping and resource information authority in the acquisition of data from airborne and spaceborne platforms for use in their respective projects. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.