MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 2

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL SITUATION ROOM

WHEREAS, as Chief Executive and Commander-in-Chief, the President should always have timely and full access to adequate and accurate information and analysis on all events and incidents affecting national interest and security;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that all government efforts and activities pertaining to crisis situation management be promptly and appropriately coordinated, harmonized and synchronized;

WHEREAS, there is a need to enhance the capacity of the Office of the President to effectively monitor all related government activities in order to evaluate and analyze matters of State as well as emerging issues requiring immediate Presidential attention and executive action;

WHEREAS, there is a need to appropriately establish a site to allow the President seamless access to pertinent information, and to enhance his ability to provide prompt executive action in managing, handling, abating and/or resolving such matters or incidents deemed critical to national interest and security;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Presidential Situation Room — The Presidential Situation Room (PSR) is hereby created, the establishment of which, including its appropriate staffing, shall be undertaken by the National Security Adviser/Director-General of the National Security Security Council Secretariat. It shall be headed by an Executive Director who shall report directly to the National Security Adviser/Director-General, the Executive Secretary and Secretary of the Presidential Management Staff.

SECTION 2. Functions — The PSR shall have the following functions:

a) Monitors events, situations and developments that have national security implications including those with serious diplomatic, political and peace and order ramifications;

b) Provides current intelligence and crisis support to the President, the Executive Secretary, the National Security Adviser and the Secretary of the Presidential Management Staff;

c) Serves as the primary monitoring, coordination and communications center in Malacañang on classified information;

d) Coordinates the collection, verification and evaluation of highly sensitive information bearing on national security;

e) Establishes linkages and coordinates with the various operations centers of civil and security agencies of government;

f) Serves as the National Crisis Management Operations Center for various contingencies and crises.

SECTION 3. Operations — The National Security Adviser/Director-General shall determine the operational requirements and guidelines of the PSR. The National Security Council Secretariat shall provide the necessary manpower support to operate the PSR to be sourced from staff detailed from the different units in the Office of the President as well as personnel to fill the vacant plantilla positions of the National Security Council (NSC). All concerned government agencies including the intelligence units of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Philippine National Police, the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency, and representatives from the President’s Communications Group shall provide support in manning the PSR. Other vital government agencies may be called upon to provide support as may be determined by the National Security Adviser/Director-General.

SECTION 4. Budget — The PSR shall have an initial budget of P5.5 million for the purchase of office equipment and for the operations of the PSR, sourced from the Office of the President. The National Security Council Secretariat shall include in its annual appropriations succeeding budgetary support for the PSR.

SECTION 5. Repealing Clause — All orders, issuances, rules and regulations or any part thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Effectivity — This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2010). Administrative Order No. 2: Creating the presidential situation room. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.