MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 6

ORGANIZING THE INTER-AGENCY ENERGY CONTINGENCY COMMITTEE (IECC)

WHEREAS, although there is no imminent danger of any oil supply disruption, the Government deems it prudent to issue this Order as a precautionary measure to ensure that the necessary preparations are in place in the event the situation deteriorates;

WHEREAS, the Government is taking steps to ensure the continuous, adequate and stable supply of petroleum and other energy sources in the country;

WHEREAS, there is a need to carefully study and evaluate the Government’s strategy in addressing contingencies arising from energy supply disruptions;

WHEREAS, the coordination of all Government agencies is vital in evaluating and enhancing the existing contingency plan for its effective implementation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Organization of the Inter-Agency Energy Contingency Committee. There is hereby organized the INTER-AGENCY ENERGY CONTINGENCY COMMITTEE (IECC), to be composed of the Departments of Energy, Finance, Budget and Management, Justice, Trade and Industry, Agriculture, National Defense, the Interior and Local Government, Transportation and Communications, Foreign Affairs, the National Economic and Development Authority and the National Security Council.

The departments and government agencies shall be represented by their respective heads. However, an alternate representative with the rank of Undersecretary may be designated.

SECTION 2. General Responsibilities of the IECC. The IECC shall perform the following responsibilities relative to the evaluation and enhancement of the existing contingency plan.

a. Undertake   a   comprehensive   audit of  the   available   resources   of  their respective agencies;

b. Validate the viability of the enhancements made to the existing plan;

c. Assess the need to operationalize the proposed plan; and,

d. Submit reports to the Office of the President on its recommendations

SECTION 3. Responsibilities of the lECC Members. The members of the IECC shall among others have the following responsibilities:

a. The Department of Energy shall provide the over-all direction in the enhancement of existing policies and guidelines. The Secretary of Energy is hereby instructed to take the lead and chair the IECC.

b. The Department of Finance shall ensure that proposed plans are consistent with the government’s fiscal policies.

c. The Department of Budget and Management shall identify procedures for the utilization and reallocation of funds, consistent with existing rules and regulations of the Commission on Audit.

d. The Department of Justice shall ensure that proposed plans are consistent with existing laws, rules and regulations.

e. The Department of Trade and Industry shall monitor the effects of prices of other commodities as a result of any supply disruption and provide measures to remedy the same.

f. The Department of Agriculture shall provide information and represent the concerns of the agricultural sector with respect to the effects of any supply disruption.

g. The Department of National Defense shall integrate the proposed plans with the plans of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council.

h. The Department of the Interior and Local Government shall consult and coordinate with all local government units (LGUs) and the Philippine National Police relative to the proposed plans.

i. The Department of Transportation and Communications shall be responsible for providing effective representation of the transport sector and coordination with all transport organization in the development of the proposed plans.

j. The Department of Foreign Affairs shall provide linkages with the international community for up-to-date information on global developments.

k. The National Economic and Development Authority shall advise on the possible socio-economic impact of the proposed plans and ensure its alignment with the over-all economic plan of the country.

i. The National Security Council shall advise on matters affecting national security and energy security,

SECTION 4.  Duty to Extend Assistance to the IECC. The other departments, bureaus,   offices,   agencies   or   instrumentalities   of   the   Government,   including government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), are hereby directed to extend such assistance and support to the IECC for the successful discharge of its functions under this Order.

SECTION 5. Effectivity This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2011). Administrative Order No. 6: Organizing the Inter-Agency Energy Contingency Committee (IECC). Manila: Malacañang Records Office.