MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 28

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE PHILIPPINE EXHIBITION AT THE MUSÉE DU QUAI BRANLY

WHEREAS, the Philippines was chosen as the featured exhibiting country at the Musée du Quai Branly, the premier museum in France for indigenous art and culture, to be held on 09 April to 21 July 2013 in Paris, France;

WHEREAS, must-see artworks on pre-colonial Philippines from national collections of the Philippines, United States and Europe, as well as private collections will be put on display during the Exhibition;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Exhibition provides an excellent opportunity for the Philippines to promote and create awareness about its rich cultural heritage, history and people to a wider audience across Europe;

WHEREAS, the Exhibition will enable the Philippines to promote and present its products, tourism and trade, and promote general awareness about the country in Europe; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to create an Inter-Agency Committee to plan and carryout the activities necessary for the success of the Philippine Exhibition at the Musée du Quai Branly.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Committee. An Inter-Agency Committee (IAC) for the Philippine Exhibition at the Musée du Quai Branly in Paris, France, is hereby created to be composed of the following:

SECTION 2. Authority and Functions. The IAC shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Formulate and implement a work program for the proper implementation of the Philippine Exhibition and its parallel activities with the aim to maximize benefits, through a concerted and cost effective approach, in promoting Philippine products, tourism, trade and culture;

b. Coordinate with the Government of France, the Musée du Quai Branly and all concerned agencies/entities, including private persons and entities, for the preparation and conduct of the Exhibition and its related activities;

c. Ensure that the Government of France and the Musée du Quai Branly will guarantee the safety, protection and return of all the Exhibition pieces, including properties and equipment of the Philippine Government used in the Exhibition;

d. Subject to existing laws, rules and regulations, through its designated representative, enter into agreements/contracts and secure approvals/permits necessary for the attainment of the objective of this Administrative Order (AO), including arrangements for the loaning and shipment of artworks and pieces for the Exhibition and their safe return; and

e. Undertake any or all other measures necessary for the successful conduct of the Philippine Exhibition.

SECTION 3. Secretariat. The IAC, through its Chairperson, shall establish a Secretariat that shall provide the necessary administrative support, undertake and supervise the preparations for the Exhibition, and oversee its conduct.

SECTION 4. Funding. The financial requirements of the IAC shall be shouldered by member agencies, chargeable against their regular budgets.

The packaging, transit, forwarding and insurance costs of all cultural artifacts to be used in the Exhibition will be shouldered by the Musée du Quai Branly.

SECTION 5. Report to the President. Relative to the performance of its mandate, the IAC, through its Chairperson, shall submit a report to the President thirty (30) days after the Exhibition.

SECTION 6. Cessation of the IAC. Unless otherwise ordered by the President, the IAC shall cease to exist thirty (30) days after submission of its report as provided in Section 5 hereof.

SECTION 7. Separability. If any provision of this AO is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 8. Repeal Clause. All orders, rules, regulations, and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this AO, are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SECTION 9. Effectivity. This AO shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2012). Administrative Order No. 28: Creating an inter-agency committee for the Philippine exhibition at the Musée du Quai Branly. Manila: Malacañang Records Office.