MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 12
APPROVING THE 2017 INVESTMENT PRIORITIES PLAN

Pursuant to Article 29 of Executive Order No. 226 (s. 1987) or the Omnibus
Investments Code of 1987, as amended, the attached 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
(IPP) is hereby APPROVED.

Upon effectivity of the IPP, all government agencies and entities are enjoined
to issue the necessary regulations to ensure its implementation in a synchronized and
integrated manner. No government body shall adopt any policy or take any course of
action contrary to, or inconsistent with, the IPP.

The Chairman of the Board of Investments shall render an annual report to the
President on the accomplishments and implementation of the IPP.

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper
of general circulation as required under Article 31 of the Omnibus Investments Code
of 1987.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 28th day of February , in the year of
our Lord, Two Thousand and Seventeen.

 

By the President:

‘

—~o We
SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary

CERTIFIED COPY:

  
  

MARIANITO M. DIMAANDAL!
ay DIRECTOR IV
ACARANG RECORDS OFFICE

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PRRD 2016 - 001926 THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

FOREWORD

With the theme “Scaling Up and Disbursing Opportunities,” the new IPP reflects the
Administration’s desire to see economic growth spread to a broader segment of the population.
Intensifying implementation of the government’s comprehensive national industrial strategy, we have
made significant adjustments in the sectoral coverage qualified for registration with the Board of
Investments (BOI).

Taking-off from the President’s zero + 10-point SocioEconomic Agenda and Ambisyon Natin
2040 and the objectives of the Philippine Development Plan, the BOI has identified ten (10) preferred
activities for investments. This list significantly differs from the 2014 IPP with the inclusion of more
MSME oriented, innovation-driven, health and environment conscious activities that look at
expanding job opportunities for more segments of the population and bringing more firms into the
local and global value chains. In addition, there is a deliberate policy to shift investments to the
countryside.

The broadened coverage of the 2017 IPP aims to encourage and attract new capital in sectors
and regions that can help address the inequality of growth and the jobs gap. Using experience from
developing industry roadmaps and implementing the new industrial policy, this IPP seeks to transform
both the manufacturing and agricultural sectors by expanding their forward and backward linkages,
particularly with MSMEs.

The 2017 IPP is emphasizing two things — continuity of industrial policy direction and its
implementation; and the identification of opportunities that can directly impact the lives of all
participants in the growth process.

The 2017 IPP contains the following priority investment areas:

1. Preferred Activities: All qualified manufacturing including agri-processing; Agriculture,
Fishery and Forestry; Strategic Services; Infrastructure and Logistics including LGU-PPPs;
Health Care Services including drug rehabilitation; Mass Housing; Inclusive Business
Models; Environment and Climate-change; Innovation Drivers; and Energy.

2. Export Activities including services exports and activities in support of exporters;
3. Activities based on Special Laws granting incentives; and
4. ARMM List.

This 2017 IPP list was formulated through a process that is both analytical and participative,
covering a range of sectors and geographic areas. Regional consultations were held in Metro Manila,
Cebu and Davao. Various inter-agency and private sector consultative meetings were held to finalize
the list. A national Manufacturing Summit that had participants from major industry associations,
government agencies, non-government organizations and the academe also helped in the crafting of
sectoral priorities and identification of necessary incentives and binding constraints. These ensure
that the important elements for a more inclusive and participative economic growth have been put into
the Plan.

 

Chairman, Board of Investments
Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry

The 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
Proposed Theme: Scaling Up and Dispersing Opportunities

I. PREFERRED ACTIVITIES FOR INVESTMENT

A. Preferred Activities
1. All Qualified Manufacturing Activities including Agro-Processing!

This covers the manufacture of industrial goods and processing of
agricultural and fishery products, including Halal and Kosher food, into (a)
semi-finished/intermediate goods for use as inputs in the production of
other goods, or (b) finished products or consumer goods for final
consumption.

This also covers the manufacture of modular housing components and
machinery and equipment including parts and components.

Except for modernization projects, only projects located outside Metro
Manila may qualify for registration.

2. Agriculture, Fishery and Forestry

This covers commercial production of agricultural, fishery and forestry
products.

This also covers production of seeds and seedlings, and establishment of
nurseries and hatcheries, and support services and infrastructures, such as,
facilities for drying, cold chain storage, blast freezing, bulk handling and
storage; harvesting, plowing, and spraying/dusting; packing houses, trading
centers, ice plants in Less Developed Areas, AAA slaughterhouse, AAA
dressing plant.

Except for modernization projects, only projects located outside Metro
Manila may qualify for registration. Modernization projects include those
for agricultural support services and infrastructure only.

3. Strategic Services!

a. IC Design

This covers all logic and circuit design techniques required to design
integrated circuits (ICs).

 

‘Subject to the criteria on the qualification for registration of projects to be defined and clarified by the
Board in the implementing guidelines.

1

The 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
Proposed Theme: Scaling Up and Dispersing Opportunities

b. Creative Industries/Knowledge-Based Services
This covers IT-BPM services for the domestic market (e.g., contact
centers, data analytics), and those that involve original content such as
animation, software development, game development, health information
management systems, and engineering design.
This also covers digital or technological start-ups/activities.

c. Maintenance, Repair, and Overhaul (MRO) of aircraft
This covers the MRO of all types of aircraft.

d. Charging/Refueling Stations for Alternative Energy Vehicles

This covers the establishment of charging/refueling stations for
alternative energy vehicles except LPG-run vehicles.

e. Industrial Waste Treatment

This covers the establishment of treatment facilities for toxic and
hazardous wastes (THW) from an industrial operation.

f. Telecommunications

This covers the establishment of connectivity facilities for fixed and
mobile broadband services.

Only new players may qualify for registration.

g. State-of-the-art Engineering, Procurement, and Construction

This covers engineering design, procurement, and construction for
industrial plants and infrastructure.

4. Healthcare Services including Drug Rehabilitation Centers”
This covers the establishment and operation of general and specialty
hospitals, and other medical/healthcare facilities including drug
rehabilitation centers.

5. Mass Housing

This covers the development of mass housing units based on a price ceiling
of Php2.0 Million.

 

Subject to positive list of location as endorsed by the DOH.

The 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
Proposed Theme: Scaling Up and Dispersing Opportunities

This also covers in-city low-cost housing projects for lease.

Except for in-city low-cost housing for lease, only projects located outside
Metro Manila may qualify for registration.

. Infrastructure and Logistics including LGU-PPPs

This covers the establishment and operation of physical infrastructures vital
to the country’s economic development and prosperity such as, but not
limited to: airports, seaports, (air, land and water) transport, LNG storage
and regasification facilities, pipeline projects for oil and gas, bulk water
treatment and supply, training facilities, testing laboratories, and domestic
industrial zones.

This also covers PPP projects including those initiated and/or implemented
by Local Government Units (LGUs).

. Innovation Drivers

This covers research and development (R&D) activities, conduct of clinical
trials (including drug trials) and the establishment of Centers of Excellence,
innovation centers, business incubation hubs, and fabrication laboratories
(fablabs)/co-working spaces.

This also covers commercialization of new and emerging technologies and
products of DOST or government-funded R&D, such as, but not limited to:

° Agricultural biotechnology tools

* Disaster mitigation/prevention hardware or software

¢ Hardware or software for increasing agricultural productivity

* Mechanized means for natural resources conservation

* Portable technologies — innovation on existing bulky or heavy device
to make it portable, or a new device or service that can be brought
virtually anywhere

* Hardware or software for the prevention of disease outbreaks

* Remote monitoring devices or systems

* Professional services for remote sensing

* Hardware or software for the upgrading of local industries

* Photonics and Nanotechnology

° Natural health products

. Inclusive Business (IB) Models
This covers business activities of medium and large enterprises (MLEs) in

the agribusiness and tourism sectors that provide business opportunities to
micro and small enterprises (MSEs) as part of their value chains.

10.

The 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
Proposed Theme: Scaling Up and Dispersing Opportunities

IB projects may qualify for Pioneer status.

. Environment or Climate Change-Related Projects

This covers manufacture/assembly of goods and the establishment of
energy efficiency-related facilities where either utilization of which would
significantly lead to either the efficient use of energy, natural resources or
raw materials; minimize/prevent pollution; or reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.

This also covers green ship recycling based on international standards, and
the establishment of privately-owned materials recovery facility.

Energy
This covers power generation projects utilizing conventional fuels (i.e.,

coal, diesel, bunker, natural gas, and geothermal), waste heat and other
wastes, and the establishment of battery energy storage systems.

B. Export Activities

1.
2;
3.

Production and manufacture of export products
Services Exports*
Activities in support of exporters

C. Special Laws

Th

is covers activities where inclusion in the IPP is mandated for purposes of

incentives, as follows:

1
2
a3
4

_ Industrial Tree Plantation (P.D. 705);

. Mining (R.A. 7942) (limited to capital equipment incentive);

Publication or Printing of Books/Textbooks (R.A. 8047);

. Refining, Storage, Marketing and Distribution of Petroleum Products
(R.A. 8479);

. Rehabilitation, Self-Development and Self-Reliance of Persons with
Disability (R.A. 7277);

. Renewable Energy (R.A. 9513); and

. Tourism (R.A. 9593).

 

3Contact centers and non-voice business processing activities that will be located in Metro Manila may
no longer be qualified for incentives availment with the Board of Investments under Executive Order
No. 226, otherwise known as the Omnibus Investments Code of 1987, as amended, by year 2020.

4

3

The 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
Proposed Theme: Scaling Up and Dispersing Opportunities

i. ARMM LIST

The 2017-2019 ARMM List contains the following priority investment areas:

A, EXPORT ACTIVITIES

1. Export Trader and Service Exporters
2. Support Activities for Exporters

B. AGRICULTURE, AGRIBUSINESS, AQUACULTURE and FISHERY

B.1. Agriculture and Agribusiness

This covers all types of agricultural production, farming, plantation, processing
or manufacturing, as long as, the land or the agricultural production,
plantation, processing or manufacturing is based in ARMM. It includes value-
chain, value-adding, logistical and supply chain agribusiness activities based in
or involving ARMM agricultural products or the farmers of the region, such as
silo storage and drying facilities.

B. 2. Aquaculture and Fishery

This covers the aquamarine industry; inland water resources; seaweeds;
fishing; fish pond including other marine, inland and brackish water farming,
such as abalone farms, shrimp farming or crab fattening; the establishment of
hatcheries or breeding of fingerlings and processing of such marine and inland
water resources.

C. BASIC INDUSTRIES

This covers the production of pharmaceuticals such as antibiotics; traditional
or herbal medicines and related activities such as bio-prospecting; textile or
garments; water supply and treatment; ice plant or refrigeration; traditional
craft like boat building; production of inorganic and organic fertilizer; all types
of heavy industries, such as the steel industry, petrochemical industry, ship-
building, ship breaking, ship repair and servicing; dredging for industrial
purposes and landfill; cement production and concrete aggregates.

D. INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES

This covers strategic infrastructure projects such as railways, bridges, tollways,
flood control and support industries like sand and gravel, batching plant and
pre-mixing of cements; air, land and water transportation; telecommunications
to include the construction and operation of international gateway facilities
both satellite-linked or linked by terrestrial and submarine cables for internet
connectivity, so long as these are based in ARMM and are holding ARMM
franchise, or servicing ARMM areas including to and from ARMM in order to
increase inter-connectivity and support regional or national integration.

wn

The 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
Proposed Theme: Scaling Up and Dispersing Opportunities

E. INDUSTRIAL SERVICE FACILITIES

This covers industrial centers or industrial estates to include testing and quality
control laboratories; manpower training and demonstration centers; vocational
and technical skills services and facilities; call centers and Information
Technology related enterprises such as business process outsourcing; tool and
dye shops and similar facilities; metal casting and metal working; furniture and
fixtures; ceramics and tile-making; petrochemical complex and industrial
gases.

F. ENGINEERING INDUSTRIES

This covers engineering products; electronics and telecommunication products;
and fabrication of construction materials including pre-fabricated construction
materials using new technologies (e.g. 3D printing) or indigenously sourced
materials.

G. LOGISTICS

This covers the logistics, supply chain and logistics network industry;
shipping, hauling and trucking; cargo shippers and forwarders; bulk carrier;
warehousing and depots; storage; and other logistics facilities principally based
in ARMM including transhipment hubs and services using ARMM ports,
airports or located near its special economic zones. This also contemplates the
ports industry and allied industry in the ARMM and ancillary services, such as
arrastre and stevedoring, because the ARMM needs to attract more port
industry players.

H. BIMP — EAGA RELATED INVESTMENT ENTERPRISES

This covers enterprises using the BIMP-EAGA framework on trade and
investments and who are located or have their base of operations in the BIMP-
EAGA namely, Brunei; Sabah and Sarawak in Malaysia; Maluku, Sulawesi,
Kalimantan and Irian Jaya in Indonesia; and Mindanao and Palawan in the
Philippines, who shall invest and engage in economic activity in the ARMM
including traditional cross-border trade and the age-old barter trading to
encourage the formalization of peripheral shadow economies.

I. TOURISM

This covers the establishment of tourism-related facilities and attractions;
tourism-related services; hotel and restaurants catering to ARMM tourists;
Halal-based tourism; tourist accommodation facilities; tourist transport
facilities and development of retirement villages, which shall include health or
medical facilities and other amenities.

The 2017 Investment Priorities Plan
Proposed Theme: Scaling Up and Dispersing Opportunities

J. HEALTH AND EDUCATION SERVICES AND FACILITIES

The ARMM has some of the lowest indicators in the country regarding health
and education as reflected in the Human Development Index. For this purpose,
there is a need for incentives to be given to investors in the health and
educational sectors such as putting-up of private hospitals, medical clinics,
wellness centers, primary education, secondary education, tertiary education
(colleges, universities and vocational-technical schools) and ancillary or
support services such as teacher training centers.

K. HALAL INDUSTRY

The 2004-2010 MTPDP envisioned that ARMM shall be the production and
processing center for the Halal industry. ARMM being the only Muslim region
in the country has a comparative advantage in the Halal industry since majority
of Halal consumers are in the region. Any Halal related business enterprises
that obtain the necessary Halal certification or is operating under Islamic
(Shariah) law principles shall be covered. Halal refers to the permissible
products and services under Islamic Law.

L. BANKING, NON-BANK FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND FACILITIES

Aside from conventional banking and finance, microfinance and cooperative
financing, this includes Islamic banking and finance; and Islamic microfinance
and pawnshop operations, since the ARMM is the most unbanked region in the
country and there is a need for financial inclusivity in accordance with the
provisions of the Organic Act (Sec. 7, Art. IX, R.A. No. 9054). This also
includes remittance centers to cater to remittances of Overseas Filipino
Workers. Guidelines for this purpose may be issued by the RBOI after
consultation with the relevant stakeholders and institutions engaged in
financial access and financial inclusivity programs and activities.

M. ENERGY

More energy investments are needed in the ARMM considering that the
household electrification rate in the ARMM is the most dismal in the country
with only 34% as compared with the national rate of 74%. This covers energy
investments in upstream and downstream industries such as power generation,
transmission and distribution. Off-grid and Small Power Utilities Group or
SPUG areas shall be prioritized for investments and giving of incentives
considering that these are stranded markets for electricity. It covers not only
energy but also ancillary services and in the context of ARMM, this means the
construction of substations and transmission and distribution towers
considering that there are also frequent power outages due to disruption of
such facilities from man-made and natural disaster causes.
---000---NOTHING FOLLOWS---000---