Translation of the Official Gazette for informational purposes. This is not the official translation of the law.

Read in English

RULES AND REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING THE ACT

OF THE ENHANCED BASIC EDUCATION OF 2013

(REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10533)

In accordance with Section 16 of Republic Act No. 10533, entitled “An Act Enhancing the Philippine Basic Education System by Strengthening its Curriculum and Increasing the Number of Years of Compulsory Education, Appropriating Funds Therefor and for Other Purposes,” also known as “The Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013,” which was enacted on May 15, 2013, and took effect on June 8, 2013, the Department of Education (DepEd), Commission on Higher Education (CHED), and the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) hereby issue the following rules and regulations to implement the provisions of the Act.

RULE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. Title. These rules and regulations shall be known as the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the “Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013” (Republic Act No. 10533).

Section 2. Scope and Application. The provisions of the IRR shall primarily apply to all public and private institutions and learning centers for basic education. This IRR shall also apply to Higher Education Institutions (HEI), Technical-Vocational Institutions (TVI), organizations with appropriate recognition and functioning as Teacher Education Institutions (TEI), and foundations.

Section 3. Policy Declaration. This IRR shall be interpreted in accordance with the Policy Declaration found in Section 2 of the Act.

Section 4. Definition of Terms. For purposes of this IRR, the following terms shall mean or be understood as follows:

(a) The Act refers to Republic Act No. 10533, entitled “An Act Enhancing the Philippine Basic Education System by Strengthening its Curriculum and Increasing the Number of Years of Compulsory Education, Appropriating Funds Therefor and for Other Purposes,” also known as “The Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013.”

(b) Learning Center refers to a physical space that contains the tools and facilities for learning of a learning program for youth and out-of-school adults. It is a venue for face-to-face learning activities and other learning opportunities for community development and improvement of the town’s quality of life. It may also be referred to as a “Community Learning Center” authorized and recognized by DepEd.

(c) Learner refers to a child or student, or a learner in an alternative learning system.

(d) Mother Tongue or First Language (L1) refers to the language or languages first learned by a child, with which he/she identifies, and recognizes as a native language used by him/her in accordance with others, which he/she knows best, or uses most. This includes Filipino Sign Language [sign language] used by individuals with relevant disabilities. The regional or indigenous language refers to the traditional form of speech or type of Filipino sign language present in a region, locale, or place.

(e) Non-DepEd Public School refers to a public school offering basic education operated by a national government agency other than DepEd, or by a local government unit.

Section 5. Basic Education. In accordance with Section 3 of the Act, basic education aims to address the foundational learning needs that provide the foundations upon which subsequent learning is built. It comprises kindergarten, elementary, and high school as well as alternative learning systems for out-of-school learners and those with special needs under Section 8 of this IRR.

Section 6. Enhanced Basic Education Program. For purposes of this IRR and in accordance with Section 4 of the Act, the enhanced basic education program consists of at least one (1) year of kindergarten education, six (6) years of elementary education, and six (6) years of secondary education, in that sequence. Secondary education includes four (4) years of junior high school and two (2) years of senior high school. The enhanced basic education program may also be delivered through an alternative learning system.

The first stage of required and mandated formal education is Kindergarten Education consisting of one (1) year of preparatory education for children at least five (5) years of age as a prerequisite for Grade I.

Elementary Education refers to the second stage of required basic education consisting of six (6) years.

Secondary Education refers to the third stage of required basic education consisting of four (4) years of junior high school education and two (2) years of senior high school education. The age of entry into the junior and senior high school levels is generally twelve (12) and sixteen (16) years, respectively.

DepEd may be lenient in the adoption of the program by private educational institutions as long as they comply with the minimum standards prescribed by DepEd in accordance with the Act.

Section 7. Compulsory Basic Education. Every parent or guardian or person having custody of a child shall enroll that child in basic education, regardless of the mode or system of learning delivery, until completion thereof, in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations.

Section 8. Enhanced Basic Education for All. In furtherance of Section 3 of the Act, enhanced basic education for all means the implementation of programs developed to address the physical, intellectual, psychosocial, and cultural needs of learners, including, but not limited to the following:

8.1. Programs for the Gifted and Talented. This refers to comprehensive programs for learners who are gifted and talented from all levels of basic education.

8.2. Programs for Students with Disabilities. This refers to comprehensive programs designed for students with disabilities that may be conducted at home, school, center, or community.

8.3. Madrasah Program. This refers to a comprehensive program using the Madrasah curriculum prescribed by DepEd, in coordination with the Commission on Muslim Filipinos, for Muslim learners in public and private schools.

8.4. Program for Indigenous Peoples (IP) Education. This refers to a program that promotes educational principles conducted through formal, non-formal, and informal modalities, with emphasis on any of the following key themes, but not limited to these: Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Practices; indigenous languages; Indigenous Learning Systems (ILS) and curriculum and assessment based on life-cycle-community; educational goals, aspirations, and skills unique to Indigenous Cultural Communities (ICC); engagement of elders and other community members in methods, assessment, and supervision of teaching-learning of community ILS principles, recognition, and continuous practice; and the rights and responsibilities of ICCs.

8.5. Programs for Learners in Especially Difficult Circumstances. This refers to programs that are timely and responsive to learners in especially difficult circumstances, such as, but not limited to the following: geographic isolation; chronic illness; displacement due to armed conflict, urban resettlement, or calamities; child abuse or child labor practices.

Section 9. Acceleration. Acceleration of learners in public and private basic education institutions shall be allowed, in accordance with the rules and regulations of DepEd.

RULE II. CURRICULUM

Section 10. Development of the Basic Education Curriculum. In developing the Basic Education Curriculum, DepEd shall be guided by the following:

10.1. Formulation and Design. In accordance with Section 5 of the Act, DepEd shall develop the design and details of the enhanced basic education curriculum. DepEd shall collaborate with CHED and TESDA to develop coherent curricula in basic, tertiary, and technical-vocational education for the skills of Filipino graduates, both local and global.

10.2. Standards and Principles. DepEd shall adhere to the following standards and principles, where appropriate, in developing the enhanced basic education curriculum:

(a) The curriculum must be learner-centered, engaging, and developmentally appropriate;

(b) The curriculum must be relevant, responsive, and research-based;

(c) The curriculum must be culturally sensitive;

(d) The curriculum must be contextualized and globalized;

(e) The curriculum must employ constructivist, inquiry-based, reflective, collaborative, and integrative pedagogical approaches;

(f) The curriculum must adhere to the principles and framework of Mother Tongue-Based Multilingual Education (MTB-MLE) starting from what the learners already know and what they have, moving from the known to the unknown; there must be instructional materials and teachers capable of implementing the MTB-MLE curriculum. For this purpose, MTB-MLE refers to formal or non-formal education where the mother tongue and additional languages of the learner are used in the classroom;

(g) The curriculum shall employ a spiral progression approach to ensure mastery of knowledge and skills after each level; and

(h) The curriculum must be flexible so that schools may localize, indigenize, and enhance it further based on their particular educational and social contexts.

10.3. Production and Development of Materials. The production and development of local instructional and learning materials shall be encouraged. The adoption of these materials shall be devolved to the regional and division units in accordance with national policies and standards.

10.4. Medium of Instruction and Learning. In accordance with Sections 4 and 5 of the Act, basic education shall be delivered in languages understood by learners because language plays a strategic role in shaping the formative years of the learner.

The curriculum shall develop proficiency in Filipino and English, provided that the former shall serve as the foundational language of education and the latter as the dominant language of the learner. For kindergarten and the first three (3) years of elementary education, instruction, instructional materials and assessment shall be in the regional or indigenous language of the learners. DepEd shall develop a program for the transition from mother tongue/first language to languages of the curriculum appropriate to the ability and needs of learners from Grade 4 to Grade 6. Filipino and English shall be gradually introduced as languages of instruction until the two (2) languages become the primary languages of instruction at the level.

10.5. Stakeholder Participation. To achieve an improved and responsive basic education curriculum, the DepEd will conduct consultations with other national government agencies and other stakeholders, including, but not limited to, the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC), private and public school organizations, national student organizations, national teacher organizations, parent-teacher associations, chambers of commerce and other industrial organizations, for matters that will affect the stakeholders involved.

Section 11. Curriculum Consultative Committee. In accordance with Section 6 of the Act, a Curriculum Consultative Committee will be established with the Secretary of DepEd or his/her authorized representative as chairperson and the members consisting of, but not limited to, one representative each from CHED, TESDA, DOLE, PRC, Department of Science and Technology (DOST), and one representative from the business sector such as an industrial organization in Information Technology–Business Process Outsourcing (IT-BPO). The Consultative Committee will look into the review and evaluation of the implementation of the improved basic education curriculum and may suggest to the DepEd the formulation of the necessary curriculum refinements.

RULE III. QUALIFICATIONS, TRAINING, AND CONTINUOUS PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OF TEACHERS

Section 12. Teacher Training and Development. To ensure that the improved basic education program meets the requirements for quality teachers and school leaders, the DepEd and CHED will conduct programs for teacher training and development, in collaboration with relevant government partners, academia, industry, and non-governmental organizations. These professional development programs will be initiated, implemented, and evaluated regularly throughout the year to ensure continuous improvement of teacher skills. Teacher training and development programs will include the following, but not limited to:

12.1. In-service Content and Pedagogy Training. DepEd teachers who will implement the improved basic education curriculum but have not undergone pre-service education aligned with the improved basic education curriculum will be trained to meet the content and implementation standards of the improved basic education curriculum.

The DepEd will ensure that private educational institutions are given the opportunity to have such training.

12.2. Training of New Teachers. New graduates of the Teacher Education curriculum that is not aligned with the improved basic education curriculum will undergo additional training, once employed, to align their skills with the content standards of the new curriculum. In addition, CHED, in coordination with DepEd and relevant stakeholders, will ensure that the Teacher Education curricula provided in these TEIs meet the required quality standards for new teachers. Organizations with due recognition acting as TEIs, in coordination with DepEd, CHED, and other relevant stakeholders, will ensure that the curricula of these organizations meet the required quality standards for trained teachers.

For the purposes of this subsection, the term “organizations with due recognition acting as TEIs” refers to organizations, other than schools or HEIs, contracted outside of DepEd during the transition and for a specific period, to conduct training for teachers for the purposes of re-tooling graduates of the Teacher Education curriculum, and in subjects only where there is a shortage of trained teachers.

12.3. School Leadership Training. Superintendents, principals, curriculum coordinators, and other school instructional leaders will also undergo workshops and training to further improve their skills in their roles as academic, administrative, and community leaders.

12.4. Training of Alternative Learning System (ALS) Coordinators, Instructional Managers, Mobile Teachers, and Learning Facilitators. ALS coordinators, instructional managers, mobile teachers, and learning facilitators will also undergo workshops and training to further improve their skills in their roles as academic, administrative, and community leaders.

Section 13. Acceptance of Other Teachers. Despite the provisions of Sections 26, 27, and 28 of Republic Act No. 7836, also known as the “Act Professionalizing Teachers of the Philippines of 1994,” the DepEd and private educational institutions will, according to the requirements of specific lessons, accept:

13.1. Graduates of science, mathematics, statistics, engineering, music, and other courses with a shortage of qualified applicants for the Licensure Examination for Teachers (LET) to teach their specialization in elementary and secondary education. Qualified LET applicants also include graduates accepted by foundations with due recognition for their expertise in the education sector and have satisfactorily completed the requirements stipulated by these organizations: Provided, That they have passed the LET within five (5) years after the date of their acceptance: Provided, further, That if such graduates are willing to teach part-time, the LET provisions will no longer be required;

The term “foundations,” as used in this section, refers to non-stock and non-profit organizations, which do not function as educational institutions, contracted by DepEd for a specific period, to provide volunteer teachers in basic education for subjects lacking qualified teachers. The DepEd will issue rules and procedures for the selection and acceptance of these organizations.

13.2. Graduates of technical-vocational courses to teach their specialized lessons in secondary education: Provided, That these graduates hold a certification issued by TESDA: Provided, further, That they will undergo appropriate in-training provided by the DepEd or higher education institutions (HEIs) at the expense of the DepEd;

13.3. Faculty of HEIs to teach general education or specialized lessons in secondary education: Provided, That the faculty hold a relevant Bachelor’s degree, and have satisfactorily served as a full-time member of the HEI faculty;

13.4. The DepEd and private educational institutions may accept practitioners, who are experts in the unique subjects offered in the Basic Education Curriculum, to teach at the secondary level; Provided, That they will teach only part-time. For this purpose, the DepEd will, in coordination with appropriate government agencies, ensure the standards of the required qualifications for accepting these experts.

RULE IV. PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS

Section 14. Reasonable Supervision and Regulation. As a matter of policy laid down in Article XIV, Section 5(1) of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines, the State recognizes the complementary roles of public and private institutions in the education system and will exercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational institutions.

Section 15. Issuance and Revocation of Permits and/or Recognition of Private Senior High Schools. The DepEd will regulate those offering senior high school in private educational institutions. Private educational institutions can only open senior high schools with the permission of the DepEd. The DepEd will designate the rules for the issuance and revocation of permits and/or recognition of senior high schools.

Section 16. Specializations of Private Senior High School. Private educational institutions may open senior high school specializations that are important for the economic and social development of the country, region, or locality. Local planning will be encouraged in the development of educational policies and programs that are consistent with state policies considering regional and sectoral needs and conditions.

RULE V. CAREER GUIDANCE AND COUNSELING ADVOCACY

Section 17. Career Guidance and Counseling Programs. In accordance with Section 9 of the Act, to properly guide students in choosing the career path they intend to pursue, the DepEd will, in coordination with DOLE, TESDA, CHED, PRC, NYC, industrial organizations, professional organizations, and other relevant stakeholders, promote programs that will open students to the world and value of work, and shape the skills of career counselors to guide students and provide them with the necessary life skills and values.

Section 18. Career Advocacy Activities. Career advocacy activities refer to activities that will guide students at the secondary level to choose the career paths they intend to pursue. Career advocacy activities include the provision of career information and experiences, counseling, coordination and referrals, and may also include, but are not limited to, career interviews, career and job fairs, parent orientations, career decision-making seminars-workshops.

Section 19. Career Advocates. Despite the provisions of Section 27 of Republic Act No. 9258, also known as the “Guidance and Counseling Act of 2004,” career advocates will be allowed to perform career advocacy activities for secondary school students of the schools where they work: Provided, That they will undergo appropriate capacity building programs developed and implemented by the DepEd, in coordination with DOLE, TESDA, CHED, PRC, NYC, student organizations, industrial organizations, guidance and counseling organizations, professional organizations, and other relevant stakeholders.

Career advocacy can be carried out by career advocates and co-facilitators. In accordance with Section 9 of the Act, career advocates refer to career guidance and employment counselors who are not registered and licensed counselors. Career advocates include homeroom advisors and teachers of all learning subjects who will implement career advocacy activities. Co-facilitators are secondary school students trained to assist career advocates in implementing career advocacy activities.

Section 20. The Role of DepEd. The DepEd shall:

(a) Integrate career concepts into the curriculum and conduct teaching on related lesson topics;

(b) Conduct career assessments;

(c) Conduct regular career advocacy activities;

(d) Will conduct continuous professionalization and capability building of guidance counselors, career advocates, and co-facilitators;

(e) Develop or authorize career advocacy training programs;

(f) Establish a career advocacy unit and provide adequate office space in high schools; and

(g) Designate guidance supervisors at the division level and career advocates at the school level.

RULE VI. BENEFICIARIES OF E-GASTPE AND OTHER FINANCING TO PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND NON-DEPED PUBLIC SCHOOLS

Section 21. Expansion of E-GASTPE Beneficiaries. In accordance with Section 10 of the Act, the DepEd shall develop complementary programs that will expand the benefits provided by Republic Act No. 8545 or the “Expanded Government Assistance to Students and Teachers in Private Education Act” to eligible students enrolled in senior high school.

Section 22. Bases for Assistance to Qualified Students. Assistance programs will primarily be given to students who have completed junior high school in public schools, taking into consideration the income and financial needs of the students, the available capabilities of schools in the local public, private, and non-DepEd areas, the socio-economic needs of the regions, the total activities of private and non-DepEd public schools, as well as the geographical scope and student population size.

Assistance programs may also be given to students who have completed junior high school in private educational institutions, whether or not these students are beneficiaries of E-GASTPE, subject to compliance with the qualifications and rules to be determined by the DepEd.

Section 23. Forms and Value of Assistance. The forms of assistance provided by the DepEd may include any of the following:

(a) A voucher system, where a coupon is issued directly to students to enable them to enroll in accredited private educational institutions or non-DepEd public schools of their choice for full or partial tuition or study assistance;

(b) Contracted Services for Education (ESC), where the government enters into agreements with private educational institutions or non-DepEd public schools to cover the tuition and other fees of high school students enrolling in private high schools under this program;

(c) Management contracts, where contractual agreements are entered into with private educational institutions or non-DepEd public schools to manage the day-to-day operations of public schools under agreed-upon objectives:

(d) Forms of assistance provided for in Republic Act No. 8545; and

(e) Other forms of financial agreements that conform to the principles of public-private partnerships.

The DepEd will consider the ability of program beneficiaries to cover the remaining tuition, if any, in setting the value of the voucher, ESC, or other form of assistance. The amount of assistance provided by the government shall not exceed the prescribed per-student spending in public schools.

Section 24. Participating Schools. Private educational institutions, non-DepEd public schools, and other potential providers of basic learning needs may be allowed to provide senior high school programs that may participate in assistance programs, if possible, under the E-GASTPE program and other financial agreements developed by the DepEd and DBM in accordance with the principles of public-private partnership. Continued participation of such providers in the E-GASTPE program and other financial agreements is subject to compliance with minimum requirements and standards, including student performance, as ensured by the DepEd.

To promote collaboration and greater unity between public and private educational institutions, the government will consider the current and potential capabilities of private educational institutions in expanding the capacity of public schools.

Section 25. Implementation Mechanisms. The DepEd may enter into contractual agreements or establish new mechanisms for the design, administration, and supervision of assistance programs or aspects thereof, subject to the approval of the appropriate government agencies. For this purpose, the DepEd shall:

(a) Issue appropriate rules for the implementation of assistance programs;

(b) Ensure transparency and accountability in the implementation of assistance programs;

(c) Implement information and advocacy programs to inform the public and ensure broad participation and access to assistance programs; and

(d) Conduct periodic reviews of program features and make changes, if necessary, to ensure successful, effective, and sustainable program implementation. Program features include the amount of financial assistance, the number of grantees, eligibility requirements, and the performance of participating schools.

Section 26. Funding Requirements. The budgetary requirements of the programs under this Rule shall be ensured by the national government.

The DepEd will encourage private and corporate donors to support the assistance programs in this section under the framework of Republic Act No. 8525, entitled, “An Act Establishing a ‘School Adopt-a-School’ Program, Providing Incentives Therefor, and for Other Purposes,” and other relevant laws and policies.

Section 27. Timeframe. The DepEd will implement the programs set forth in this Rule no later than the start of School Year 2016–2017.

Section 28. Additional Beneficiaries. The DepEd may develop similar assistance programs for kindergarten and elementary students and alternative learning system students in accordance with specific objectives, taking into account the needs and capabilities of public and private educational institutions.

RULE VII. TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

Section 29. Transition to the Improved Basic Education Program of Private Basic Education Institutions. The DepEd will ensure a smooth transition of private elementary and secondary schools in the country that are now aligned with the improved basic education program. Private educational institutions or a group thereof will develop their plans detailing how the transition will be carried out from their current basic education system to the improved basic education program. The DepEd will provide appropriate rules for the evaluation of transition plans.

Private educational institutions that offer twelve (12) to thirteen (13) years of basic education before the enactment of this Act shall submit their transition plans to the DepEd within twelve (12) months from the effectivity of this IRR, subject to rules to be issued by the DepEd.

Section 30. Implementation Mechanisms and Strategies. In accordance with Section 12 of the Act, the DepEd, CHED, and TESDA will develop appropriate strategies and mechanisms to ensure a smooth transition from the current ten (10) year cycle in basic education to the improved basic education cycle (K to 12). Strategies may cover changes in physical infrastructure, staffing, organizational and structural issues, bridging models from secondary education skills and requirements for entering new tertiary curricula, and government and other entity coordination. Modeling for Senior High School (SHS) may be implemented in selected schools to accelerate the transition process and provide concrete data for the transition plan in accordance with the rules set by the DepEd. The results of the SHS pilot program may be considered in the national implementation of the SHS program in School Year 2016–2017.

30.1. Engagement with HEIs and TVIs. To oversee the initial implementation of the improved basic education program and address the expected low enrollment in all levels for HEIs and TVIs for its people and physical resources, and issue rules relating to such engagement. Furthermore, the DepEd, CHED, TESDA, TVIs, and HEIs will closely coordinate with each other to implement strategies to ensure the academic, physical, financial, and human capabilities of HEIs and TVIs to provide educational and training services for graduates of the improved basic education program to ensure they are not severely affected. Faculty of HEIs and TVIs who are allowed to teach secondary education students under Section 8 of the Act will be prioritized for job retention during the transition.

30.2. Financial Framework for State Universities and Colleges During the Transition. The CHED and DBM will review the financial policy framework for State Universities and Colleges from the Act with the ultimate goal of maximizing the use of government resources for education, the results of which will be answered by a joint administrative order.

30.3. Effects of the Initial Implementation of the Improved Basic Education Program on Industry Human Resource Requirements. The DOLE, CHED, DepEd, TESDA, and PRC will develop a contingency plan, in collaboration with industry associations and chambers of commerce, no later than the start of School Year 2015–2016, to address the effects of the improved basic education program regarding the potential reduction or lack of college graduates who can meet industry human resource requirements. The plan will contain strategies to align industry employment policies with what is needed and practical, and may include the adoption of other related programs or appropriate qualifications.

Section 31. Labor Rights and Management. In the implementation of the Act, including the transition period, labor rights will be respected in accordance with the Constitution, the Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service, the Labor Code of the Philippines, and existing collective bargaining agreements, as well as the prerogatives of management. The DOLE, DepEd, CHED, and TESTA will promote appropriate joint administrative orders, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this IRR, to ensure the sustainability of private and public educational institutions, and promote and protect the rights, interests, and welfare of teaching and non-teaching personnel.

For this purpose, the DOLE shall convene a technical panel with representatives from the DepEd, CHED, TESDA, and representatives from organizations of teaching and non-teaching personnel, and administrators of educational institutions.

Section 32. Transition Period. The transition period shall be set from the date of receipt of this IRR until the end of School Year 2021–2022.

RULE VIII. CONGRESSIONAL JOINT OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE

Section 33. Congressional Joint Oversight Committee on the Enhanced Basic Education Program. The Congressional Joint Oversight Committee created under Section 13 of the Act shall be composed of five (5) members each from the Senate and the House of Representatives, including the Chairpersons of the Committees on Education, Arts and Culture, and Finance of both Houses. The composition of the Committee from each House shall require at least two opposition or minority members.

RULE IX. REQUIRED EVALUATION AND REVIEW

Section 34. Required Evaluation and Review. At the end of School Year 2014–2015, the DepEd shall conduct a required review and submit a midterm report to Congress on the state of implementation of the Enhanced Basic Education Program in terms of addressing the following current deficiencies in: (1) teachers; (b) classrooms; (c) textbooks; (d) chairs; (e) toilets; and (f) other deficiencies that need to be addressed.

The DepEd shall include in the midterm report the following key indicators of access to and quality of basic education: (a) participation rate; (b) retention rate; (c) National Achievement Test results; (d) completion rate; (e) teacher welfare and training profiles; (f) adequacy of funding requirements; and (g) other learning facilities, including, but not limited to, computer and science laboratories, libraries and library hubs, and sports, music, and arts facilities.

RULE X. ACCOUNTABILITY TO GLOBAL STANDARDS.

Section 35. Accountability to Global Standards. The DepEd shall commit to increasing per capita spending on education towards the immediate attainment of global standards. For this purpose, the DepEd shall undertake the:

a) engagement with local government units for the efficient use of funds for special education and other funds that promote and support basic education;

b) implementation of programs that will improve the participation and engagement of the private sector in basic education; and

c) proposal of annual budgetary allocation in accordance with these objectives. The DepEd shall also develop a multi-year spending plan to ensure that the education spending standards set by UNESCO are met.

RULE XI. FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 36. Appropriations. In accordance with Section 11 of the Act, the initial funding for the implementation of the Enhanced Basic Education Program shall be taken from the current appropriations of the DepEd. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued implementation of the enhanced basic education program shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Section 37. Implementing Details. The DepEd, CHED, and TESDA shall issue such policies and rules as may be necessary to further implement this IRR.

Section 38. Amendments. Amendments to this IRR shall require simultaneous approval by the Secretary of the DepEd, the Chairperson of the CHED, and the Director-General of the TESDA.

Section 39. Separability Clause. Should any of the provisions of this IRR be declared invalid or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other provisions hereof.

Section 40. Repealing Clause. In accordance with Section 18 of the Act, rules and regulations implementing the provisions relating from Presidential Decree No. 232 or “ Education Act of 1982,” Republic Act No. 9155 or “ Basic Education Management Act of 2001,” Republic Act No. 9258, Republic Act No. 7836, and all other laws, decrees, and implementing orders and rules and regulations that are contrary or inconsistent with the provisions of the Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 41. Effectivity Clause. This IRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

This IRR shall be registered with the Office of the National Administrative Register at the Law Center, University of the Philippines, UP Diliman, Quezon City.

Made this 4th day of September 2013.

(Signature) BR. ARMIN A. LUISTRO FSC

(Signature) DR. PATRICIA B. LICUANAN

Secretary

Chairperson

Department of Education

Commission on Higher Education

(Signature) CAL. EMMANUEL JOEL J. VILLANUEVA

Director-General

Technical Education and Skills Development Authority

*Official Gazette translation for information purposes only. This is not the official translation of the law.

Read in English