MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 219

CREATING A ONE-STOP-SHOP AND AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR PROCESSING OF HOUSING PERMITS

WHEREAS , in accordance with Section 9, Article III of the Constitution, the State is mandated to provide decent housing and basic services to the underprivileged and homeless Filipino families;

WHEREAS , the present Administration has embarked on a massive socialized and low-cost housing program to address the growing housing backlog in the country;

WHEREAS , to attain the targets of the housing sector as contained in the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan 2004-2010, there is a need to fast track the approval of housing-related permits to encourage maximum private sector participation in the delivery of housing services;

WHEREAS , to achieve this goal, it is necessary for government agencies involved in the issuance of housing-related permits, clearances, certifications and licenses to closely coordinate to prevent costly delays that hamper housing production;

WHEREAS , Section 20 (b) of Republic Act No. 7279, series of 1992, provides for the creation of One-Stop-Shop offices in the different regions of the country for the processing, approval and issuance of clearances, certifications, permits and licenses;

WHEREAS , Executive Order No. 45, series of 2001, mandates the concerned government agencies to comply with specific time periods in processing applications and issuance of housing-related certifications, clearances, licenses and permits;

WHEREAS , Republic Act No. 9485, series of 2007, or the Anti-Red Tape Act of 2007, was enacted into law to improve efficiency in the delivery of government service to the public by reducing bureaucratic red tape, preventing graft and corruption and providing penalties therefore;

WHEREAS , in the 19 th Cabinet Meeting held on 11 September 2007, the President directed all agencies concerned to issue new guidelines or review and amend existing procedures to streamline bureaucratic procedures and hasten government processing and issuance of housing-related certifications, clearances, licenses and permits including the creation of a One-Stop-Shop to assist real estate and subdivision developers in securing necessary permits from local government units and other agencies for housing development;

WHEREAS , there is a need to constitute an Inter-Agency Committee composed of the different government agencies involved in the issuance of housing-related clearances, certifications, licenses and permits to ensure the smooth operationalization of the One-Stop-Shop;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order:

Section 1. Establishment of One-Stop-Shop (OSS) for Housing Permits . One-Stop-Shops for Housing Permits shall be established to accept applications and assist developers in securing necessary licenses for housing development. The OSS shall be made up of agencies involved in the issuance of housing-related permits, clearances, certification and licenses, including but not limited to the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR), Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG).

Section 2. Creation of an Inter-Agency Committee for the One-Stop-Shop (IAC-OSS) . There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee for the One-Stop-Shop, which shall be composed of the following:

The IAC-OSS shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

1. Provide policy and operational guidelines to ensure compliance with the processing and issuance of housing-related clearances, certifications, permits and licenses as provided for in Executive Order 45, series of 2001;

2. Ensure the designation of their respective agencies’ permanent and alternate representatives to the OSS, and to the extent allowed by law, delegate to them sufficient authority to process and dispose of applications for necessary documents; and

3. Ensure that the objective of this Administrative Order is successfully implemented.

HUDCC, as chair of the IAC-OSS shall have the power to call upon the agencies of the government including the members of the IAC-OSS to ensure the successful implementation of the One-Stop Shop.

Section 3. HLURB as the Lead Implementing Agency . The HLURB is directed to lead the implementation and operation of the OSS. As lead implementing agency, the HLURB shall have, but not limited to, the following functions and responsibilities:

1. Oversee the proper implementation and smooth operation of the OSS;

2. Regularly assess and monitor the OSS operations, with the end view of adopting new policies and guidelines to continually improve the OSS; and

3. Recommend improvements in the proper operation of the OSS to the IAC-OSS.

Section 4. Support from Concerned Agencies and Other Private Sector Groups . All concerned agencies are hereby directed to provide the necessary support and assistance to the OSS.

The OSS may also invite and call on private sector groups, such as the Chamber of Real Estate and Builders Association, Inc. (CREBA), the Subdivision and Housing Developers Association, Inc. (SHDA), the National Real Estate Association (NREA), other real estate associations, and non-government organizations involved in socialized and low-cost housing projects, to provide input and assistance in the operationalization and monitoring of the OSS.

Section 5. Funding . Funding for the establishment and operation of the OSS shall be sourced from the respective budgets of the agencies involved in the OSS.

Section 6. Repealing Clause . All executive orders, rules and regulations inconsistent with any provision of this Administrative Order shall be deemed revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of January in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2008). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.