MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 278

PROVIDING MEASURES FOR THE OPTIMUM UTILIZATION OF WATER RESOURCES IN METRO MANILA

WHEREAS, the water level in Angat Dam has fallen to an alarming level, which may be aggravated by the forecasted El Nino conditions during the first quarter of 2010;

WHEREAS, as a consequence, a shortfall in water supply for Metro Manila is expected;

WHEREAS, there is a critical need to institute appropriate measures to ensure the optimum utilization of water resources for Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, there is a need to actively implement water conservation measures and to improve the operational efficiency of water service providers (e.g., reduce the level of non-revenue water) to maximize the limited supply of water.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. The Government shall adopt urgent and decisive measures to address the water shortage in Metro Manila to protect the health and well-being of the population.

Sec. 2. The following measures are hereby adopted to mitigate the effects of water shortages:

a. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), through the National Water Resources Board (NWRB), shall appropriately cut-down water allocation and actual releases to the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) and the National Irrigation Authority (NIA) effective January 2010;

b. The DENR, with the NWRB, the MWSS, and the Public Information Agency (PIA) shall undertake a massive information, education and communication campaign to encourage people to implement water conservation measures;

c. All Local Government Units (LGUs) in Metro Manila through the barangays shall monitor and report all water leaks and pilferages to the concerned Water Concessionaire;

d. The MWSS and its Concessionaires * shall actively pursue and immediately respond to all complaints of water leaks within twenty four (24) hours and shall ensure that the leaks are repaired within 3 to 5 days after receiving the complaints;

e. The Philippine National Police shall assist the MWSS and Water Concessionaires in the enforcement of anti-pilferage measures;

f. The LGUs in Metro Manila shall expedite the grant of permits for the repair of water leaks by allowing the 2 concessionaires to apply for permits directly with the barangay concerned with a copy of the permit furnished the Office of the Mayor for recording purposes;

g. The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), the Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA) and other concern government agencies shall provide immediate assistance to the MWSS and Water Concessionaires in improving water service delivery;

h. The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), in coordination with the Department of Finance (DOF), shall work for the grant of incentives for the production of goods that conserve water and establishments undertaking optimum water conservation and utilization in Metro Manila;

i. The Department of Agriculture, through the National Irrigation Authority, shall terminate or schedule land soaking activities of Angat-Maasim River Irrigation System (AMRIS) service areas to maximize the use of available water for irrigation;

j. All government agencies and instrumentalities shall assign water marshals and shall undertake water conservation and assessment program, using as reference point, water consumption in January 2010, and submit monthly comparative report of water consumption to the NWRB.

Sec. 3. The Angat Hydro-Electric Plant shall be exempted from use, for ancillary services.

Sec. 4. The National Economic & Development Authority, in coordination with NWRB and MWSS, shall engage experts in identifying all possible options on demand-side management (e.g., use of water-free urinals, off-the-shelf environmental-friendly practices), operational efficiency improvement (e.g., reduction in non-revenue water) and new water supply sources that will avert the water crisis, and analyzing each identified option/intervention in terms of “value for money”.

Sec. 5. The DENR, through the NWRB, shall take the lead in the preparation of the detailed action plan and coordinate activities to implement this Order.

Sec. 6. All Departments, agencies and instrumentalities of Government are hereby directed to provide assistance in the implementation of this Order.

Sec. 7. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8 th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2010). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.