MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 211

CREATING A TASK FORCE AGAINST POLITICAL VIOLENCE

WHEREAS , it is the policy of the State to maintain peace and order, protect life, liberty, and property, and promote common welfare as essentials for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings of democracy;

WHEREAS , the State recognizes that the attainment of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace under the rule of law is the foundation of economic development and national prosperity;

WHEREAS , with the recent incidents of violence in the country, political violence has become a fundamental moral and governance challenge;

WHEREAS , this administration, pursuant to its constitutional and international obligations, condemns all forms of violence, particularly when perpetrated for political gains and goals, destabilization, abuse of power and other political excesses;

WHEREAS , the constitutional guarantee of full respect for human rights by the State cannot be fully attained without the cooperation of all sectors of society;

NOW , THEREFORE , I , GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation and Mandate of the Task Force Against Political Violence (TFAPV) . A Task Force Against Political Violence (hereinafter “Task Force”) is hereby created to harness and mobilize government agencies, political groups, the religious, civil society and sectoral organizations and the public for the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment of political violence, the care and protection of people and communities victimized and threatened with violence, and the promotion of a culture opposed to violence and for the advancement of reconciliation and peace.

SEC. 2. Composition . The Task Force shall be composed of representatives from the following departments and agencies:

1. Department of Justice

2. Department of National Defense

3. Department of Interior and Local Government

4. Office of the National Security Adviser

5. Office of the Political Adviser

6. Office of the Presidential Adviser on Peace Process

7. Presidential Human Rights Committee, and

8. Philippine Information Agency

The members of the Task Force shall elect from among themselves a Head.

The Armed Forces of the Philippines, Philippine National Police, National Intelligence Coordinating Agency and National Bureau of Investigation are hereby directed to actively support and participate, through their principal agencies, in carrying out the mandate of the Task Force.

Sec. 3. Secretariat . The secretariat of the Task Force shall be designated from among the personnel of the department/office of the Head.

Sec. 4. The Task Force shall coordinate and work with the Judiciary, as well as the Presidential Commission on Values Formation, the Commission on Human Rights, the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines and nongovernment organizations, in achieving its mandate.

Sec. 5. The Task Force shall prioritize the formulation and implementation of measures to prevent further political violence and ensure peace and security all over the country.

Sec. 6. The various departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and local government units are hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance, and cooperation to the Task Force in carrying out its mandate.

Sec. 7. The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to provide the necessary funding support for the expenses in connection with the activities of the Task Force, subject to existing and pertinent budgetary, auditing rules and regulations.

Sec. 8. Effectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of November, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.