MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 171

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE

WHEREAS , the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) of the United Nations has released its fourth assessment report on climate change, prepared by 2,500 experts from 150 countries;

WHEREAS , the report indicated that global temperature will continue to rise towards the year 2100, and in the short-term, will rise by about 1.4-5.8 degrees centigrade, leading to an increase in the sea level from 18 to 59 centimeters by 2010;

WHEREAS , the IPCC findings indicated, that with ninety-percent (90%) certainty, the rise in temperatures had been “very likely” caused by human activity and due to increases in the release in the atmosphere of greenhouse gasses: carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride;

WHEREAS , climate change poses serious threats to the lives and welfare of the people, especially the poor households, and sustainable development of the country due to the attendant rise in sea levels, frequency and intensity of extreme weather events and drought, and the resulting flooding, disruptions in food production, water resources availability and quality, increase in natural hazards and landslides, threats to human health, and damages to the ecosystems;

WHEREAS , the Philippines signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) on June 12, 1992 and ratified it on August 2, 1994, and signed the Kyoto Protocol on April 15, 1998 and ratified it on November 22, 2003;

WHEREAS , the Philippines, being an archipelagic country and located in the typhoon belt, is highly vulnerable to the adverse effects resulting from climate changes and has been experiencing unusual number of high-intensity typhoons that have wrought devastations and anguished to our people;

WHEREAS , there is an urgent need to confront the issue of climate change and decisively address its adverse effects on the people and on the production sectors pursuant to the constitutional mandate for the state to protect and advance the right of the Filipino people to a balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature;

NOW , THEREFORE , I , GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of the Presidential Task Force. — There is hereby created a Presidential Task Force on Climate Change (PTFCC, hereinafter), to act with resolve and urgency in addressing the issue of climate change, mitigate its impact and adapt to its effects.

Section 2. Composition. — The PTFCC shall be composed of the Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources as Chair, with the Secretaries of Energy, Science and Technology, Agriculture, and Interior and Local Government, with two (2) representatives from the private sector/civil society as members.

The representatives from the private sector/Civil Society shall be appointed by the President, upon the recommendation of the PTFCC Chairman.

Section 3. Mandate and Functions. — The Task Force shall have the following functions:

1. Conduct rapid assessment on the impact of climate change to the Philippine setting, especially on the most vulnerable sectors/areas, like water, agriculture, coastal areas, as well as on the terrestrial and marine ecosystems, among others.

2. Ensure strict compliance to air emission standards and act with urgency to combat deforestation and environmental degradation as well as apprehend violators.

3. Undertake/initiate strategic approaches and measures to prevent or reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the Philippines, including fuel efficiency, energy conservation, use of renewable energy, waste management, etc.

4. Conduct a massive and comprehensive public information and awareness campaign nationwide to educate the public on the climate change situation and its adverse effects, and mobilize multi-sectoral actions on climate change.

5. Design concrete risk reduction and mitigation measures and adaptation responses, especially to address short-term vulnerabilities, on sectors and areas where climate change will have the greatest impact.

6. Collaborate with international partners at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels to support a global front to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions and institute mitigating and adaptive measures, especially for developing countries.

7. Cause the integration and mainstreaming of climate risk management into the development policies, plans and programs of government.

8. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

Section 4. Secretariat and Technical Support. — The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) shall provide secretariat support to the PTFCC. The Inter-Agency Committee on Climate Change, created by Administrative Order No. 220 dated May 8, 1991, and composed of the DENR as Chairman, Department of Science and Technology (DOST) as Co-Chairman, Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Environmental Management Bureau (EMB), National Mapping and Resources Information Authority (NAMRIA), and Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAG-ASA) shall act as the technical arm of the PTFCC.

Section 5. Agency Assistance. — All departments, agencies, offices or instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to provide support, assistance and resources to the PTFCC in the discharge of its functions.

Section 6. Budgetary Support. — The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) is hereby directed to provide the funds necessary for the effective operation of the PTFCC and implementation of necessary actions to address climate change.

Section 7. Reporting. — The PTFCC is hereby directed to submit to the Office of the President (OP) an Action Plan to implement its mandate within forty-five (45) days from the issuance of this Order. Thereafter, the PTFCC shall guide, coordinate and monitor the implementation of the Action Plan and submit regular status report to the OP.

Section 8. Separability. — Any portion or provision of this Administrative Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying its other portions or provisions, as long as such remaining portions can still be given effect.

Section 9. Repeal. — All administrative orders, rules and regulations and other issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order, are hereby revoked, amended, or modified accordingly.

Section 10. Effectivity. — This Administrative Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of February in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.