MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 205

DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF EDUCATION TO LEAD THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF A PROGRAM OF ACTIVITIES IN COMMEMORATION OF THE 110 TH ANNIVERSARY OF PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE ON JUNE 12, 2008

WHEREAS, the heroism, patriotism and nationalism of our forebears in the struggle for the independence of our country merit noble commemoration;

WHEREAS, the 110 th anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence is an ideal occasion for all Filipinos to unite and celebrate the freedom and liberty of our nation and to rally behind the government and the country’s institutions;

WHEREAS, in order to have a truly meaningful celebration, the proper planning, coordination and implementation of all activities are needed;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The Secretary of Education is hereby directed to take the lead in the planning, coordination, and implementation of the program of activities and events in celebration of Independence Day on June 12, 2008.

Sec. 2. The Department of Education, as the lead agency of the celebrations, shall convene an inter-agency organizing task force to plan, coordinate and implement effectively all programs, projects and activities related to this national event.

Sec. 3. The inter-agency task force shall be composed of the representatives of the Office of the President, the Department of Education, the Department of Tourism and the National Historical Institute.

Sec. 4. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies, local government units and government owned and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to give full support, assistance, and cooperation to the Secretary of Education in the exercise of his responsibilities under this Administrative Order.

Sec. 5. All branches of the government are enjoined to actively participate in the Independence Day celebrations, as well as to enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations, so that the commemoration of the 110 th Anniversary of the country’s independence will truly demonstrate the spirit of patriotism, unity and national identity of the Filipino people.

Local government units, together with private sector groups and non-government organizations, and the Philippine Embassies abroad are likewise enjoined to celebrate Independence Day in their respective localities and offices.

Sec. 6. The events and activities for the Philippine Independence Day celebration shall include, to the extent appropriate, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (National Flag Day) on May 28, as the kick-off ceremony

b. Flag-Raising and Wreath-Laying Ceremonies at the Rizal National Monument, Rizal Park, Manila, in the morning of June 12

This particular activity shall be replicated in places of national historical significance, such as the Barasoain Church Historial Landmark in Malolos City, Bulacan; the Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, Cavite; the Mausoleo de los Veteranos de la Revolucion at the Manila North Cemetery; the Bonifacio National Monument in Calookan City; and the Pinaglabanan Memorial Shrine in San Juan, Manila. All other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to simultaneously hold similar activities on the same day and time.

c. To follow immediately, the Philippine Independence Day Parade at the Quirino Grandstand, which shall have a meaningful theme relevant to the celebration; and, thereafter, by a special presentation on the historic importance of June 12.

Sec. 7. The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to provide the necessary funding support for the expenses in connection with the activities commemorating the 110 th Anniversary of Philippine Independence, chargeable against appropriate funds for the purpose and subject to existing and pertinent budgetary, auditing rules and regulations.

Sec. 8. In support of the celebrations, all concerned government agencies and local government units, subject to budgetary laws and issuances, are authorized to allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for the said event.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of October, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.