MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 28

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 16th ANNIVERSARY OF THE FEBRUARY 22-25, 1986 FIRST PEACEFUL PEOPLE POWER EDSA REVOLUTION AND THE 1st ANNIVERSARY OF EDSA-2

WHEREAS, the February 22-25 first peaceful People Power EDSA revolution otherwise known as EDSA-1 restored democratic institutions and ushered meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country, while EDSA-2 further pursued the reforms towards reformation and good governance;

WHEREAS, the triumph of both peaceful revolutions for social and political change and reformation was anchored upon people power, the ultimate demonstration of the citizens’ solidarity in seeking to transform Philippine society and chart a new course for the country’s history by linking arms and courageously asserting their democratic rights for the commonweal;

WHEREAS, EDSA-1 and EDSA-2 serve as our inspiration as we continue charting our collective course as a nation and a people.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Constitution of a National Committee. There is hereby constituted a National Committee for the commemoration of the 16th Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 First Peaceful Power EDSA Revolution and the 1st Anniversary of EDSA-2, which shall be chaired by the Chairman and Co-Chairman of the EDSA People Power Commission, Secretary Alberto Romulo and Commissioner Ramon del Rosario, Jr., respectively. Secretary Dinky Soliman of the Department of Social Welfare and Development, is hereby designated as Vice Chairperson. The other members of the EDSA People Power Commission shall also be members of the National Committee, serving as representatives of the NGO’s/Private and Business Sectors, together with the following representatives of the Government Sector:

1. Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs 2. Secretary of the Department of Tourism 3. Secretary of the Department of National Defense 4. Secretary of the Department of Public Works and Highways 5. Secretary of the Department of Interior and Local Government 6. Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management 7. Secretary of the Department of Education 8. Secretary of the Department of Labor and Employment 9. Secretary of the Presidential Management Staff 10. Chairman of the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority 11. Chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education 12. Chairperson of the National Youth Commission 13. Chairman of the Development Bank of the Philippines 14. Chairperson of the National Commission on the Role of Women 15. Executive Director of the National Historical Institute 16. Director General of the Public Information Agency 17. Administrator of the Philippine Overseas Employment Agency 18. Administrator of the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration 19. Director General, Technical Education and Skills Development Authority 20. President, League of Provinces of the Philippines 21. President, League of Cities of the Philippines 22. President, League of Municipalities of the Philippines

SEC. 2. Functions. The Committee shall have the following functions.

1. Formulate a comprehensive plan under the guidance of the EDSA People Power Commission as mandated by virtue of Executive Order No. 82, s. 1999, for the nationwide commemoration of the 16th Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 First Peaceful People Power EDSA Revolution and 1st Anniversary of EDSA-2 and coordinate with all sectors concerned in the implementation of the same taking into consideration austerity measures and the spirit of volunteerism;

2. Create such working committees and designate the respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors, as may be necessary, to ensure the success of the celebration; and

3. Invite and mobilize all sectors that wish to participate in the celebration and call upon any government instrumentality to render the necessary assistance therefor.

SEC. 4. Staff Support. The Department of Social Welfare and Development, together with the EDSA People Power Commission, shall provide the technical and secretariat support of the Committee. The heads of departments, agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are directed to give full support to the National Committee and its various working committees and to actively participate in the celebrations.

SEC. 5. Funding. The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of TWO MILLION PESOS (Php 2,000,000.00) to support this activity and release said amount to the Department of Social Welfare & Development immediately. Concerned agencies may allocate such amount as may be necessary to defray the expenditures that may be incurred in connection with their participation in the Anniversaries.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2002). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.