MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 140

DIRECTING THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TO EXPEDITE THE INTERMODAL TRANSPORT DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

WHEREAS, the Government of the Philippines is implementing the Sustainable Logistics Development Program (SLDP) Road and Roll-on-Roll-Off Ferry Network and Coastal Service developed by the Development Bank of the Philippines in pursuit of one of the 10 points of the legacy agenda of the Arroyo administration, namely, to link the entire country through a network of transport and digital infrastructure;

WHEREAS, the Government of the Philippines prioritizes tourism investments in the Visayas, Palawan, Bicol and the small islands of Northern Mindanao;

WHEREAS, the Government of the Philippines, with the technical assistance from the Asian Development Bank (ADB), is currently implementing the Intermodal Transport Development Project to improve the accessibility of Southern Philippines and contribute to the reduction of poverty in the areas of Mindanao and Palawan;

WHEREAS, the objectives of this study, among others, should be as follows:

a. Prepare an integrated transport development plan for Mindanao and Palawan that will identify priority projects that will improve efficiency of intermodal (air, sea and land) transportation system in synchrony with the master plan for the SLDP and the priority tourism investments;

b. Formulate recommendations on priority transport infrastructure projects for funding by ADB;

WHEREAS, the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) is tasked to implement said project in two phases, to wit:

a. Phase I involves the preparation of an intermodal transport development plan for Southern Philippines, identification of priority areas of intervention for the ADB, and screen potential subprojects that may be undertaken for the development of intermodal transport in Southern Philippines.

b. Phase II involves the consolidation of subprojects identified in Phase I for the development of an intermodal transport development project for ADB financing.

WHEREAS, there is a need for the DOTC to expedite this project and closely coordinate with all relevant government agencies to ensure its effective implementation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The DOTC is hereby directed to expedite the ADB Intermodal Transport Development Project for Southern Philippines and organize a Project Management Office (PMO) for the ADB Intermodal Transport Development Project for the purpose.

Section 2. The PMO shall be headed by a senior official of the DOTC, with a deputy who is a senior official of the Mindanao Economic Development Council (MEDCO).

Section 3. The PMO shall prepare an integrated development plan for Mindanao and Palawan and formulate recommendations on priority transport infrastructure projects for funding by the ADB.

Section 4. The Secretary of DOTC and the Chairman of MEDCO are hereby authorized to call upon all other agencies whose assistance and support may be deemed necessary to the effective performance of its functions and such agencies as are hereby directed to extend full cooperation thereto.

Section 5. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of February, in the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.