MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 114

DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS TO COORDINATE THE PHILIPPINE ACTIVITIES IN CONNECTION WITH THE CELEBRATION OF THE 30TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES AND THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

WHEREAS, on 9 June 2005, the Republic of the Philippines and the People’s Republic of China will commemorate the 30th year of the establishment of diplomatic relations;

WHEREAS, China is an important bilateral partner of the Philippines and its ascendancy as an economic and regional power signifies the development of meaningful relations with China as a strategic agenda of Philippine foreign policy;

WHEREAS, the 30th anniversary of Philippine-China diplomatic relations presents an opportunity for the Philippines to promote its national interest through enhanced bilateral relations and the establishment of a comprehensive and coordinated program to promote the country to achieve the following:

a) Improved image of the country in China; b) Increased bilateral trade; c) Additional foreign direct investments from China; d) Increased tourism activity in the country; e) Openings for the service sector; f) Enhanced business confidence on both sides; g) Expanded people-to-people exchanges; and h) Improved government-to-government relations.

WHEREAS, there is a need to identify a coordinator who will oversee the activities and events that will be held in 2005 related to the 30th anniversary celebrations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Coordinator. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs, hereinafter referred to as Coordinator, is directed to coordinate the program of activities in connection with the celebration of the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Republic of the Philippines and the People’s Republic of China. The Coordinator shall be responsible for the implementation of this Administrative Order.

Section 2. Adviser. The Coordinator is authorized to elicit the advice of former President Fidel V. Ramos in the performance of his functions.

Section 3. Powers and Functions of the Coordinator. The Coordinator shall exercise the following powers and functions:

a) Serve as the over-all coordinator of the events and programs for the Philippines related to the 30th anniversary celebration;

b) Integrate and coordinate the efforts of the various government agencies and private sector organizations on Philippine image-building campaigns in China;

c) Call upon the support of any department, bureau or office of the Government, including government-owned and controlled corporations for any assistance deemed necessary in the implementation of this Administrative Order;

d) Propose projects for immediate implementation and recommend funding thereof;

e) Partner with private sector institutions to secure, approve and manage financial resources for the programs for the celebration; and

f) Perform other functions as may be deemed necessary in order to achieve the objectives of this Administrative Order.

Section 4. Executive Secretariat. The Coordinator shall appoint an Executive Secretariat that shall monitor and integrate the projects and activities of the implementing agencies of the Government and partners in the private sector. The Executive Secretariat shall be composed of personnel appointed by the Coordinator.

Section 5. Funding. A sum of Five Million Pesos (P 5,000,000.00) from sources to be identified by the Department of Budget and Management is hereby provided to the Coordinator as seed money for financing the programs approved by the latter. The Coordinator shall raise funds from various sources whenever necessary.

Section 6. Separability Clause. If any part or provision of the Administrative Order is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other parts or provisions not affected shall remain valid and effective.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2005). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.