MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 98

DESIGNATING THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AS THE LEAD AGENCY FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION IN EXPO 2005 AICHI, JAPAN, THE WORLD EXPOSITION

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, in its desire to sustain its presence in the international community, has committed to organize Philippine participation in the EXPO 2005 Aichi, Japan by presenting the country’s natural and cultural heritage and its thrust of maintaining the critical balance between sustained development and environment;

WHEREAS, the Philippine participation in the EXPO 2005 Aichi provides a major opportunity for the Philippines to present itself to the world in terms of creating awareness for its business potentials, history, and culture vis-à-vis the theme of the EXPO 2005 Aichi: “Nature’s Wisdom”;

WHEREAS, there is a need to designate a lead agency to supervise the conduct of the Philippine participation during the EXPO 2005 Aichi:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Department of Tourism as Lead Agency. The Secretary of the Department of Tourism is hereby designated as the lead in overseeing and undertaking the necessary preparation for the Philippine Presentation in EXPO 2005.

As such, the DOT Secretary is hereby given authority to form a preparatory committee, assisted by the Bureau of International Tourism Promotion (BITP) and the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation (PCVC).

SEC. 2. Functions. The DOT Secretary shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Act as the coordinator between the private sector and various government agencies to ensure that all directives issued to the said agencies for the planning, operation, and management of the Philippine Pavillion at EXPO 2005 Aichi shall be implemented;

b. Ensure that the economic advantages of the Philippine presentation are maximized through a concerted and cost-effective country approach;

c. Select the theme, concept, and message of the Philippine participation as maybe acceptable to both the Governments of the Philippines and Japan;

d. Ensure the safety and protection of government and personal properties, exhibit materials, and special effects needed to complete the Philippine presentation;

e. Seek the assistance of, and coordinate with the private sector and other Government organization in implementing the Philippine presentation and meeting the necessary requirements for the participation;

f. Call on any department, bureau or office of the government, including government-owned and controlled-corporations to render such assistance as it may need;

g. Undertake all other measures necessary for the successful participation of the Philippines at EXPO 2005 Aichi.

SEC. 3. EXPO-General. The DOT Secretary shall designate an official of the DOT to act as the EXPO-General for the Philippine Presentation in EXPO 2005 Aichi. He shall be the contact person of the EXPO 2005 organizers. The EXPO-General shall attend the activities that will be required by the EXPO 2005 organizers. He shall perform such functions that will be necessary to ensure the successful participation of the Philippines in the EXPO 2005 in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bureau of International Exposition (BIE).

SEC. 4. Secretariat. The EXPO-General shall form a project Secretariat that will service the technical, administrative, as well as the requirements of the BIE and the World Expo 2005.

Personnel of the Secretariat shall be sourced from the detail of personnel from the various units of the DOT, such as the BITP and PCVC.

SEC. 5. Funding. Funding subsidy shall come from the following Government departments and shall serve as the Philippine Government’s contribution to the project:

a. Subject to approval of the President, an allocation of Five Million Pesos (P5 M) from the President’s Contingent Fund which shall be used as initial operating expense of the Committee;

b. Allocation from the Department of Tourism in the amount of Sixty Three Million Pesos (P63 M) – P31.5M to be sourced from the funds of the Philippine Tourism Authority and 31.5M from DOT;

c. Allocation from the Manila International Airport Authority (MIAA), amount of which shall be subject to the approval of the MIAA Board of Trustees.

d. Allocation of Fifteen Million Pesos (P15 M) from the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) and Six Million Pesos (6 M) from the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA).

SEC. 6. Submission of Quarterly and Terminal Reports. A quarterly report on the status of the preparations for the Philippine Presentation as well as a terminal report within sixty (60) days from the termination of the Project shall be submitted to the Office of the President.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.