MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 170

ESTABLISHING WORKING ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE EFFECTIVE OPERATION OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT PORTAL, DELINEATING THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF SPECIFIC GOVERNMENT AGENCIES RELATIVE THERETO, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS , the State recognizes the vital role of information and communication in nation-building;

WHEREAS , Section 2 of Republic Act (RA) No. 8792 provides that the State recognizes the need to create an information-friendly environment which supports and ensures the availability, diversity and affordability of information and communications technology (ICT) products and services, including but not limited to government services;

WHEREAS , the Philippine government online portal was established to facilitate citizen and client access to online government information and services;

WHEREAS , the effective operation of the government portal is dependent on the active and sustained participation of all government agencies; and,

WHEREAS , ensuring the active and sustained participation of all government agencies in the successful operation of the government portal requires general directions and policies;

NOW THEREFORE I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order:

Section 1. General Supervision and Management of Portal Operations . The Office of the Executive Secretary (OES) shall exercise general oversight functions over the operations of the government portal. Pursuant to this task, the OES shall promulgate the following policies for the efficient and effective operation of the portal:

1.1 Portal Content and Content Quality Policy

1.2 Level of Service Policy

1.3 Operations Policy

The OES shall also take measures to ensure compliance to these policies. The Presidential Management Staff (PMS) is hereby directed to provide technical support to the OES in the tasks of policy formulation and ensuring compliance thereto.

Section 2. Responsibilities of Government Agencies relative to Portal Operations . Following are the specific responsibilities of relevant government agencies for the effective operation of the government portal.

2.1 Office of the Press Secretary (OPS) — shall be the agency (thru its Internet Unit) primarily responsible for direct supervision and maintenance of the government web portal; to specify and implement the design, look and feel, and revisions of the portal as an effective and timely communications tool as well as to provide the informational content, ensuring that the contents therewith are consistent with relevant policies and principles promulgated by the OES. Through the Presidential News Desk (PND) or in coordination with the information officers of the different government agencies, the OPS shall be responsible for providing timely news updates that shall be provided by the Philippine Information Agency (PIA). The OPS shall also be responsible for answering queries received through the portal, the intended recipient of which queries are not identified.

2.2 Commission on Information and Communications Technology (CICT) — shall be the agency responsible for the portal’s network and security management. The CICT shall also be responsible for the management of accounts of users of the portal.

2.3 Philippine Information Agency (PIA) — shall be the agency responsible for ensuring that the site’s overall appearance reflects the values and aspirations of the Philippine government, based on relevant policies set by the OES. The PIA may engage the services of private organizations to pursue this task effectively. The PIA shall also act as the official cyber-librarian of the government portal.

2.4 Other government agencies — shall be responsible for providing content, subject to the editing and approval of the OPS. These agencies shall be responsible for answering online queries received through the portal which are addressed to them or falling within the purview of their respective mandates.

Section 3. Separability Clause . The provisions of this Order are hereby deemed separable. If any provision thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions which shall remain in full force and effect.

Section 4. Repealing Clause . All orders, issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. Effectivity . This Administrative Order takes effect immediately.

DONE , this 29th day of December, in the year of our Lord, two thousand and six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2006). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.