MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 285

SETTING UP A TRANSITION COOPERATION TEAM AND INTRODUCING THE TRANSITION BLUEPRINT

WHEREAS, the true hallmark of a strong, functioning democracy is a smooth transition to a new government;

WHEREAS, the outgoing Administration must do everything in its power to make sure the new government has the benefit, from day one, of a strong, stable, government ready to continue working on behalf of the people it was elected to serve;

WHEREAS, there is need for a transition cooperation team to work closely with the representatives of the next President to ensure a peaceful, orderly and effective transition on June 30;

NOW, THEREFORE I, GLORIA M. ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Presidential Transition Cooperation Team . There is hereby created a Presidential Transition Cooperation Team (PTCT), which shall be responsible for the overall implementation, coordination and supervision of the entire transition blueprint provided in Section 2 herein and its corollary activities.

SEC. 2. Transition Blueprint . Transition planning shall be conducted to establish and define the processes and parameters that shall guide the government’s operations during the transition period. Results of the planning shall be the formulation of a Transition Blueprint (TB), which will provide for efficient and effective turn-over and the continued functions of the bureaucracy in the early days of the next Administration.

The Blueprint, which shall cover all government departments, agencies, bureaus, government-owned and -controlled corporations (GOCCs), and other instrumentalities including attached agencies under the Office of the President, may include the following:

a) Provide orderly and smooth transfer of power to the next Administration through:

i) Readiness to orient the incoming President and his Cabinet Members and key officials on the government’s structure, procedures and decisions flows;

ii) Readiness to provide information to the incoming Administration of the policies of various departments/agencies, their specific mandates, vision/mission, objectives, functional structures, key officers and their credentials, and other administrative information; and

iii) Proposals for continuity, particularly the clustered forward-looking national education program of the Department of Education, the Commission on Higher Education, and the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority as recommended by the Presidential Task For on the Education System;

b) Ensure seamless service delivery during the transition phase;

c) Document the key accomplishments of the Arroyo Administration;

d) Give due recognition to the persons, institutions and other organizations who have helped the Arroyo Administration achieve its goals.

SEC. 3. Composition of the PTCT . The PTCT shall be composed of the following:

The Executive Secretary as Chairperson

The Secretary of Foreign Affairs

The Secretary of Budget and Management

The Secretary of Education to represent the Presidential Task Force on the Education System

The Press Secretary

The Director-General of the National Economic and Development Authority

The Director-General of the Presidential Management Staff (PMS)

The Director-General of the Philippine Information Agency, with regard to the documentation of the key accomplishments of the Arroyo Administration.

The Office of the Executive Secretary and the PMS shall jointly provide technical and secretariat support to the PTCT.

SEC. 4. Functions of the PTCT . The PTCT shall perform the following specific functions:

a) Serve as overall and central coordination committee of all government departments, agencies, bureaus, GOCCs and other instrumentalities on the preparation and implementation of the TB;

b) Prepare guidelines on the specific preparations to be used by all government departments, agencies, bureaus, GOCCs, and other instrumentalities, for the turn-over;

c) Direct and oversee the preparation of the agencies’ respective TBs and the necessary transition reports;

d) Consolidate agencies’ reports into one (1) transition report which will be formally submitted to the incumbent President who may turn-over said documents to the President-elect;

e) Identify and prepare and inventory of key positions and the roles and functions of departing Presidential appointees at each major department, bureau or agency to guide the President-elect with necessary information in hiring the new officials; and

f) Serve as a clearing house for the recommendations of the Agency Transition Cooperation Teams provided in Section 5 herein, regarding the persons and/or organizations meriting the recognition of the Arroyo Administration in achieving its goals, and submit to the President the final list of said personnel and/or organization.

SEC. 5. Creation of Agency Transition Cooperation Teams (ATCT) and Coordinators . All government departments, agencies, bureaus, GOCCs and other instrumentalities including attached agencies under the Office of the President shall establish their respective ATCTs, as chaired by the Secretary or Head of the Agency and vice-chaired by the Senior Undersecretary or the Deputy Head of the Agency, with senior career officials as members. The ATCT shall:

a) Prepare the Organizational Transition Reports (OTRs) and Functional Transition Reports (FTRs) of their respective departments, which are provided in Section 6 herein;

b) Identify and summarize each agency’s important policies, and internal management for the guidance and information of the next Administration’s appointees;

c) Conduct briefings for incoming officials;

d) Conduct training exercises for the incoming officials and their staff to provide a working familiarity with each other and the processes that need to be followed;

e) Establish systems and procedures for transition to ensure continued operations; and

f) Extend technical and administrative assistance to the incoming Head of Office and his/her staff.

A Transition Coordinator shall be appointed to regularly coordinate with the PTCT on the status of the preparation and implementation of the department’s/agency’s transition plan.

SEC 6. Preparation and Submission of Reports. The departments/agencies’ transition cooperation teams shall prepare and submit the following on or before May 31, 2010 to the PTCT.

a) OTRs which shall provide the following formation:

i) Information on the Organization (mandate and functions, organizational chart, profiles of officials and personnel at central and field levels);

ii) Strategic linkages including their public clientele;

iii) Resources (financial, physical), including accomplishments in the Rationalization/Streamlining Plan; and

iv) Other challenges and proposed areas for action of the new head of office.

b) FTRs which include the status of policies, reforms ongoing as well as pipelined major programs/projects and legislative agenda and accomplishments.

SEC 7. Funding . Funding for the transition plans and other related activities shall be sourced from the respective budgets of the departments/agencies/GOCCs.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) LEANDRO MENDOZA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2010). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.