MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 6

DELEGATING THE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES PERTAINING TO TRAVEL ABROAD AND LEAVES OF ABSENCE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS TO THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, the President exercises general supervision over local governments pursuant to Article X, Section 4, of the Constitution; Book III, Title I, Section 18, of the Administrative Code of 1987; and Section 25 of the Local Government Code of 1991;

WHEREAS, the authority to approve requests of local government officials for permission to travel abroad when the period of travel extends to more than three (3) months; or during periods of emergency or crisis; or when the travel involves the use of public funds is vested in the President under Section 90 of the Local Government Code of 1991;

WHEREAS, the authority to approve the leaves of absence of governors and mayors of highly urbanized cities or independent component cities is vested in the President under Section 47 of the Local Government Code of 1991;

WHEREAS, sound principles of organization demand that the President be able to concentrate her attention upon larger and more important questions of policy and her time be freed, so far as possible, from the consideration of the smaller and far less important details;

WHEREAS, except for acts to be performed by the President personally, the multifarious executive and administrative functions of the President may be performed by and through the executive departments under the control of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Delegation of authority. – The authority to approve the following matters is hereby delegated to the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government:

a. Requests by local government officials for authority to travel abroad when the period of travel extends to more than three (3) months, or during periods of emergency or crisis, or when the travel abroad involves the use of public funds, vested in the President under Section 96 of the Local Government Code of 1991, and such other matters relative to the authority of local government officials to travel abroad vested in the President by law;

b. Leaves of absence of governors and mayors of highly urbanized cities or independent component cities vested in the President under Section 47 of the Local Government Code of 1991, and such other matters relative to leaves of absence of such local government officials vested in the President by law.

SECTION 2. Guidelines. – In line with the austerity measures being undertaken by the government, the grant of authority to travel abroad on official time, or when such travel involves the use of public funds, shall be confined to those travels which are urgent and extremely necessary and are expected to bring immediate benefit to the country.

SECTION 3. Implementing rules and regulations. – The Secretary of the Interior and Local Government shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Administrative Order taking into account the austerity measures of the government.

SECTION 4. Repealing Clause. – All executive orders and other issuances and authorizations not consistent with this Administrative Order are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

SECTION 5. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

City of Manila, March 7th, 2001.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RENATO S. DE VILLA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2001). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.