MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 254

MANDATING THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TO LEAD IN FORMULATING A NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT (EST) FOR THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS , Executive Order (EO) No. 774 dated 26 December 2008 reorganized the Presidential Task Force on Climate Change;

WHEREAS , Section 9 of EO No. 774 provided that to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels, the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) shall lead a Task Group on Fossil Fuels (TGFF) to reform the transportation sector;

WHEREAS , officials of the DOTC attended the Ministerial Conference on Global Environment and Energy in Transport in Japan on 14-16 January 2009, wherein the ministers responsible for environment and energy in the transport sector committed to combating climate change.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA M. ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Mandating the Task Group on Fossil Fuels (TGFF) to formulate a National Environmentally Sustainable Transport Strategy for the Philippines — The TGFF shall be primarily responsible for the effective coordination by various agencies of the government, international organizations and the private sector pertaining to the formulation of the National Environmentally Sustainable Transport (EST) Strategy, including all activities related thereto.

SECTION 2. Composition of the TGFF — The TGFF shall be composed of the following:

Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)

Executive Secretary

Presidential Adviser on Climate Change (PACC)

Secretary, Department of Budget and Management (DBM)

Secretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)

Secretary, Department of Health

Secretary, Department of Finance

Secretary, Department of Trade and Industry

Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority

Chief Executive Officer and Commissioner, Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board

Chairman, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority

Chairperson, National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women

Representatives from the academe, and

Representatives from the private sector.

The TGFF may form sub-Task Groups or Technical Working Groups composed of representatives from government agencies concerned and private sector or non-governmental organizations to perform specific duties and assignments.

SECTION 3. Secretariat — A Secretariat composed of representatives from the DOTC, the National Center for Transportation Studies of the University of the Philippines and the Presidential Adviser on Climate Change is hereby created to assist the Task Group.

SECTION 4. Functions of the TGFF — In addition to the functions provided in EO 774, the TGFF shall initiate and pursue the formulation of the National EST Strategy for the Philippines.

Specifically, the TGFF shall perform the following functions:

(a) Reform the transport sector to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels. The new paradigm in the movement of men and things must follow a simple principle: “Those who have less in wheels must have more in road.” For this purpose, the system shall favor non-motorized locomotion and collective transportation system (walking, bicycling, and the man-powered mini-train).

(b) Through the DOTC and the DPWH, immediately transform roads using the aforesaid principle.

(c) Through Malacañan Palace and all Cabinet offices, bring down by fifty percent (50%) the consumption of fossil fuels within two (2) years from the issuance of EO 774.

(d) Review the conformity of existing Philippine laws and regulations with established standards and provisions of EST.

(e) Identify, classify and prioritize programs toward realizing EST in the Philippines.

(f) Identify and establish the institutional and technical infrastructure requirement to implement the National EST Strategy.

(g) Through the DILG, coordinate with local government units and guide them on the plan to transform the locomotion and transportation system to favor parties who have no motorized vehicles, and facilitate the mainstreaming of the National EST Strategy.

(h) Through the PACC, consult with the biggest consumers and undertake extensive mass media social marketing and mobilization campaigns to reduce consumption of fossil fuels, as well as consult and coordinate with pertinent agencies and other bodies concerned concerning EST related plans and programs.

(i) Through the Secretaries of the DOTC, DBM, and DPWH, report to the President through the PACC every 48 hours on the progress of the initiatives stated in this Section.

(j) Perform such other duties and functions which may be necessary in the attainment of the objectives of the National EST Strategy, and such other acts as may be necessary and proper to implement this Order.

SECTION 5. Funding — To support the operations and activities of the Task Group, the DBM shall immediately make available funds from the Special Vehicle Pollution Control Fund of the Motor Vehicle Users’ Charges and other such funding sources as may be recommended by it.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause — All executive issuances, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are herby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity — This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a national newspaper of general circulation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2009). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.