MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 177

CREATING A NATIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE CONDUCT OF THE PHILIPPINE PARTICIPATION IN EXPO 2008 ZARAGOZA, SPAIN

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government, in its drive to enhance further the promotion of the Philippines, and sustain its presence, in the global market, has committed to participate at the International Exposition Zaragoza, Spain to be held from 14 June to 14 September 2008;

WHEREAS, the Philippine participation in Expo Zaragoza 2008 provides an excellent opportunity for the Philippines to present itself and create awareness about its natural and cultural heritage, its history and people, its business/investment potentials to a wide audience across the world;

WHEREAS, the relevance of the Expo Zaragoza 2008 theme: “Water & Sustainable Development” to the Philippines as an Archipelagic State will bolster the country’s strong foothold as the world’s number one dive site and the center of marine biodiversity in the world;

WHEREAS, in addition to the trade and tourism benefits and the goodwill that will be generated from participating in Expo Zaragoza 2008, it will likewise provide valuable insights and new learning opportunities on the recent trends, best practices and innovative concepts on water technology that will be beneficial in improving our policy and development framework on water and sustainable development;

WHEREAS, there is a need to create a National Organizing Committee with the Department of Tourism (DOT) as the lead implementing agency for the conduct of the Philippine participation in Expo Zaragoza 2008;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. National Organizing Committee (NOC) – A National Organizing Committee (NOC) for the Philippine participation at Expo Zaragoza 2008 is hereby created with the Department of Tourism (DOT) as the Lead Implementing Agency. The NOC shall be comprised of the following:

Chairman and Commissioner General:

Secretary of Tourism

Vice-Chairman:

Secretary of Foreign Affairs

Members:

Executive Secretary, Office of the President

Secretary of Trade and Industry

Secretary of Science and Technology

Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources

Secretary of Agriculture

Secretary of Budget and Management

Secretary of Health

Chairperson, National Commission for Culture and the Arts

Director General, Philippine Information Agency

General Manager, Philippine Tourism Authority

Chairman, Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation

Private Sector Representatives

In the event of unavailability of the above-mentioned members, they may designate their representatives with full authority to commit and decide on behalf of their agency to represent them during meetings of the Committee.

Section 2. Functions of the National Organizing Committee –

Section 3. Expo Secretary-General – The National Organizing Committee, through the Commissioner-General, shall designate an official of DOT or PCVC, to act as Expo Secretary-General for the Philippine participation in Expo Zaragoza 2008. He shall act as the contact person for the Expo Zaragoza 2008 Organizers, attend all activities that will be required by Expo organizers and, perform such functions that will be necessary to ensure the successful participation of the Philippines at Expo Zaragoza 2008 in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Bureau of International Exposition (BIE).

Section 4. Secretariat – The Commissioner-General thru the Secretary-General shall form a Secretariat that shall undertake the day-to-day operation and over-all preparations for the Philippine participation in Expo Zaragoza 2008.

Personnel of the Secretariat shall be sourced from various units within the DOT and PCVC. Said personnel shall be provided with honoraria or allowances at rates consistent with those prescribed by law.

Section 5. Funding – Funds necessary for the Philippine participation in Expo Zaragoza 2008 shall come from the following sources:

Allocation from the Department of Tourism (DOT) in the amount of TWENTY MILLION PESOS (P20M);

Allocation from the Philippine Tourism Authority (PTA) in the amount of TWENTY MILLION PESOS (P20M);

Allocation from the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) in the amount of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10M);

Allocation from the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) in the amount of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10M);

Allocation from the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) in the amount of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5M);

Allocation from the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) in the amount of ONE MILLION PESOS (P1M);

Allocation from the Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR) in the amount of TEN MILLION PESOS (P10M);

Proceeds from commercial activities at the Philippine Pavilion.

The financial subsidy to be given by the various members of the National Organizing Committee shall be recorded in their books as subsidy to National Government Agencies. The Receipt of Subsidy shall be recorded by the lead implementing agency as subsidy income. The lead agency shall then issue the corresponding official receipt to acknowledge financial assistance.

All funds to be solicited for this purpose shall be placed in a separate bank account that will be opened by the NOC Secretariat as authorized by the Secretary of Tourism, with account name: Expo Zaragoza 2008. A separate book of accounts shall be maintained by the NOC for this project.

Any savings to be realized and any income to be generated from sales of the souvenir shop, royalties from restaurants, sales from pavilion exhibitries, furniture, furnishings and other donations from other sources at the closing of the exposition, will be held in trust by the NOC and remitted to the Department of Tourism and to be utilized as mobilization fund for the Philippine Participation in the upcoming World Expo 2010 in Shanghai, China.

Any equipment acquired by the NOC and undisposed shall be turned over to the Department of Tourism at the end of the event for use in future projects.

Section 6. Submission of Terminal Reports – The NOC, through the Commissioner-General, shall submit a terminal report within sixty (60) days after the closing of Expo Zaragoza 2008.

Section 7. Cessation of the Committee – The Committee shall cease to exist sixty (60) days after submission of its terminal report as provided in Section 6 hereof, unless otherwise ordered by the President.

Section 8. Effectivity – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25 th day of May, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2007). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111-288]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.