MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 234

RATIONALIZING THE FUNCTIONS, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CABINET OFFICERS FOR REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT (CORD)

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish an effective system for immediately resolving urgent and critical issues and concerns at the Presidential level;

WHEREAS, Cabinet members have direct access to the President, and are in a strategic position to raise urgent issues to the President;

WHEREAS, the Cabinet Officer for Regional Development (CORD) System was revived by virtue of Administrative Order (AO) No. 34, series of 2002, amended by AO No. 95, s. 2004;

WHEREAS, a CORD is a Cabinet member who is assigned, in addition to his/her regular duties, to discharge functions, duties, and responsibilities provided in AO No. 34, s. 2002, and AO No. 95, s. 2004, with respect to a particular region;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order (MO) No. 151, s. 2004, was issued to provide the implementing guidelines regarding the conduct of CORDs;

WHEREAS, there is a need to streamline the present guidelines to improve the effectiveness of the CORD System;

WHEREAS, under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Rationalizing the CORD System. — The existing CORD System is hereby rationalized as a mechanism for facilitating the process of communicating to the President the urgent and critical issues and concerns at the regional level that need to be elevated to the President/national government agencies (NGAs).

SECTION 2. Functions, Duties, and Responsibilities of the CORD. — Pursuant to the provision provided for in Section 1 herein, the CORD shall perform the following functions, duties, and responsibilities, in tandem with the Super Regional Development Champions:

A. Monitor developments at his/her assigned region for urgent and critical issues and concerns that need to be elevated to the President’s attention;

B. Identify critical issues and concerns that shall be discussed and resolved during Presidential meetings/visits in the region;

C. Conduct consultations with various regional agencies and other stakeholders in preparation for Presidential visits/meetings in the CORD’s assigned region; and

D. Ensure that Presidential decisions regarding these issues and concerns are carried out.

SECTION 3. Operational Guidelines. — The following are the operational guidelines for the CORD in performing his/her tasks:

A. Monitoring developments

1. The team to assist the CORD, which is provided for in Section 4 herein, shall coordinate with the following government bodies for updates on their respective concerns, as follows:

a. National Economic Development Authority (NEDA) Regional Office — on socio-economic developments;

b. National Police Commission (NAPOLCOM) Regional Offices — on local peace, order and security conditions;

c. National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC) — on developments in the Accelerated Hunger Mitigation Program as well as other poverty alleviation programs;

d. Presidential Management Staff-Strategic Monitoring Group (PMS-SMG) — on the development of the Administration’s infrastructure projects (SONA infrastructure projects).

For this purpose, NEDA and NAPOLCOM Regional Offices, NAPC and PMS-SMG are hereby directed to provide information and assistance to the CORD’s Team.

2. The CORD’s team may coordinate with Presidential Assistants for their respective special concerns.

3. The CORD’s team may also coordinate with local government officials and the private sector in the region to keep the CORD abreast of local issues and developments.

B. Identifying critical issues and concerns

1. The CORD’s team shall evaluate and validate all identified issues and concerns in the region based on urgency and criticality of Presidential action. All other issues that do not require immediate Presidential action shall be subject to further evaluation for possible resolution by the CORD concerned at Sub-Cabinet levels.

2. Critical issues and concerns shall immediately be reported by the CORD to the President, along with corresponding recommendations. The recommendation shall also identify the NGA that is in the best position to undertake action.

C. Conducting consultations with regional stakeholders, in preparation for Presidential meetings/visits

1. The Office of the Undersecretary for Presidential Engagements shall immediately alert the CORD concerned of any proposed Presidential visit to the CORD’s region of assignment.

2. The CORD shall advance to the area at least a day before the actual engagement to conduct consultations with various agencies and local government units concerned and report high impact matters and concerns and measures taken by the government.

3. The CORD shall also receive the President at the airport or landing zone and be present in all the events in the region. As such, the CORD should be well-informed of the issues in the field (Socio-economic, political, programs/projects) to be able to assist the President in the speedy, efficient and orderly resolutions of these problems.

4. During Presidential meetings/visits/other engagements in the CORD’s assigned region, the Cord shall be in-charge of selecting the most urgent/critical issues and concerns that need to be raised and resolved.

D. Ensuring the implementation of Presidential action/decision

1. Once the President approves the recommendations of the CORD and/or issues instructions to address the critical issues and concerns in the region, the CORD’s team shall monitor the implementation of said Presidential decisions/instructions by the concerned NGAs.

For this purpose, concerned NGAs are hereby directed to submit update reports to the concerned CORD on the actions taken; copy furnished the PMS-Directive Monitoring Office.

2. Whenever the CORD deems necessary, he/she shall report developments/updates to the Office of the President.

SECTION 4. CORD Backstop. — The necessary technical and secretariat support to the CORD shall be drawn from his/her Department.

SECTION 5. Budget. — Funds necessary for the CORD’s operations shall likewise be drawn from the budget of his/her Department.

SECTION 6. Repealing Clause. — AO No. 34, s. 2002, AO No. 95, s. 2004, and MO No. 151, s. 2004, and all other issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. — This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2008). [Administrative Order Nos. : 111 – 288 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.