MALACAÑANG MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 107

DESIGNATING FORMER VICE PRESIDENT TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. AS SPECIAL ENVOY AND SENIOR ADVISER ON ECONOMIC AFFAIRS AND DEVELOPMENT

WHEREAS, former Vice President Teofisto T. Guingona, Jr. possesses vast experience and a credible track record in governance and public service;

WHEREAS, I have invited former Vice President Teofisto T. Guingona, Jr. to assist the government in its recovery efforts and give true meaning to the reconciliation program of my administration;

WHEREAS, former Vice President Teofisto T. Guingona, Jr. has been involved in the implementation of certain national development programs like a sustainable housing program, to promote the welfare and economic status of Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) and Seafarers;

WHEREAS, there are socio-economic programs, particularly involving the development of Mindanao;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Designation — Former Vice President Teofisto T. Guingona, Jr. is hereby designated as Special Envoy of the Philippine Government and Senior Adviser on Economic Affairs and Development.

SECTION 2. Powers and functions — The Special Envoy of the Philippine Government and Senior Adviser on Economic Affairs and Development shall exercise the following powers and functions:

a. Advise and report directly to the President on matters concerning the formulation and implementation of programs and projects pertinent to the promotion of the welfare of overseas Filipino workers and seafarers and the development of Mindanao.

b. Recommend short and long term measures and appropriate actions to address policy, institutional implementation, and operational issues and concerns on programs and projects for Overseas Filipino Workers and Seafarers and those relative to Mindanao development; and oversee and supervise the implementation and completion of said relevant projects and programs.

c. Call upon any agency of the government for such assistance as may be necessary to address problems affecting the relevant projects.

d. Represent the Philippine Government abroad, promote foreign and local investment opportunities, prioritize, as necessary projects under the aforementioned programs in cooperation with national government agencies, local government units, and other stakeholders.

e. Promote and accelerate the socio-economic development in Mindanao with the assistance provided by other presidential appointees and elected officials in the area. Elected officials in the areas affected by the programs shall continue to perform their functions relative to the socio-economic projects covering their respective areas of responsibility as provided by law.

f. Perform all other functions that the President may direct.

SECTION 3. Technical and Administrative Support – The Special Envoy of the Philippine Government and Senior Adviser on Economic Affairs and Development is authorized to engage the services of consultants, as may be approved by the Office of the President.

SECTION 4. Funding – Funding shall be taken from such available resources as may be determined by the Department of Budget and Management.

SECTION 5. Repealing Clause – All executive issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby amended, or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. Effectivity – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October in the year of our Lord, two thousand and four.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2004). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 110-A] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.