Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the inauguration of the Jct. National Road Mianay-Duyoc-Calaan-Panitan Road

When I learned we were visiting Capiz, I really prepared thoroughly. But with the thickness of the briefers I studied, I spent a long time on one thing: practicing Ilonggo. [Laughter] Please excuse my sleepless nights: It is truly the case that the people of Capiz are good supporters, friendly, and lovable. [Laughter and applause] Thank you very much for your warm welcome here in Capiz. [Applause] Before the campaign ends, I think I’ll be able to sing. [Laughter] But let’s not expect that, especially when there are many clouds. In a way, we are said to be in El Niño, so maybe that’s worth it, but only when you get home.

From the very beginning, our vow has been: In progress, no one will be left behind. Of course, we want all towns to prosper. In economics, it is said that the fastest way is to have what is called a “comparative advantage.” Meaning: Where are we abundant? Where are we good? In what field are we really good? Here in Capiz, you are known for what is called seafoods. Your crabs, shrimp, and oysters are very delicious; you also have a very delicious shellfish called diwal. But isn't it true that the value of your product depends on how fresh it is? When it comes from the freezer, it’s different. We also know: You are abundant in agriculture, as we can see around us. Some of your products include sugarcane, rice, and coconut. Now, all of these can maximize value and benefits if we have good transportation and connections. Others say that in their area it’s bananas. Due to the lack of roads, the bananas supposedly looked like “mashed banana.” When it arrived at the market, the price was the price of bruised bananas.

That’s why we continue to focus on infrastructure. Look: An estimated 5 percent of our total Gross Domestic Product this year is allocated to infrastructure. In summary: As the economy grows, the budget for building roads and bridges, ports, airports, schools, and others, which in turn improves the lives of our Bosses, increases simultaneously. That is the Straight Path; that is the result of what is called good governance.

Now, we inaugurated the improvement of your Junction National Road Mianay-Duyoc-Calaan-Panitan Road. What are its benefits? The travel time between Junction Mianay, Sigma and the municipality of Panitan in Capiz, which used to take an hour, is now only half an hour. Because of this road, not only will it open roads to places that were previously difficult to reach, it will also open up more opportunities for the development of our countrymen.

According to the DPWH, the remaining 195 meters that needs to be finished on the road will be completed this March. I just asked Sec. Babes: Is this true? 195 meters will still take until March, when we're just starting February? Did you just extend the deadline so you can say it was completed ahead of schedule? We know the competence of our Secretary Babes, and I really think he can finish the remaining 195 meters this month.

This initiative, along with our other infrastructure projects, we are doing to deliver products to the market in the most efficient way. As an archipelago, this will also help connect and link our provinces. The end result is that we can maximize our potential, and we can open up more opportunities for progress for our fellow Filipinos.

Our principle in Daang Matuwid (Straight Path) is simple: Focus service on our Bosses, do what is right, and it will surely yield good results. We have come a long way, but it is clear: This is just the beginning. This coming May, the Filipino will once again face a crossroads. The question is: Will we go straight and continue what we have started? Or will we waste all our hard work and go back to the crooked system and old practices?

What exactly was there in the past that we want to return to? I cannot imagine anyone saying, “Let’s go back to the 28.5 percent employment rate for TESDA scholars because we don’t want the current 71.9 percent of graduates whose potential is being maximized and whose future is improving.” I cannot imagine our 4.4 million household beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya saying, “Please stop Pantawid Pamilya, don’t focus on the education and health of our children, just leave us alone again.” I cannot imagine the 91 percent of the population covered by PhilHealth shouting, “Remove us from PhilHealth, don’t take care of us anymore.”

My Bosses, we already know the hardship caused by the system of advantage and everyone for themselves in the past. Likewise, we are aware of the benefits of concern, help, and contribution that we have shown in the present. Things that were supposedly done in the past, we have done within just six years, and we continue to do so.

If you trusted me in 2010, please trust me again now. We have companions who are not “maybe,” but surely will continue and expand the Straight Path. No one else, but Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause] Let us support them; let us lift them up. In the end, the good future of the country is once again in our hands. Truly: You are still the strength, you are still the boss, you are still the ones working for a great and noble change. [Applause]

Thank you very much. Next time, we will try, if I can’t sing that well, I will rap my Ilonggo. It’s up to you to take care of our future. Long live you all. Good morning to all of us.