Read this in English.

Year after year, we gather and celebrate our freedom. This year, we deemed it appropriate to slightly change how we refresh the understanding of how difficult it was to attain the freedom we enjoy.

Let us remember: It has only been almost a generation since the very government led by Filipinos, was the one that suppressed the freedom of fellow Filipinos.

As we look back: I invite everyone to put yourselves in the eyes and mind of a 13-year-old—my age during those times—who experienced the following.

[ VIDEO PLAYS; CLICK HERE TO WATCH VIDEO ONLINE ]

I emphasize: This has happened before. Once, a fellow Filipino stole our freedom. This means that if we are not vigilant, it could happen again.

As we enter a new chapter in our history, may we not forget: Freedom must be guarded and nurtured. Everything valuable must be strived for; must be fought for. As a writer, Edmund Burke, said: All it takes for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.

When we started, I swore: When I step down from office, I will leave our country better than we found it. Under our administration, the Philippines will be a dignified and responsible member of the global community. In my final appearance before you, my Bosses, and the diplomatic corps as President, I can proudly say: I fulfilled all my promises.

Everyone knows this—those helped by PhilHealth, our TESDA scholars who have graduated, and the youth entering well-maintained classrooms. They know this—the graduates who are now choosing jobs, instead of desperately searching for them. Those in the provinces know this, now benefiting from roads, bridges, ports, airports, and other infrastructure that we have built. The citizens who were once trapped in gunfire know this, but now peace is within reach. Everyone enjoying new opportunities due to economic growth knows this—an economy that, from being the “Sick Man of Asia,” is now the “Darling of Asia.” The whole world knows this, admiring the steadfastness, integrity, and enthusiasm of the Filipino people.

We have shown that we can fight for democracy. We have shown that we can reclaim stolen democracy. Now, we have proven: We can make democracy work for the benefit of our citizens.

We have achieved everything we enjoy today by respecting the process, the law, and the rights of every person. We did this without suppressing anyone’s voice, and by valuing the freedom fought for by those who came before us. We still maintain: No real progress can be achieved if we surrender our dignity and rights.

At this point, with our friends from the diplomatic corps, allow me to propose a toast:

To the Filipino people: May we never lose our patience with the ways of democracy, and may we never take it for granted or be passive in its defense;

To the friends of the Philippines: As we collectively face the challenges of an ever-shrinking world, may our solidarity continue to bear fruit in the cooperation that improves the lives of our respective peoples;

To our hard won Filipino freedom: Earned by the blood and sacrifice of martyrs, nurtured by the vigilance of an empowered people, may it never again be challenged, diminished, or negated.

Long live!