Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at his meeting with Filipinos in Los Angeles, California.

Just now, as Noel was almost finished with his song, I was planning to join him, but as I was coming here, I noticed it was already raining. So there’s no need to contribute to adding water here in Southern California. [Laughter]

Perhaps I can start with our speech, mentioning the wonderful work done by Ambassador Cuisia along with our good Secretary Albert del Rosario. You know, most of the ambassadors we appointed are called “career diplomats.” Only a few can be said to be political appointees, and Joey is one of those we appointed. I truly take pride in having appointed people like Joey Cuisia.

So as not to make it too long, perhaps we should start with the head of those we appointed, Albert del Rosario. He took his oath in 2011, and I remember, two days after he swore into office, he immediately went to Libya. That was during the Arab Spring. And when I spoke to him, I said, “Albert, the signal is kinda poor. Where exactly are you?” “Sir, I’m in Tripoli.” But you just took your oath, right? Shouldn't you first fix your office, get to know your colleagues a little? He immediately went to Libya.

Perhaps this is the only thing I want to emphasize: The Department of Foreign Affairs has changed so much because those under Albert during those times happened to be promoted and took their oaths. Before their oath-taking, we had a meeting in the most intense part of the Arab Spring. He told me, “Sir, we lost contact with our ambassador.” “Why did we lose contact?” “Cell phone services and the internet have been shut down, so we can no longer reach him.” These people I’m talking to, I try to be subtle and not get angry, not get irritated. So I just told them, “You know, I remember people climbing Mount Everest in the Himalayas and I’m sure those internet providers…” There are no internet providers at the top of Mount Everest, but they have something they can use, called a satellite phone. It works even without a provider. And you can buy it in the Middle East. Surely it would be easy for us to send someone from Egypt, go where it can be bought and deliver it to our embassy in Libya, and we can talk to the ambassador, right?” “Oh yes, of course. We’ll do that right now.” In my mind, “Out of all of you, and after being there for so long, and with the crises you need to handle, didn’t you think the solution was that simple?” Your job is to give me the information. Usually, you give me the solution and I choose the solution. Now, if I have to do everything myself, maybe you shouldn’t be here. I’ll just do it myself. [Laughter] As I said, it’s been a long time since I’ve seen them and it seems their performance has improved.

Joey Cuisia is very different. Albert del Rosario is very different. Manolo Lopez is also very different. And we have many other ambassadors who can truly be said to be self-starters who, when it comes to you, will give you problems, give you a menu of potential solutions, are easy to talk to, and tirelessly promote the interests of the Filipino people. So if you’ll allow me, I’ll include the Cabinet, you can give them a little applause for all of them. [Applause]

We’ll be leaving a little later. We arrived on Monday, as you know, it’s hard to stay too long here in America so two days is enough, lest we get jetlag. [Laughter] The only difficulty here is when we need to talk to someone in Manila, the time is really tight. Our Executive Secretary received a call at five in the morning, of course he was still asleep. It was the maid who answered the phone, so she was able to help a little, and I spoke to him around six in the morning in Manila. [Laughter] Luckily, he’s my close friend. Our parents have had a long-standing relationship. So when I talk to him, he says to me, “Boss…” [Laughter] I don’t think any of us like waking up to a problem, but after five years and eight months, he’s used to it. So, God willing, around 6:30 a.m., he started working on the problem I called him about. That’s what you can expect from our administration.

You probably remember when we started our term, one of the first Filipino communities I interviewed was of course here in America. If I’m not mistaken, in this ballroom. Is there anyone here tonight who I interviewed back then? If there is, just raise your hand. Quite a few. That’s a big thing. You could have gotten tired of me. You could have not been happy with what I did, but you’re here again, it really fills my heart. Even without sleep, we will endure all the problems again as soon as we arrive in the Philippines. [Applause]

Let me just reiterate, some of you I interviewed when I was just starting, and perhaps it is only right that as our term is ending, here we are again, it truly can be said that it’s a full circle – I have interviewed all of you.

Last week in the Philippines, we attended a gathering of Barangay leaders. Before that, we spoke with those in the League of Municipalities of the Philippines, the mayors. And there, with us was the Secretary of the Interior, Mel Sarmiento. And truthfully, his speech was very good, where he revisited the past and the present. He was a mayor in 2001, a seasoned mayor in our country, and he shared some stories about his experiences as mayor in Samar.

According to Sec. Mel, he was Mayor of Calbayog in 2001—during the term of our predecessor in the presidency—“You know, when you are a leader at the local level, from the pregnancy of your constituents to their last breath, you are the one they run to with their problems.” We all know that, don’t we?

So, someone from his jurisdiction approached him. And he said, “Mayor, a relative of mine has passed away. Now our problem is, we don’t have a coffin to bury our relative.” Mayor Mel’s problem at that time was that many people were approaching him with problems, but he had nowhere to turn for help with the problems brought to him. When they said there was no coffin, the carpenter, a municipal employee, whispered. He said, “Mayor, we have extra plywood here. I’ll take care of it. I’ll figure out a way to make that coffin.” [Laughter] It really happened. So the coffin was made. He had no source of funds, but the coffin was produced.

The one who asked for the coffin returned and saw it, perhaps to express gratitude. “Oh, you’re here again.” “Mayor, first, thank you for the coffin. The problem is, it’s ugly.” [Laughter] He asked, “What’s the problem with the coffin?” “It’s just wood, there’s no glass.” [Laughter] The municipal carpenter was diligent and truly loyal to Mel. The carpenter approached again, whispered again, “Mayor, I’ll take care of it. I’ll figure it out again.” What did the carpenter do? He got some jalousies. [Laughter] It was excessive. He put it on top of the coffin, I don’t know if it was this way or that way. Horizontal or vertical. But the result was, the bereaved person said, “This will do. We can see him inside the coffin.” [Laughter]

Sec Mel presented it as a joke, but the experience of the honest leaders of those times was clear. We are truly very aware of this situation, which is why when we ran for the presidency, our message was: If there is no corruption, there is no poverty.

Now, we have been on the Straight Path for five years and eight months. I am sure you know what we are doing to suppress corruption: Our predecessor in the presidency is now under hospital arrest. Former untouchable senators have also been imprisoned for plunder. We also have a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who was impeached by Congress, because he forgot to declare 98% of his assets. [Applause] In the use of funds, we ensure that the people’s money goes to the people alone. We have truly lived up to what we said, “no corruption.” Because the waste has been stopped and greatly reduced, the government’s ability to provide opportunities for our people has come a long way.

For example, let’s talk about the Conditional Cash Transfer program, or what we call the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino program or 4Ps. The concept is simple: Families will be given aid, especially our poorest countrymen. In return, they will guarantee that their children will attend or remain in school. When we came into office, this program included only about 780,000 households. We received reports that many of those included in the list were not actually identified as the poorest, but were placed on the list due to connections, due to politics.

Now, the program has been intensified: 4.4 million households are already included in it. [Applause] The 4.6 million households recorded, we will complete this year, before we step down from office. They will be included before the end of the current year. Right now, each family on the list is truly identified in a scientific manner and not through connections.

Last April, the first batch of beneficiaries of the expanded Pantawid Pamilya program graduated from high school. There were 333,673 of them; of that number, more than 13,400 graduated with honors. [Applause] The two representatives who spoke for their entire group were both accepted into UP College of Engineering, a quota course. Isn't that wonderful: The state has truly gone above and beyond in serving the people because that is where the mandate comes from, that is where power comes from; the potential of our youth is truly getting the opportunity to reach their goals because of programs like 4Ps.

This 4P’s program focuses on the long term. But when we studied the impact on our beneficiaries, it is truly, even now, considered a huge success: It is estimated that 7.7 million individuals have risen above or surpassed what is called the “poverty line” because of our program. They are almost no longer among the poorest of our countrymen. Now, we have a new program, which identifies what is called the “near poor.” What is the “near poor”? They have enough to cover daily expenses, but if struck by a calamity, for example, a typhoon, they might fall back into poverty. If struck by a serious illness, they will exhaust their savings and fall back into poverty. So that is the near poor. Our goal is to lift the near poor further and further away from the poverty line.

In education, I believe you have all heard, we were left with many shortages. I think some of you experienced studying under mango or coconut trees, with no mangoes or coconuts. [Laughter] Some of you may have also borrowed books, borrowing because there were not enough, and the data and concepts were often incorrect.

Here is the change: In 2013, our backlog of 66,800 classrooms was filled. Some might be content with just filling the shortage, but this administration is different. We saw classrooms that could truly be described as “full utility.” This means they have been depreciating for a long time because they are 30 or 40 years old. Sometimes, we wonder how those buildings are still standing, considering that we experience twenty typhoons every year. Anyway, they are there, thirty-forty-year-old buildings, and they are being replaced.

We also have prepared classrooms for the two years added by K-12, our basic education cycle, so our youth can keep up. The Philippines, if you remember what I told you before, was one of only three countries in the world with a ten-year basic education cycle. Now, we have moved to a twelve-year basic education cycle to give all our youth the opportunity to learn, not forcing them like funneling them through a narrow opening, but giving them enough opportunity to truly study and appreciate what they are learning so that it will benefit them.

Even the classrooms needed for those new two years are being built and prepared for use in the next school year in June. In total, before we step down from office, the number of classrooms built will reach 185,149 classrooms, not just the 66,800. [Applause] You can see: What we needed to do, we have done, we are still doing others, and we are pushing ourselves to the limit so that our successors will not have to worry about or take care of these things.

In health, we focused on PhilHealth, which is central to our Universal Healthcare agenda. In 2010, only 51 percent of our population was covered by it. The 2010 data might even be higher than normal, because it was an election year. The number of PhilHealth beneficiaries reportedly increases during elections. And after the elections, the number of beneficiaries decreases because those choosing the names on the list are those who want to impress voters. We changed that: Now, 91 percent of the population are PhilHealth beneficiaries. And this too: All those belonging to the poorest of our countrymen, the so-called two quintiles or 40 percent of our population, receive free treatment in public hospitals through PhilHealth’s “no balance billing” program. [Applause]

You can see the difference: Our goal is to maximize service and opportunity. All our efforts are focused on our fellow citizens. We can also see this in the infrastructure: Truly, in every corner of the country, so many schools, hospitals, rural health units, barangay health centers, roads, bridges, ports, airports, and many others are being built. Ask our LGUs, even those not from our party, no one is being left out, except for those who really don't want these projects.

Honestly, I remember, a storm passed, and we talked about dividing the work. He said, “Why not? You look for the relief goods, I’ll deliver them. You also clean up our roads after you’ve built them. You also return our electricity…” [Laughter] He almost even mentioned debts, “Maybe you want to advance the IRA because we have no funds here.” That was the suggestion. We said, “Okay, if that’s all you can do, we agree.” Thank God, even the distribution of relief goods, not just going around, not just wrapping the relief goods, we literally deliver it to them, they are the ones who hand it out so they are remembered by those who received it. It didn't happen, we were the ones attacked. That’s just life.

You know, even with those not from our party, they understand the meaning of “focused on our fellow citizens.” That’s why many have joined our party because they saw: On the Straight Path, as long as there is a genuine need, we will find a way to address it.

In the economy: It was also mentioned earlier in the survey mentioned by our esteemed Ambassador Cuisia, if we were once branded as the “Sick Man of Asia,” now, we are called “Asia’s Bright Spot,” “Asia’s Rising Tiger,” and many other praises. We experienced the fastest six-year economic growth since the seventies, and our growth in the past six years, our average is 6.2 percent GDP growth. I emphasize: During the time of the dictator, their numbers were high only because of what is called crony capitalism; only a few benefited, but we were buried in debt that we are still paying off today. Now, the growth of our economy is accompanied by widespread development. To emphasize, especially for those who are younger, sugar centrals were built in Mindanao. I remember three. And the sad thing about this is, when they were built, we had a loan, foreigners built the centrals and the government provided a guarantee. Now, according to NEDA, these centrals have been running for twenty years and haven't even broken even on the investment. Actually, what I remember reading there was, “In twenty years’ time, they will be obsolete and they will not have a return on investment.” So if you’re a sensible businessman, you wouldn’t enter into it. Right? Your money is rotten, you haven’t even earned anything. The sad thing is, the central was built in a place where there wasn’t a single piece of sugarcane. [Laughter] I’m not joking, this is serious. Now, if they add it up, you know who the propaganda minister was back then, Minister of Information they said but actually “misinformation,” “non-information,” they boasted about how many centrals were built! That’s true, and then you won’t hear anything because they won’t boast, “Thank God, this year we lost money. Next year, we lost money. And after that, we’re still losing money.” [Laughter] Of course, they didn’t say that. But that’s true, that’s part of what we’re paying for because of the guarantee. After they were built, the crony made a profit; they pocketed money, the partner pocketed money. Then it was given to the government, “You pay the debt.”

Actually, Cesar is researching now, it seems we had almost no foreign debt before martial law began. It seems the first one they traced was 1974. [Applause] Now, if that’s how things are done, of course those who lend to you will say, “These borrowers are unreliable.” They might lend to you once, maybe, but the second time, “How will they pay it back?” If the first answer is, “They can’t pay it back,” you won’t lend again, right? Now, what’s the difference? We are now investment grade with the three major credit ratings agencies. The benefit of this: The funds that were previously used to pay interest on debt, we can now focus on social services, because our debt-to-GDP ratio has been reduced.

Even corporations benefit from the improvement in our investment grade, because they also benefited from the lower borrowing rates, because interest rates are low, of course they are more encouraged to invest in the Philippines. Things that our countrymen used to save for a long time, like condominiums and cars, are now more accessible because interest rates are lower and the payment period is longer. Look, in 2013, the total registered vehicles in the Philippines was 7,690,038. In 2014 and 2015, combined — car sales only — exceeded 600,000 for the two years because for the past three years, vehicle sales have been increasing in the mid-20 percent; 23, 24, last year I think 26 percent, that’s just cars. Motorcycles are fewer: 1.2 million per year. You who are good at math, 600,000 over 7 million, almost 10 percent, the traffic is the same, hopefully we have added 10 percent to the infrastructure. It’s not that fast to build 1,200 kilometers of new roads. And it is also said that we are improving mass transportation.

But the bottom line is, when you go home, there is traffic almost every day, even on Saturdays and Sundays. [Laughter] Even I am part of that traffic, I am also affected. I said, “Why is there traffic even on Saturdays and Sundays?” Someone told me, “You know, those in the provinces, they consider going to the mall a vacation. And the best malls are in Metro Manila. And to get to the mall, they need the weekend.” So, on weekdays, those from Metro Manila create the traffic. On weekends, those from the provinces do. [Laughter] Everybody is part of the traffic. I’m not complaining; we really need to speed up our solutions there.

You know, if you buy something from the government, it will take you four to six months, even for a paperclip. [Laughter] There are many laws that need to be followed: There’s an Invitation to Bid; there’s pre-qualification of all bidders; there’s submission of all specifications; there’s post-qualification; there’s awarding; there’s notification in publications of national circulation for two weeks. [Laughter] We’re talking about a ballpen here. [Laughter]

The road, of course, you can't just say, “Give me a four-lane road.” [Laughter] Detailed engineering and design are needed. Where will we route that road? Does the government already own the right-of-way? Is it elevated or at grade? How many lanes? How will it be funded? It will go through NEDA, through the procurement process. Two years might be too short to start the process. And after that, if you follow all the processes, someone will still sue you. [Laughter]

That’s how it was during my mother’s time. During my mother’s time, one person won, four lost. Those four would file a lawsuit. [Laughter] If it doesn’t go to us, then nothing will happen. [Laughter] That’s why I’m rushing home, in case I get used to fewer problems being brought to me. [Laughter]

Also, because of the investment grade, the prices of our goods are more stable, and the so-called inflation rate is more manageable.

Before, if there was a typhoon, the government was content, and perhaps our countrymen only expected that they could reliably distribute some relief goods. For us, that’s not enough. We have what’s called Project NOAH and a strengthened PAGASA, so we are better prepared for incoming typhoons. There’s also Oplan Listo of the DILG: Listo – or Operation Plan Listo – is a checklist. These are the things that each local government should do to prepare for a typhoon. And we should look there, included in the list, what should be done before the typhoon arrives, during the typhoon, and after the typhoon. There are what are called geohazard maps that identify which areas are prone to flooding, which areas are prone to landslides. This has been given to all local government units and other government agencies, and they have also been taught how to understand the map, studied it, so they are not caught off guard when a strong flood comes or a landslide occurs. Project NOAH’s minimum guarantee is to warn each community six hours before the problem arrives.

Our goal is not just immediate assistance; we are restoring livelihoods, and we are also repairing infrastructure in a way that is more resilient against typhoons and other disasters—so that when it comes, we don’t repeatedly go through the cycle of recovery and falling down.

You know, I think Manolo Quezon was the first to say and phrase it best—if you think about it, our resident historian and chief writer—he said, “We have to break the cycle of destruction and reconstruction.” What does that mean? A school is destroyed by a typhoon, we rebuild it. The following year, another typhoon comes, it collapses again, we rebuild it again. It’s not right to just keep repeating this. Maybe that area is really in the path of typhoons, maybe we can pivot the position of this school. Can we change the standards to make it stronger? In English, it’s called “more resilient.” Maybe that community is really no longer habitable. All of this is included in what we call “Build Back Better.” The point is: Don’t just fix what’s broken, rebuild it exactly, break it again, rebuild it exactly again. Let’s stop that cycle, and let’s go to institution building, let’s spend properly. After that, when something comes, it won’t disrupt the lives and livelihoods of our countrymen.

We have also reached the lowest unemployment rate in ten years. Before, our police and military lacked equipment. Now, every police officer has a 1:1 ratio of firearms; 99 percent of our municipalities have new patrol vehicles. What does 99 percent mean? There were only twenty that weren’t delivered last year, they will be delivered this year. So they are 100 percent equipped. [Applause] Not just in municipalities, of course, the region and the province also have additional equipment. Our soldiers, I think you’ve seen it on the net, you’ve heard it in our media, a variety of and many modern weapons, vehicles, and equipment have been acquired. I was telling you earlier, I started as a congressman in 1998, right after the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997. Our district had a need, you would go to a government agency and ask for aid, and you would be told, “There are no funds.” I remember, one of the areas flooded in Tarlac City, MacArthur Highway. MacArthur Highway, National Road—this is not under the congressman’s jurisdiction. But we were told, “We can’t do anything, there are no funds. If you can’t find any, we can’t fix the road. It’s up to you.” The youth said, “Let Batman handle it.” [Laughter] But Batman hasn’t arrived in Tarlac yet.

Now, Secretary Mel said: You mayors, the current executives of our local government, are really very lucky. Instead of always hearing “you have no funds,” there’s something called Bottom-up Budgeting where the community itself says, “This is our primary need.” Whether it’s a program, a project, sometimes a road, sometimes irrigation—drinking water irrigation, irrigation for farms. They themselves make the plans, we trained them on how to identify and carefully investigate the problem to have a real solution that is acceptable to the entire community.

The next group that will benefit from the Bottom-Up Budgeting are our barangay councils. They are currently undergoing training. Of course, because it's election season now, they say that Bottom-Up Budgeting is our bribe. How can you bribe someone when the funds for the barangay will arrive after we've stepped down? They are still in training, the process is long, they will submit plans, their projects will be approved, it will go through many approvals. By the time it's approved, I will already be a private citizen. [Laughter] So, this is a new kind of bribe. Do what I need first and I'll get back to you. [Laughter] Our opponents really think differently.

There is another program, called Kapit-bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services or KALAHI-CIDSS, which funds and empowers them to set other projects for their respective communities. There is also the Payapa at Masaganang Pamayanan or PAMANA program, for communities affected by conflict.

Our country has truly changed so much. I need to emphasize: This transformation that the Philippines is enjoying now was not achieved by one individual or by the government alone. The entire nation contributed to achieving this. And isn't it true that if we are united, we can reach our goals more easily?

Let me give you a concrete example: If you remember, when tensions rose in the Korean Peninsula, we prepared for the evacuation of our countrymen there, just in case it was needed. At that time, we had 23 members of our embassy in South Korea. They were supposed to take care of 50,000 Filipinos in South Korea. What's even more painful is that we also had nine countrymen in North Korea, who needed to be taken care of by our Beijing embassy. I wondered, “What are our countrymen doing in North Korea?” [Laughter] They are members of various UN agencies assigned there. The various associations are united and strong, and the entirety of this organization of associations is also really solid and united. Even if our embassy only has twenty-three people, we are all involved in planning, preparation, and if the turmoil in the Korean Peninsula had pushed through at that time, we would have a way to save our 50,000 countrymen; bringing them to the southernmost portion of South Korea, and if necessary, we could evacuate them back to the Philippines.

It's good to remember that, especially here in Los Angeles where there are so many Filipinos. Your mayor said earlier that if the number of Filipino citizens increases, Los Angeles will rank in the top 10 of the largest communities of Filipinos. He said it really well this morning, “Los Angeles would be one of the top 10 cities for Filipinos.” Is that correct, as our good mayor said? I've heard that we have quite a few Filipino associations here. It might be good to consider and work towards uniting into a single Filipino community, since our goals are also united. [Applause] Perhaps if I have any remaining ambition for our Filcoms, that would be it. If we are truly united, we can go far. It wouldn't matter if we separate if we were going to different places, but it seems like we want to go to the same place. Why go our separate ways when we can support each other? Isn't that right?

One more thing we should remember: Elections in the Philippines are approaching again. I am very eager because we can further strengthen the Straight Path, and make the changes we are enjoying permanent.

Of course, there are opponents, who have their own strategies to get your sweet “Yes.” For example, there are those who want to increase SSS pensions. The problem is, what they promise cannot be sustained. Currently, the fund life of the SSS will last until 2042. If their proposals are implemented, we will reduce the life of the Social Security Fund by 15 years. What about those who are not yet retired now? What about new members from now until 2027? We cannot just pass this problem on to the next administration, just to show off in the present.

Let me tell you so it's clear: For every peso contribution of an SSS member, there is a benefit of six to fifteen pesos. When that system was established, they could charge high interest rates. Now, it's not that high, it's far from it. Our government borrowed earlier, with an interest rate of less than 4 percent, 3.7 percent interest. He said that if it were at 5 percent, it would take 120 years to accumulate the obligation to pay in the present to recover the benefit. These people who are pretending, to be honest—excuse me, you are my Boss, I'll take a breath from you—they say, “The SSS cannot lose money. There is a law saying that if the SSS reaches a point of being on the brink, it must be revived.” That may be true, but if we don't do that, we will just print money, right? You have a source. Who do they want to reduce? The 4Ps? Modernization? Education? Health? And to be honest, I don't know whether to laugh or cry, because two good lawyers spoke up, “I researched the law, and the law does not allow this.”

Because I remember before, I don't know if you experienced it, there were people complaining, they asked a president long before me, “Why are prices so high?” Those of us who are older here probably remember. The answer was, “Sir, that is the result of the law of supply and demand.” [Laughter] Do you remember? Because the response of the one who replaced him, the one who was president a long time before me, was, “If that is a law, why don’t we repeal it?” [Laughter] Those two who are acting smart about the SSS, thankfully, didn't seem to understand what was being taught there. One of them is even a candidate. [Laughter] So, when I hear him speak, we get a little nervous, “Where will this lead us?”

I repeat: We, we can't just say that something was done, and that's enough. We can't just have a photo op, and that's okay. We need something that will truly benefit people and if someone has promised service. If you want to know who likes to make themselves look good, maybe you should just look at their campaign materials. You'll see the campaign materials, what they look like, you'll see the live news, it looks very different. [Laughter] It's like saying, isn't the appearance in the picture very different from real life? They are just introducing themselves, disguising themselves.

I am facing you, as you can see, my remaining hair is neatly combed. [Laughter] When you see me on TV, sometimes my remaining hair isn't combed neatly, I won't Photoshop it, because this is my real hair. [Laughter] Losing hair is part of the job. [Laughter] My point is, to focus on what actually happens. I'm also a voter on May 9.

And if we're talking about who is being truthful, I think the most important question is: Who is willing to sacrifice? As a leader, this is very necessary. You often ask me about my love life. [Laughter and applause] If I get into a relationship, I won't invite you to the celebration, [laughter] because you've asked so many times. It's like when you ask, “When will you really get married?” I say, “It's like I'm Juan Tamad, just waiting for someone to come along and tell me ‘I'm the one you're waiting for.’” I've been looking too. How many of you here would volunteer to go on a date with me, of course, getting to know each other? [Laughter] Everyone who passes through there wants to ask, “Can I have a picture with you? Why are you meeting?” It's like they all feel like they're Boy Abunda's assistant. [Laughter] Boy is my friend.

But the point is, as a leader, we need someone who has truly carried the burden, someone who has truly put the country first before themselves. If I were to be asked, it is very clear to me who has proof of sacrifice. And for me, there is no one else but Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo.

Bosses, we didn't start from zero, you know that, we were in the negative. Now we are in a very positive position. The challenge for us now is how to ensure that the successes we have achieved continue and expand even further. If we elect the wrong people, you think about what will happen to us. But if we elect the right people, the good things happening to us will continue. If the soul of the person we vote for is corrupt, then we will surely return to the wrong practices of the past.

I think there's no sane person who would decide to just throw away everything we've worked for in almost six years. So, if you are registered for absentee voting, or can help convince your relatives in the Philippines, maybe we can contribute, so that the positive things we have planted will be watered and finally reaped by future generations of Filipinos. [Applause]

Bosses, as we walk the Straight Path, we haven't spared anyone. In fixing society, we have had to confront some obstacles. We are not looking for trouble, but there are really some troublemakers. They are already hinting about the cases they are planning to file against me. If they are already attacking us now, they will probably really try when we step down from office.

But for me, everything is fine, whatever happens when we step down from office. I will face them without fear—because I can say that I did everything to serve my Bosses, the Filipino people. [Applause]

You trusted me in 2010. And in the years of my presidency, I poured every moment into ensuring that I was worthy of your trust. You are still my strength, you are still my Bosses, and we will all ensure together that everything we worked hard for, everything we started will continue and will expand and flourish even more.

Thank you very much. Good evening to all of you.