This is the final graduation of the Philippine Military Academy that I will be attending as President. As I stand before you today, I must admit: When I saw the batch name that you agreed upon, my eyes widened.  To me, what “Gabay Laya” sounds like: “gabay” or “guide”; “laya” or “freedom”—you will guide all the freedoms we enjoy. You know, it is only the Armed Forces who can dictate what freedom we hold.

I am reminded of Article 2, Section 3 of our Constitution: “Civilian authority is, at all times, supreme over the military. The Armed Forces of the Philippines is the protector of the people and the state. Its goal is to secure the sovereignty of the State and the integrity of the national territory.” My eyes returned to their normal state, and my worries, eased, when I saw the true and complete meaning of your batch name. You are the “Gintong Anak ng Bayan Alay ay Buhay para sa Kalayaan.” (Golden Children of the Nation, Offering their Lives for Freedom.) Reading that, my blood pressured calmed.

I wish to emphasize the responsibility of the Armed Forces in our democracy, especially since we are celebrating this year the 30 th anniversary of the EDSA People Power Revolution. At one point in our history, an experiment was conducted, where you became tools to hinder democracy and to follow the whims of one family.

Under the leadership of my mother, our people’s trust in your ranks was restored, and you once again committed to serve the people. Now, in our term, along the Straight Path, we have collectively strengthened and reinforced our Armed Forces so that you can fulfill your duties even better.

Let us remember that it is only the Armed Forces that possesses the numbers, such that if they choose to involve themselves, especially in politics, can attain what is called a “monopoly of power.” When this happens, it’s as if the discussion changes, so it is important for you to always remember that you must be neutral, especially when it comes to politicking.

We have, in fact, pursued extensive modernization, and perhaps solid proof of this is the first pair of brand new FA-50 aircrafts that we procured. For my part, I believe that if I detail everything we have done for the Armed Forces, we will end up staying here until the traditional merienda cena, or afternoon snacks, gets cancelled, and you might all end up drowsy. We must not also forget: This also concerns national security, and each time we speak of our new capabilities, it is as if we are announcing to enemies of the State what they should be prepared for. What I can say is, we have completed 68 big-ticket projects worth 58.43 billion pesos.

When you begin your service, you will know just what we are capable of now. Those who have gone ahead of you all share the same sentiment: You are lucky to be joining a more modern AFP. For your part, you, especially the GABAY-LAYA, will say, “we are leaving a far better PMA, because the barracks, facilities, and other buildings and equipment here in your beloved Fort Santiago are much improved.” Indeed: we can say that your lives will be much easier because of the wholehearted care that the State is giving you.

I remember the first time I stood before the Armed Forces as Commander-in-Chief. I remembered a scene that we often see on television, if not in the movies: The character of the father telling his son, in the second or third scene: “I am sorry, this is all I am capable of providing.”

There was a time in the history of our Armed Forces wherein soldiers had to make do with purple backpacks from a fast food chain, for sensitive operations.  I have also been told of stories about how, here in the PMA, only one barracks had a heater, so barrack assignments became a matter of luck for cadets. Those who have gone ahead of you had to shower in cold water very early in the morning. They just had to learn how to “adapt and overcome.”

In truth, the equipment we are entrusting to our soldiers do not come at a small price. For example, if I remember correctly: A second hand C-130 is more than 40 million dollars. In pesos, that is 1.8 billion. That is equivalent to 109 school buildings. And we cannot just dedicate the nation’s entire budget to the Armed Forces. Let us remember the “guns versus butter” debate: If the State needs to choose between two objects, shall it pour all its funds into guns? Or into butter? That is why we always said that the correct balance must be struck.

Clearly, there is a need that must be addressed. Let us remember: More than 20 percent of our population is confronted by poverty. Through good governance, however, we can say that we have dedicated sufficient focus to all sectors; that no one has been left behind. As father of this nation, I cannot help but be happy, because, after recalling everything we have been through, I have the right to say say: “We have helped each other achieve a lot,” as opposed to: “Sorry I can’t give you what you need.”

These days, I have been going to a number of provinces, and I can really say that we have not been content with small achievements; we have really achieved so much through good governance. For example, I just came from Cebu. From 2005 to 2010, my predecessor allotted 12 billion pesos for infrastructure. Under our administration, this has increased to almost 32 billion pesos. In Bohol, the previous administration allotted 3.75 billion, while we have reached 10.45 billion pesos, just for infrastructure.

Another good example is our enhancement of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, which has increased its coverage from 780,000 to 4.4 million household beneficiaries. This year, our target is to increase this amount to 4.6 million beneficiaries. Initial studies on this program reveal that 7.7 million Filipinos have been lifted above the poverty line, and through the continued implementation of this program, you can count on more Filipinos rising from poverty.

As for our uniformed services, apart from the various capability enhancement programs we are undertaking at present, we have also made sure to focus on their personal circumstances and the futures of their loved ones. One example is the 61,378 housing units that have been constructed through the AFP-PNP Housing Program. We also have livelihood programs both for retired and active servicemen, such as those being implemented in Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija.

This February, I also signed Executive Order No. 201, which includes the continued increase of your monthly hazard pay, provisional allowance—actually, the provisional allowance has been consistently increased, and your hazard pay has likewise been increased—and the officer’s allowance from this year, and once Congress passes the necessary law, until 2019.

We are also waiting for the Salary Standardization Law, which is still in Congress. It’s a good thing that we already have an allocation in our National Budget that allowed us to increase your allowances. Congress permitting, I am hoping that the SSL4 will continue until 2019.

And since we are already talking of proposals that are stuck in Congress, all of you know that, along the Straight Path, we have truly sought to move the peace process forward. We built a relationship with the MILF based on trust. We all know the saying that “soldiers are the last to wish for conflict.” In fact, they will be the first ones to jump into the turmoil; they will be the first to sacrifice; and they will be the first to be imperiled. We already have a proposed Bangsamoro Basic Law, together with a Framework Agreement and a Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro. Our hope is to bring justice, peace, and progress to the Bangsamoro.

What is frustrating is that there are two members of the Senate who blatantly hindered the passage of BBL. Remembering this, I am likewise reminded of what our elders say: “All right, it’s clear you do not like this. What, then, do you want to happen?” These two members of the Senate simply left their opposition at “No,” and did not propose a better solution. I leave it to you to judge: which one of us failed you, and which one kept their word to you.

This is the message I want to leave to you: What we said was that, along the straight path, when I step down from office, the country will be in a far better state. I am certain you see that, from supporting your needs in equipment and training, and even in terms of your future and welfare, we did everything in our power—and even went above and beyond what we initially envisioned. You are the ones who can say if your condition improved or worsened.

Now that I am here before you, I want to tell you how proud I am of you. Even after I step down from office, even with the passage of time, the image of our soldiers, police, firemen, and other members of the armed forces who truly served with honor will never be erased from my memory.

At the height of storms, no matter how strong the winds or how heavy the rainfall, you are there, clearing the roads for the safety of our countrymen. In fact, during Yolanda, at the first opportunity, our helicopters flew to the area precisely to undertake clearing operations in the Tacloban airport; because of this, not even 24 hours passed before our C-130, carrying relief and assistance, was able to land.

During the Zamboanga crisis, you displayed exemplary courage in the face of extreme peril. When our delivery of supplies for the BRP Sierra Madre was blocked—even if the boats of our then-challengers were much bigger and more modern—you would not allow yourselves to be defeated in ship-handling. Even when they seemed to be playing patintero in the sea with us, obstructing our passage, you were able to strategize and pass through more shallow waters in order to evade their sea vessels and deliver to our soldiers the supplies they needed.

There are also our peacekeepers in different corners of the world. During the Arab Spring, we became involved and rendered assistance, because it was our goal to contribute to the maintenance of stability. In the Golan Heights, unforeseen elements put our troops in greater danger. We went to the UN, but the support they gave was extremely limited. It even got to the point when the bandits attacked our camp there, and the only advice we were given by the UN was to surrender and enter into negotiations. Our soldiers, armed with bravery and sharpness of mind, did not take to the proposal, and instead what happened was the so-called “Great Escape” of our history.

In Liberia, when the situation became extremely dangerous due to Ebola, the local government asked that a number of forces remain. As with the Golan Heights, we negotiated with them, and appealed: Give us a reasonable mission, and we will help. Show our peacekeepers the respect they deserve—but if “mission impossible” is what you will ask us to do, then, I am sorry, but it is my responsibility to safeguard Philippine soldiers. To me, it seemed as if our soldiers were being asked to be the last and only line of defense in an extremely untenable situation. That, I can never allow.

Indeed: nothing can be greater than my confidence in our soldiers. What we have been able to reach along the straight path would not have been possible without your support. It is clear that you have responsibilities to fulfill in the future progress of our society. Prosperity cannot take place where there is no peace and stability. As long as the entire Armed Forces is here, united and steadfast in fulfilling its mandate—as long as you stay only on the side of our countrymen, as long as you do not involve yourselves in politics, I am confident that positive change will continue.

To the GABAY-LAYA Class of 2016: You are one of the smallest graduating classes since the 1960s. More than 20,200 applied to the PMA; only 63 graduates stand before me today. For me, you should be proud of what you have accomplished. Your character was weighed; your abilities, measured—and you passed all the criteria. Today, let me also emphasize that you are the sixth batch of graduates in this chapter of our history—a chapter characterized by good governance, honesty, and integrity in government.

In leaving the PMA, you will face innumerable challenges; many will tempt you. The question is: what do we have to consider in making a decision? If you will allow someone who is somewhat older than you to give you some advice, for me, it is simple. You need only ask yourselves: Will what I do help the nation, or will only a few people benefit, and the majority suffer? At any time you face doubts about what you are doing, look back on what your elders have done. You are aware of the lessons and principles displayed by our exemplary leadership in the AFP and DND, under the watch of DND Secretary Volts Gazmin, who, in himself, is an excellent example. There is a reason they have grown old in service of the nation; they now have many experiences to share with you. The question remains: Will you fail to listen to your elders, and instead repeat the mistakes of the past? Or will you listen to the advice of those who have gone before you, and value the principles they bequeath?

You must also consider: The moment you reach the point when you are the only one who is right—that you are the only one who is capable of his job, then you must once again review your values.

To our graduates, the principles sealed in your memory will strengthen your character, in fulfilling your mandate to be the protectors of your fellow Filipinos. It is in your hands whether democracy will prevail, or whether we will return to the dark chapter of our history, characterized by abuse and lack of justice. It is in your hands whether peace will spread throughout our communities, which in itself will encourage others to stand with us, or whether we will return to a state in which we continue to doubt each other.

I have faith that you, the “Golden Children of the Nation, Offering their Lives for Freedom” will prove, once again, that PMA graduates are principled, professional, and honorable—the qualities that are the mark of the Filipino soldier. It is a great honor to be the Commander-in-Chief of an Armed Forces that treads the Straight Path together with the Filipino people.

Good day, and my congratulations to the GABAY-LAYA Class of 2016.