Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during his meeting with Filipinos in Rome, Italy.

This is my first visit to Italy, and I deeply feel in the warmth of your welcome the support given by our Overseas Filipino community since 2010 when I ran for president, which continues until now, and if anything, has even intensified. Because of you, I forget the coldness of the weather outside. Last night, and this really happened last night, I was working on this speech to deliver to all of you. I was making corrections. I took out my fountain pen. It's been to so many places: America, Japan, China, you name it. Just now, I was writing, and it refused to write. I said: This cartridge is new. It seems the ink froze. When I fiddled with it, it suddenly agreed to write. Well, it's been struggling with me for about five years. It can retire with me next year too.

You know, I don't usually boast. But perhaps, not all the news that reaches you is complete. In our newspapers, even just on the front page, it's obvious that negative news outweighs good news. To provide balance, allow me to share some good news from our country.

Let's start with the economy. We used to be called the “Sick Man of Asia,” right? Now, we are considered Asia’s new darling. Just last week, we recorded a 6 percent GDP growth for the 3rd quarter of the current year. The fearless forecast of our Secretary Arsi Balisacan and Cesar Purisima, who are with us now, is that the fourth quarter will see even higher GDP growth. In the past five years of our administration, our GDP has had an average annual growth of 6.2 percent. This is the fastest five-year average growth of the country in almost four decades. If we compare the 2010 and 2014 figures, our foreign direct investments have increased sixfold. When we took office in June 2010, our ranking in the Competitiveness Report of the World Economic Forum was 85th place. In their latest report, we are now in 47th place.

The question is: What does this mean for the average Filipino? The answer is simple: Jobs. In fact, our unemployment rate of 6.8 percent in 2014 was the lowest in a decade. If you return to our country, you will notice it yourself: Before—I think this also drove many of you to leave our country—we saw many “No Vacancy” signs. Now, we see “For Immediate Hiring” everywhere, and the classified ads in the newspapers are full of companies looking for employees. Some even offer incentives. Some will just interview you, and they'll pay for your breakfast. Others, when you're hired, will give you a free celebration to celebrate your new job. That's the incentive plan of companies in our country that are really looking for employees.

I also remember: During my time—my time, because the young people now tell me I'm a classmate of Jose Rizal—when I got a job, it didn't occur to me to immediately buy a house or a car. In fact, I calculated: Twenty years on my salary at that time would be needed to get a second-hand vehicle.

Now, even those who have just started working, who have only been graduates for three years, young people are already able to save for their own car or condominium unit. It's not surprising that year after year, the number of vehicles on our roads is increasing. Just in 2014, car sales increased by 27 percent. The number of new cars sold last year reached almost 270,000 vehicles. Motorcycles, around 1.2 million are sold within the year. Let's also add the large population in NCR—the daytime population has reached 14 million, while 12 million at night. This means that 2 million people travel in and out of NCR every day. So if you read complaints about traffic on Facebook, now you know the context, and I ask for your understanding while we work on projects to address this problem.

Just a few of these solutions are the NLEX-SLEX connector which will ease traffic on EDSA. This will connect the North Luzon and South Luzon Expressways. If those my age or older remember, this was promised to us by Mr. Marcos in the 1970s. C6 Phase 1 which will traverse from Parañaque to Batasan, and the 48 new MRT coaches arriving at the end of December and in January. Of course, all of this goes through detailed studies, a bidding process, and approval from Congress for the funds to be used. We want to make the process polished so that it doesn't end up like other projects that were stalled due to lawsuits. I assure you: This waiting has a limit. When the roads open and our public transport system is fixed, the travel in our National Capital Region will surely start to improve, and the growth of our economy will intensify even more.

For example, Congressman Egay Erice of Caloocan has a son who went into the trucking business. He used to have only one truck, and it wasn't running all week. Now, he has five trucks, but it's still not enough to serve everyone who wants to transport cargo to different parts of the Philippines. His father doesn't interfere with his son's business; he has no influence on the number of clients in their trucking business. It's just that our commerce is really booming right now.

Let's look, for example, at the manufacturing sector. It was so sluggish when we came in, that even something as simple as an electric fan, we almost entirely imported everything. Only one company remained because of national pride. Now, the annual average growth of our manufacturing sector from 2010 to 2014 has reached eight percent. The manufacturing sector is growing by eight percent each year. Not only have garment factories and other workshops opened up; even high-tech equipment such as aortic catheters, hemodialysis treatment devices, and in vitro diagnostics, even what is called an electric tricycle and aircraft components, are now made here. Let me also tell you: The other day, in Paris, someone showed us a high-tech toothbrush. Why high-tech? When you use it, it sends a signal to an app on your smartphone, and tells you if you've brushed enough. [Laughter] Honestly, when our host was showing it to us, I was wondering because it looked like a laboratory where you prototype, study the manufacturing process before mass production. So he was walking around, carrying the toothbrush. I said, “What does a toothbrush have to do with what he’s going to lecture us on?” And then that was it. Of course, the incredible engineering behind it: Imagine, fitting technology into something as small as a toothbrush. Those who make it, which is really something to be proud of: Our fellow Filipinos. Designed in France, but this high-tech toothbrush is made in the Philippines. Of course, because it's so high-tech, I haven't seen anything like it here in the Philippines. It seems to be all for export. So when we get back, we're arriving on Saturday, on Sunday I will have it located and see their manufacturing facility. I became conscious of whether my brushing was correct earlier.

Of course, as our economy improves, opportunities also increase. It would be a shame if our countrymen couldn't keep up because they lack the ability. What we want is inclusive growth driven by social services. For example, in education, we found a backlog in classrooms, textbooks, and chairs for students. These backlogs are now gone. The shortage of chairs of 2.5 million, was closed in 2012. In books, the backlog was 61.7 million; it was also filled in 2012. In 2013, we completed the shortage of 66,800 classrooms that we found.

Let me just explain that. Of course, education is very important. My father, who taught me, said, “Maybe you're famous now. You'll be even more famous tomorrow. Maybe you're rich now. You'll be poor tomorrow. But if you study and the lessons get into your head, you'll be okay for life.” So we also want to give that opportunity that our parents gave us. We will work on 66,800 classrooms in six years. We need more or less 11,000 classrooms per year, right? The problem is, the budget can only afford eight thousand; so I still owe three thousand each year. But truthfully, we have already closed that 66,800 classroom shortage. In total, when we step down from office, we will have built 180,000 classrooms. Someone might ask, 66,800 was the shortage, didn't you build a lot? Let me clarify: We replaced or built even the damaged classrooms, those hit by typhoons, and of course, we also prepared for the additional years in school due to the K to 12 program.

I just want to emphasize this K to 12. Before it was enacted, only three countries in the world had a ten-year education cycle, and the Philippines was one of those three. As a result, the qualifications of our graduates were questioned. One was even demoted because of insufficient training compared to his peers in other countries. With K to 12, knowledge is no longer crammed into ten years, our youth learn more, and they have enough knowledge to compete inside or outside the country.

In health, we focused on PhilHealth, which is the center of our Universal Healthcare agenda. If in 2010, only 51 percent of our population was covered by it; as of June 2015, 88 percent are PhilHealth members. The time when healthcare was affected by politics is over. Because if you look back then, when elections were approaching, the number of PhilHealth beneficiaries increased. After the elections, they decreased. We worked hard to make healthcare services orderly and permanent, so now, everyone belonging to the poorest 40 percent of our population can get free treatment in public hospitals. We expanded the membership, we expanded the illnesses covered by PhilHealth.

You've probably also heard of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program or 4Ps. It's simple: We give aid to our poor countrymen in exchange for certain conditions, primarily ensuring that their children go to school. We have also expanded it: from 786,523 households when we came in, now 4.4 million households are our beneficiaries. The program also covers the completion of studies up to high school. There is a study that says that those who finish high school earn about 40 percent more than those who only finished elementary school.

In fact, just last April, the first batch of beneficiaries of the expanded Pantawid Pamilya graduated from high school. There were 333,673 of them; those who graduated with honors and various awards, more than 13,400. Two of them represented and spoke at our celebration; both were accepted and spoke at the UP College of Engineering. It's probably not an exaggeration to say that without Pantawid Pamilya, they probably wouldn't have graduated from high school—they also wouldn't have reached their potential, and society wouldn't benefit from their intelligence.

It's no longer surprising that the number of out-of-school children in our country is decreasing. In 2008, it was 2.9 million. Of course, due to population growth, it's natural to think that the number would increase over time. But in the latest data from 2013, we only had 1.2 million out-of-school children. Here's the latest: The DSWD conducted a study on the impact of the Pantawid Pamilya program. They haven't finished reviewing all the beneficiaries yet, but the initial results are very positive. Currently, 1.4 million households have already risen out of poverty because of Pantawid Pamilya. Surely, when the study is completed, that number will increase. The meaning of “nakaalpas sa kahirapan” is “living below the poverty line” in English. Now they are above the poverty line, but their new classification is called “near poor.” If you are “near poor,” you might experience a serious illness, be hit by a disaster, and fall back into being “poor.” That's what the government is working on – to push them further and further away from this so-called poverty line.

Truly: Our contributions really make a difference. And if I were to detail all the successes one by one, we might run out of time and be late for our audience with Pope Francis, who is of course difficult to get an audience with. Imagine: We used to be known as a haven for corruption. Now, whether in ASEAN, or in APEC which we just hosted in the Philippines; at COP21 which we came from, or in every country we visit like you here in Italy, I deeply feel the world's renewed respect for Filipinos.

Just this past October, the Asia-Pacific Retailers Convention was held in the Philippines. You can really feel the renewed confidence in our economy: Imagine, 1,579 people attended; there were 502 companies from Japan, and 216 businessmen from Korea. When the Forbes Global CEO Conference was held, it was also held in our country, and the attendees were divided into three groups. They all said the same thing: They regretted being late to hear about our transformation; they regretted not joining our progress sooner.

Let's also list the changes. In infrastructure: There are those that our countrymen have been waiting for for a long time, such as the Basilan Circumferential Road, Nasugbu-Ternate Road, Aluling Bridge in Ilocos, Jalaur Multipurpose Project in Iloilo, and Balog-Balog Multipurpose Project Phase 2 in our province of Tarlac. All of these are funded, being built, or have already been completed and are being enjoyed by our Bosses. Wherever we go in the provinces, there are roads, bridges, airports, ports, schools, hospitals, and other infrastructure being built to improve the lives of our countrymen. TESDA is also empowering many people; many lives are being saved thanks to our improved weather forecasting capability, and the prompt response of our personnel during disasters or typhoons. In tourism, for example: Before, Tawi-Tawi had an estimated 200 tourists per year. In 2014, it reached 16,540. But I think that's just one area, because according to the Governor, it's actually 60,000. They said that when Sec. Babes Singson of Highways visited there, he had to sleep in the hospital because the only hotel on the island was full. Now there are 9 hotels, 4 convention centers, and 4 beach resorts in the province of Tawi-Tawi. Fugitives like Jovito Palparan and the Tiamzon couple of the NPA, as well as Senators allegedly involved in stealing from the public treasury, and even the president I succeeded, they have all been arrested by the state and are facing due process.

All these successes and projects are not carried out haphazardly. They are part of a broad strategy to achieve our goal of inclusive growth. By enforcing justice, we build trust in our system. Businesses enter and the economy grows, which in turn creates jobs. Services like PhilHealth and a good education system empower our people to maximize opportunities. All of this is done with prudent spending of funds – so that the people's money goes to the people alone. The result: Filipinos are achieving their dreams.

I brought a video so that one of our youth can tell the story of what is happening in our country:

[INSERT VIDEO]

We have collected many such videos from those who have benefited from our journey along the Straight Path. But I can't show them all to you. Just if you trust me, in every place in the Philippines, there are many such stories. Like a group in Apayao. They said, 'When someone gets sick, we walk through the forest for two days to reach the hospital.' That forest became like a cemetery because of the many who didn't make it to the hospital. Now they say, 'Because of the road you built, it takes only minutes to get to the hospital and when they were young, dreaming of having a road in their area was just a dream. Now it's there and they are benefiting from it.'

You can just imagine: In the old days, you could have ambition, you could be ready to work hard, but there was no way to finance your needs. Now, the state is helping Norashia, and look at how many medals are being awarded to her. It's as if all the criticisms, insults, and slights I received were worth it because there are people like her who are given opportunities. It could also be the equivalent of all the negativity I received just to give them a chance.

I remember back in 2010, the only request was to “stop the hemorrhaging” happening in our system. Did anyone think then that more than 20 million Filipinos would receive aid from the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program? When we reviewed it at the beginning—I mentioned earlier that we could only fund eight thousand classrooms per year—did anyone think that the entire backlog of 66,800 classrooms would be filled, and we could prepare for future needs beyond that? Before, our Air Force was all air and no force. Did anyone think we could afford to buy an entire squadron of brand new FA-50 fighter jets, the first two of which landed last Saturday, and the remaining ten will be completed by 2017? Now the police, finally, have enough guns and equipment. When there was a typhoon, even the DSWD used to ask the public for relief goods. Now, as soon as there’s news of an incoming typhoon, aid is automatically prepositioned. When disaster strikes, the DOH always manages to prevent epidemics, even if the flow of water or electricity is temporarily interrupted. Anywhere in the world, if a Filipino needs to be evacuated due to conflict, we can do that—in Libya, Syria, Iraq, and Yemen, for example. When the unrest began in Libya, we evacuated 20,000 OFWs.

In this kind of response, sometimes, our countrymen can’t help but become impatient, starting to expect the government to solve all the problems we inherited from Mahoma.

Now, of course, it’s election season again, so many will make promises because they want to woo you. We, on the other hand, promised change, and you’ve seen how we’ve fulfilled those promises. Our colleagues in the Cabinet really poured in literal blood, sweat, and tears to reach where we are today. Everyone in front of you, including those who temporarily stayed in the Philippines, shares my desire to change the status quo we inherited, and we both sacrificed. Not only were their salaries reduced; they also endured the baseless and relentless insults directed at our colleagues in the Cabinet and government. Their spouses and children were not exempted from the attacks and harassment they faced.

The battle isn’t over yet: When I step down from office, they might start stripping me of everything we’ve held the corrupt accountable for, to intimidate everyone like us with good intentions. I am ready to face this, because it is clear to me that if I had agreed to simply maintain the status quo, nothing would happen in our country.

Those running for the next election are now, one by one, revealing their personalities and proving themselves to woo you. Let me tell you a story about wooing. Although I haven’t succeeded in my love life, [laughter] but about my parents. On the day the dictator imprisoned my father, we could only be together as a family on Sundays when we were allowed to stay until 9:00 AM to 6:00 PM. That’s when we were inside his prison except for the time to go to church. Once, during a conversation, my younger siblings asked how our father was sure that our mother was truly the one for him. My father replied, with a very serious face: When they were young, at a children’s party, my mother saw my father and pointed him out to my grandfather. And from that moment on, since she pointed him out to my grandfather, my father couldn’t do anything. Of course, my female siblings replied: Ooh.

The funny thing is, the very next week—remember, we were only allowed to be together for a long time once a week, often with two days of one hour each if they were kind to us. So, the next week during our visit, my father suddenly remembered one of his rivals for my mother’s heart. My father said, praising him: This man was a very good dancer, he knew all the dances invented by man. He could dance (of course) on the floor, on top of the table, on top of the chair, under the table. He really praised him. He was a great dancer. But, he apparently looked like a gecko. [Laughter] Of course—I just remember my father’s face when he was telling the story—I was surprised by my father’s story. They had been married to our mother for a long time, my older sister was about to finish college, the second of us was already in college. He had been in prison for a long time. How did he suddenly remember his rival when no one reminded him? Of course, he hadn’t seen him the day before. It was as if he had just seen him yesterday, vividly—I don’t know if it’s still possible to say he was jealous at that time.

Now, aside from laughing, I am even more struck by the deep love my mother and father had for each other. They really matched each other; it reached the point where they seemed to be reading each other’s minds, because when we would tell our mother we were going out or hanging out, I once tried to say, “Should I ask Daddy? Maybe he’ll agree.” They didn’t even talk, but Mommy said, “No.” I went to my father after two hours because it was time, “Dad, can I go to a party?” He also replied, “No.” After that, I never asked them both. If you asked one, that was also the answer of the other. Most importantly, until the end, they repeatedly emphasized: They would not have reached anything they had achieved if not for the love of the other.

And so, even as a bachelor, you have already regarded me as the father of the nation, perhaps I can offer a lesson or advice to our children. The relationship of my parents is not far from the relationship of a President to his Bosses. We seek a match: a match of hearts, a match of dreams, a matching opportunity with a leader who will prioritize you and you are willing to contribute to achieve our goals. When that happens, and if the leader’s heart is in the right place, he will fight for you and he will clash with anyone who oppresses you, because you give him strength—because he knows that no matter what happens, you are behind him. And just like our parents, whatever a country has achieved or will achieve is due to the cooperation, trust, and unity of the leader and the public he serves.

It is important to keep this in mind, especially since another crossroads is approaching. You have seen how high the Philippines has reached in recent years. According to a study, if our current path is not interrupted, within a generation, we will reach what is called high income status or first world status. The question for you in the next election: Will we continue to rise, or will we fall back to where we came from?

Let us examine our choices. There is one there, accused of plundering the public treasury for a long time. If the allegations are true and this person is indeed stealing, what will be left to fund the improvement of life that he promises?

There is also one who promises to surpass everything we have done. And if that happens, I will be the first to applaud. But let us listen carefully, he has never said how he will fulfill that promise. No context, no plan, just criticism and raw promises. He probably thinks that once he is elected, he will wake up the next morning to a new day with solutions to all the problems he mentioned.

There is one who says that many will supposedly be killed. [Laughter] Another one will just go through the campaign on social media—perhaps he is not aware that you cannot build roads and feed the hungry using Facebook alone.

I would also add another candidate for another position. His stance is that he will do what is right—but he cannot admit the mistakes he made in the past. Isn't it: If he doesn't say it's wrong, he probably thinks it's right. If he thinks it's right, he will likely repeat those mistakes.

I have full trust in all of you, you know that running a country is not just about making beautiful advertisements in a campaign. As far as I'm concerned: You gave us the opportunity, and we brought the Philippines to where it is today. We all worked hard and contributed to this. It is reasonable to think that none of us would risk what we have worked for. We dreamed. Now, our dreams are coming true. Will we back down? Why would we go to those who only promise, or to those who might fulfill their promises, if there is someone with us who participated and worked hard to reach the transformed state of our country. I think you know who we are referring to.

Bosses, I want to emphasize: When we came in, we were like challenged to farm on rocky, dry land, full of landmines. We had to clean and level the land; we had to find a way to fund the seeds; we had to strive to water and nurture this lush society that we enjoy today. I repeat what my parents said: We were able to do this only because we were each other's strength.

Truly, truly: We made the change happen. We dared to dream, we fulfilled our dreams, and we are now reaching for even higher aspirations. We are challenged to fight and continue—no more kickbacks, no more sirens, no return to corruption. We are the majority, we are on the right path, we are the hope of future generations of Filipinos. We built the Straight Path. My Bosses, let us move forward and fight for the Philippines we have long dreamed of.

Good evening to you all. Thank you very much.