Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of the 30th anniversary of the EDSA People Power Revolution

President Fidel Valdez Ramos, Speaker Feliciano “Sonny” Belmonte and members of the House of Representatives present, Executive Secretary and EDSA People Power Commission Chair Paquito Ochoa Jr, Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps, other members of the Cabinet present, other members of the EDSA People Power Commission present, the local government officials present, AFP Chief of Staff General Hernando Iriberri and the men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; the PNP Chief Police Director Ricardo Marquez and the men and women of the Philippine National Police, fellow workers in government, honored guests, my beloved countrymen,

Truly, this is a beautiful day. Good day to all of you.

Let me begin this speech by repeating a few lines from the song we heard earlier—the “Handog Ng Pilipino Sa Mundo,” which I think perfectly captures the point of EDSA: “Our freedom, for so long we have desired. It will no longer be allowed to be taken away again.” [Applause]

To be honest, although I can say that our family was victimized during Martial Law, we were still fortunate—because at least I was able to visit my father while he was imprisoned, and when he was murdered, we were able to bury him and we have a grave to visit. Others were not as lucky as us. Many of you facing me now went through more intense suffering, and I have nothing more to tell you. What I will say this morning is not just for you, but for the current generation, who now hold different kinds of freedom.

Now, if you are a new graduate, you can supposedly go straight to Bora or another country without the authorities monitoring your every move. You can hang out without fearing curfew. Owning a car or a condominium is no longer a far-fetched dream. Now, with a single touch on a smartphone, any information from anywhere in the world comes to you.

Perhaps, in your current situation, it is not easy to understand that at one point in our history, it was not easy to gather information. Back then, besides comics, there was a movie page in the newspaper, and that was the only thing we could say reported truthfully. The rest of the newspaper was filled with propaganda. Back then, if you were lucky enough to get a copy of a prohibited article, you would scramble to hide it from the elements of Martial Law, because if you were caught, it was enough reason to be imprisoned indefinitely and without charges filed. Back then, simply being seen together with more than three friends could be a reason to be charged with illegal assembly.

These freedoms that you barely notice today are a far cry from the situation under the Marcos regime. Back then, freedom meant: Freedom to praise the dictator. Freedom to endure getting an exit permit if you wanted to leave the country. Freedom to expect to be imprisoned when you fought for your rights. There was freedom to believe gossip more than what was revealed on radio and TV—because of this, the government enacted an absurd law against rumor mongering. There was also freedom that if you fought against Martial Law and were targeted, there was no process for appeal.

I would like to emphasize: All of this is not fiction. It is not a theory or the view of a few. Martial Law truly happened. There was a dictator, along with his family and cronies, who indulged in power, and in exchange, the lives and freedom of Filipinos were sacrificed.

I can only shake my head, because there are those who say that the time of Mr. Marcos was the golden age of the Philippines. Perhaps, golden days for him, who, after exhausting his two terms as President, equivalent to eight years, still found a way to cling to power. I wondered: We both became President—what would have been our situation if he had only been true to his mandate during his time in office?

It was perhaps a golden age during that time for Mr. Marcos’ cronies, and those close to him. I have heard many stories: During the time of the dictator, businessmen did not want to expand their businesses. They were afraid that they might be noticed and have their businesses seized by those in power.

It was also a golden age for the growth of the country's debt. When Mr. Marcos began his term in 1965, the national government's debt was P2.4 billion; at the end of 1985, two months before he was ousted from office, our debt was already P192.2 billion. And because the money did not go where it should have, the benefits went only to a select few; the repayment, however, is our burden to this day.

Let us emphasize this: a golden age of what is called brain drain. A golden age of the departure of OFWs to the Middle East. Now, for us, it is a golden age of the return of OFWs. Before, it was a golden age of the New People’s Army, which, due to the people’s disillusionment, was said to have swelled from 60 people to 25,000 members after the end of Martial Law. It even reached a point where Davao was used as an urban laboratory of the NPA, as preparation for their invasion of various cities. Until now, we still feel their disturbances in the most remote communities of the country.

It was also a golden age for those who abused our Moro brothers and sisters. Land-grabbing became rampant in Mindanao; the Marcos regime, instead of siding with the exploited, seemed to tolerate the oppressors. Instead of justice being the response, or creating a law to rectify the situation, the Philippine Constabulary and the Armed Forces were pushed as the solution.

Now, when I think about what we have achieved in the peace process, where we already have a Framework Agreement and a Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro, and we are just lacking the Bangsamoro Basic Law, I really regret it, because the only law that will deliver justice and peace was deliberately blocked. And isn't it true: The BBL was stuck in the Senate in the committee on local government, chaired by Senator Marcos? Wasn't it that on the very last day of the session, Senator Enrile was still interpelling? And isn't it that these two surnames were the ones who pushed for a military solution for the Moro people during the time of the dictatorship?

Bosses, many of us who were also oppressed by Martial Law understand what our Moro brothers and sisters went through. Our own family faced severe abuse from those in power.

You all know what we went through. What was my father’s crime, if all he did was his job? He was arrested and taken to jail. Soon after, from Crame and Fort Bonifacio, he was transferred to Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija and imprisoned in solitary confinement there. His reading glasses were taken so everything he saw would be blurry. His watch was taken so he couldn’t measure the passage of time. His ring was taken so he would forget he had a wife and family looking for him. The cell was painted pure white so he would forget there was a world outside of it.

He was tried as a civilian in a military tribunal; Marcos himself was the accuser, Marcos appointed the members of the prosecution and defense, Marcos appointed the judge to the Military Commission, and Marcos was also the final reviewing authority. The only lawyer member who disagreed with what was happening in the tribunal was dismissed. It was because of these reasons that the term “Lutong Macoy” (fixed by Marcos) became popular. The fight was unfair, and if not elusive, there was truly no way to seek justice. In my young eyes then: How could I even think about preparing for a good future?

The dictator did not stop at my father. We had pilot employees who were stripped of their licenses and could not work. There were those from the media who, in Marcos’s view, were against them, so they were banned from reporting news, and some were forced to sell meat, and we were almost the only ones buying it. Even our household staff, like the one who took care of me, my nanny, and her husband, even after they were no longer employed by us, were repeatedly arrested to force them to testify against my father. The last time my nanny was arrested, she was six months pregnant. Our gardener was also taken by the authorities and when he returned, he was covered in bruises and his face was swollen. In almost every corner of the Philippines, there are stories of people being suddenly arrested, tortured, killed, or simply disappearing and their bodies have not been found to this day.

I repeat: All of this happened. Is there anyone among you who would accept the possibility of returning to a time when this could happen to you or to those you love? The government empowered by the people used that power to oppress the people. To those who say that Mr. Marcos should not be blamed for all the events under his regime, our response is: If you seized all the power, shouldn’t you also take responsibility for everything? [Applause]

It is indeed true what they say: the sins of the father should not be passed on to the son. But what is painful is this: the blood relative of the dictator, for a long time, could have simply said, “My father was wrong” or “We were wrong; give us a chance to correct this.” But just imagine, this was his direct response, “I am ready to say sorry if I knew what I have to be sorry for.” If he cannot even see the wrong in what his family did, how can we expect him not to repeat it? As for me, thank you anyway, because at least you were true to showing that you are ready to emulate your father. [Applause] Let me also clarify: this is not a matter of Aquino versus Marcos; it is very clear to me that this is a battle between right and wrong. [Applause]

When I traveled abroad, foreigners repeatedly asked me: “Is it true that the Marcoses are still in power?” It is really very difficult to explain this to them. Until now, it is still painful to think that a Filipino oppressed a fellow Filipino as Mr. Marcos did. It is also right that I share with you what was reported in a newspaper yesterday: the 1986 COMELEC tabulators are reportedly worried. They are nervous if the Marcoses will return to power, because they saw how the election numbers were blatantly manipulated to favor the dictator.

I remember a line I heard from a movie: “The greatest trick the Devil ever pulled was convincing the world he didn’t exist.” Isn't this true? This kind of evil is precisely what the people who insist that the Marcos regime was our golden age are trying to erase. Isn't this what is happening now? The revisionists of our history have achieved some success, and have swayed some of our youth. You can see the style of the loyalists in traditional and social media; they are trying to dictate a story to manipulate public opinion.

I say it plainly now, as part of the generation that suffered under the dictatorship: The time of Mr. Marcos was not a golden age. [Applause] It was a very painful period in our history, which is why so many of our countrymen mustered the courage to gather in EDSA and in other places outside Metro Manila, holding onto their faith and principles. We were able to unite, and with the grace of God, we ousted the dictatorship without resorting to a bloody revolution.

Now, if some surveys are correct in saying that support is growing for the son of the dictator who cannot see the mistakes of the past, does that mean we have forgotten what we said, “Enough, too much, change it”? [Applause] Does that mean that it is being declared now: Can we allow the possibility of Martial Law prevailing again and all its mistakes being repeated?

It is not surprising either that those who benefited from the dictatorship and the remaining loyalists say that we have not achieved anything since EDSA. They want us to believe that our situation was better under Mr. Marcos—after all, that was the promise the dictator relentlessly sold. But where did the 21 years of his rule lead us? Wasn't our country the “Sick Man of Asia”?

They deliberately cover up what we have achieved through the Straight Path: Now, more than 7.7 million Filipinos have been lifted out of poverty; there are more than 4.4 million households supported by Pantawid Pamilya, as well as 92 percent of our population covered by Philhealth. Let's also include: the poorest 40 percent of our country can now receive free medical treatment in public hospitals; and we also recorded the lowest unemployment rate in ten years. [Applause] Infrastructure that had been waited for decades, such as the Aluling Bridge, the Lullutan Bridge, the Ternate-Nasugbu Road, and the Jalaur River Multi-purpose Project, and many others, are being built or have been completed and are being enjoyed by our communities. I remember what was told to us when we visited Apayao: Finally, they have a road, which the people there had long thought they would never achieve. I ask: Is it right to turn a blind eye, especially now that we have a government that cares for the people?

Let me also remind you, dictatorship has many faces; there are other personalities who want to bring it back—to deny due process and put into the hands of one person the power to say what is right or wrong, and who is innocent or guilty. I remember what writer George Santayana said: “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.”

I believe that we are not destined to repeat our dark history; our destiny is simply the sum of the decisions we make today. I believe in the greatness of our race. I believe that although we have a great capacity for patience, there is also a limit, and if that limit is reached, a wave of unity will truly come that no one can stop.

Now, my request to the youth: Learn what happened during EDSA. We have a museum that is part of our celebration: The EDSA People Power Experiential Museum, where you can somewhat experience the cruelty implemented during the dictatorship, I hope you take advantage of this opportunity to see how valuable the freedom and democracy now in your hands are.

I truly believe that the current generation knows that the heights they reach are the result of their standing on the efforts and great sacrifices of those who came before them. I am 56 years old, and if I am fortunate enough to reach 70, I will only have 14 years left in this world. But you who are younger than me, you have several decades left. You will reap whatever future we sow today. Let me share what my mother said to me: “The problems we face are our generation’s making. It is our generation that has to correct them. Your role is to prepare yourselves better to avoid making the same mistakes.”

You grew up enjoying freedoms denied to the previous generation, when if you reached 30 years old while resisting the dictatorship, you were lucky to still be alive. Now, 30 years old is just the beginning of your professional life. You have the freedom to earn and save, to love and build a family—you have the freedom to dream. You are the ones who will benefit the most if we can protect our freedom, so I hope you understand the responsibility you hold. Let us all contribute, so that darkness will never again prevail in the Philippines. May the freedom we have longed for for so long never be taken away from us again.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much to all of you.