Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during his meeting with the community and local leaders of Iloilo.

It reminded me, back in the day, when we still had martial law, we were in Cebu. There happened to be a rally. A senator arrived late. What he found in the plaza were only three people. He said, “Should I even speak, when there are only three people left?” The emcee told him, “It would be a shame, it seems like those three aren’t convinced yet. You should still speak.”

So he spoke. Halfway through the speech, one of the three stood up and left. “Well, I was abandoned,” said the speaker. He looked at the emcee. “Just continue. There are only two left, we’re complete here, one hundred percent.” As he was about to finish his speech, the other one of the two remaining people stood up. And what was even more painful about this was, while he was speaking to the plaza, he used the sound system instead of approaching the three people. So only one was left. The emcee looked at him again and said, “You are really great. All those who came before you couldn’t convince those two. Continue, we’ll get everyone.” The speech finished, and he wasn’t left by the last person he spoke to. He approached him. He said, “Thank you very much, and I’m sure now you are convinced.” The remaining person in the plaza replied, “To be honest, even before you arrived, I was already convinced. Proof of that is the sound system you are using. It’s mine. Now that you’re finished, I’ll take my sound system home.” [Laughter]

In 2010, I asked, what is the best way to ask for help from our Ilonggo brothers and sisters, and what I was told by those we consulted was to say to all of you: There are many beautiful people here in Iloilo. [Applause] Remember that! Now, because I will ask for your help again, and if possible, even more intensely, my Ilonggo language instructor advised me to say this: Because there are many beautiful people here in Iloilo. [Applause]

You know, I almost became a transplant here in Iloilo. Let me explain why: Back then, I think I was in first year high school, my father had a family friend here in Iloilo. I won’t mention their surname. And all their children were really, really handsome. Any one of them would have been okay. The problem is, martial law came, and we couldn’t mingle with them anymore. Then, when martial law was about to end, in 1984, we had a friend here in Iloilo named [Carmela Porres]. She told me she knew this family. And it seemed one of their sons had returned here to Iloilo City. I said, “Wow, this is fate. This is my chance.” She said, “Write a letter and I’ll deliver it.” I wrote so quickly, the letter was really beautiful. It was probably about five pages long. The letter was delivered and then I met with Carmela. “Carmela, when will I see him?” She told me, “Maybe it will take a while.” I said, “Why will it take a while?” “When I delivered the letter, I was told he was getting married in two weeks’ time.” [Laughter] So that’s what you call “fate”! So to those of you who are celebrating Valentine’s next week, you’re lucky! [Laughter]

You know, in September 2009, before I had decided to run, the SWS survey for the presidency came out. The survey said that our support was at 60 percent, favoring our victory. If that had been the result of the election, even if our opponents combined their remaining forces, they still wouldn’t have been enough.

That’s why they all seemed to unite to attack me, destroy me, and trample on my character. But as we all know, because of your warm support and that of our other countrymen, when the election was over, 42 percent of the total votes cast were for us. More than that, when the Pulse survey came out in November 2012, our trust ratings reached 80 percent. Until now, as we are nearing the end of our term, the majority of the people still trust us. According to Pulse in December 2015, our approval ratings were at 55 percent, and disapproval was only 15 percent. [Applause] I think that difference will return to our side. This is proof: Our Bosses know the truth, and they don’t get fooled.

Back when I was ganged up on, someone reminded me of the saying: “The tree laden with fruit is the one that gets pelted.” The same is true for Mar Roxas, whom we endorsed to succeed us. Even now, there are already many who are attacking him. Look at this: One candidate said, “Hey, before we debate, Mar Roxas, be number one first.” But all they did was criticize Mar. This only makes it clearer: Although it hasn’t fully emerged in the surveys yet, they already know who their main opponent is. He is the one with the most “K”: [applause] capability, experience, conscience, honesty, compassion and love for others, and lastly, he has Korina too.

Perhaps you have also noticed: The ads we release are simple and not extravagant. We go straight to the point and only tell the truth. For me, the true spokesperson of our campaign is not me, not Mar or Leni, not our candidates, but all our countrymen who are benefiting and being helped by the Straight Path. Ours is simply: Do what is right, and our Bosses themselves will lift our candidacy.

Indeed, the upcoming election is a referendum. And the question is: Is the direction we are taking on the Straight Path correct? Let me give you some details: Is it true that the country formerly called the “Sick Man of Asia” has become “Asia’s Rising Tiger” because we have grown the economy? [Applause] Is it true that, on the Straight Path, the Pantawid Pamilya program, which was formerly used for political maneuvering, is now guiding more than 4.4 million beneficiary households? And within that number, 7.7 million have been lifted out of the poverty line. Is it true that from 51 percent in 2010, PhilHealth now covers and cares for 91 percent? Is it true that we have been continuously building infrastructure, which our countrymen have been expecting for decades, and is now finally being completed and built? Is it true that we are modernizing and developing our uniformed personnel, who have long been neglected? Is it true that we are focusing on the welfare of the people rather than just personal agendas?

Here with you, let's look at the change. For infrastructure, the funds allocated by our predecessor for you from 2005 to 2010 amounted to P9.22 billion. Under us, from 2011 to 2016, this has reached P26.12 billion. [Applause] With the guidance of our local leaders and under the leadership of Senate President Frank Drilon, you now have the unique attraction of the Iloilo River Esplanade, and a world-class Iloilo Convention Center. [Applause] Your roads are now wide, with bike lanes. And if they need to be widened further, there is already land donated for the construction of additional roads. Not only is it safer, but it is also more efficient to deliver your products to the market. You have also been dubbed the “Seafood Capital.” Let me clarify: I am not throwing shade at Mayor Jed Mabilog and Governor Art Defensor, let's also include Cong. Cadio Gorriceta and Cong. Jerry Treñas. If you send me seafood, especially what is called “diwal,” I just want to remind you that there is still some space in our vehicle. [Laughter] Just kidding aside, if the Straight Path continues, I will not be surprised if the title “Queen City of the South” is returned to Iloilo. [Applause]

Now, in my opinion, no one in their right mind would say that all these changes are happening now because we just acted like Juan Tamad (a character known for laziness). It is clear: We did not take a vacation and just stand around, waiting for any fruit to fall. Instead, we studied the root of each problem thoroughly, worked hard to fix them, and now, we are enjoying the positive results.

Comrades, we are now in the thick of the campaign, and these Senators of ours are truly carefully chosen. Many want to join, but these are the ones we have selected. You have already heard them all speak. In the coming days, you will learn more about their platforms. The important thing is to elect the right candidates. For example, regarding the issue of peace in Mindanao. 100 million of our countrymen are affected by the failure to pass the BBL. The sad thing is, it seems only two senators colluded. The committee report was released after a long time. Even in the last days of the session, the accomplice was still not finished interpolating. I told those who criticized this before: What is your suggestion or alternative to the BBL? Nothing was submitted to us. Now, where are we? We are still in the same situation, which did not provide a solution to the long-standing condition of Mindanao. Bosses, that is how important the legislature is, so we need Senators that we choose to be truly right and deserving.

Now, with us is Mar Roxas. How many of those who want to be President can say, face-to-face, that they can sacrifice for the country? Mar, clearly, made a great sacrifice. In 2010, he was the original candidate of the party for the presidency. He was ready then, and had already worked hard on the campaign. But what did he do? He knew that our dream for the Philippines was one. So there was no long discussion; no debate, he and Butch Abad were the first people he spoke to when he decided to step down, to give way to my candidacy. He didn't ask for anything in return. Are there others who have made such a great sacrifice? After that, did we hear him complain? You can see, he still served as Secretary of DOTC and DILG. When there is an emergency or disaster, he is the first in and last out; he is there, not just to pose for photos, but to ensure that everything is safe and in order. Isn't that putting into practice what we say, “Country before self”? [Applause]

Here before us is Leni Robredo. We all know, Jesse and she were truly meant to be. They proved the saying “The sum is greater than the parts.” Jesse would not have been able to do his service if not for the support of his wife. Likewise, Jesse was a partner to Leni, from the beginning of her life as a public servant. Leni also knows the meaning of “sacrifice.” She is a widow, but she is raising her children properly. Now, although her children have lost their father, they are not discouraged, but rather, they become a source of strength in our campaign. Another example: When her district called on her to continue progress in Camarines Sur, she stood firm even though her opponent was a powerful family. Now, when we called on her to run for Vice President, she also accepted the great challenge, because she knew that this was for the greater good. [Applause]

You know: The position of Vice President is very important. You can't just be there to look good, and use the position for your own ambition. You are second in command of the country; at any time, you can take over as President. I've been thinking: What if I had Mar as my VP from the beginning? I am sure we would have gone much further. So let us never forget: That is how important it is to choose a single tandem. [Applause]

Now, during this campaign season, surely there will be many suitors for your votes. Many will utter sweet words; they will promise the moon and the stars, but the truth is, they can only love themselves. [Applause] I remember a song I often listen to, “A Prayer for Generosity.” The lyrics of the song say: “Lord, teach me to be generous. Teach me to serve You, and to give according to what is right without expecting anything from You.”

My Bosses, my beloved Ilonggos, look at me, eye to eye, and I will tell you face to face: Mar and Leni embody these words. They are the leaders who will continue the positive transformation in our society; they are the ones who will lead us to continuous progress and upliftment; they are the ones who are capable of sacrifice; and above all, they have genuine love not for themselves, but for God, for their fellowmen, and for the country. [Applause] There is no doubt, those who will continue and expand the Straight Path, who will lead us to the fulfillment of our dreams, are none other than Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

Therefore, my Bosses, my beloved Ilonggos, the next President of the Republic of the Philippines: Mar Roxas!

Thank you very much.