Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at a meeting with local leaders and citizens of Naga.

Every time we visit the provinces, our schedule is always packed. So when I was told we were going to Camarines Sur, it immediately occurred to me: It would be a waste if we didn't make the most of our trip here. Now, we're even staying overnight. It looks like I'll get to taste more of your delicious cooking. [Applause] I'm not directing that at Vice Governor Ato Peña, Mayor John Bongat, and Gabby Bordado. [Laughter] Even better, we'll be able to spend more time with my beloved Nagueños.

Perhaps I should explain that a little further: As you know, when I ran in 2010, I had no plans to run. But even before that, during the senatorial race, two leaders of the Liberal Party were the first to suggest that I should run. One of them was Manny Mamba of Cagayan, and the other was Jesse Robredo of Naga. [Applause] And I really wanted to know what my limits were, what I was capable of, because this was a national election. We had served three terms as a congressman; local is different from national. So we decided to go to Cagayan all the way to Piat and back from Tarlac. And this Naga, back from Quezon City just to see how far we could go here.

And to be honest, Jesse shared a lot with me. To be honest, when I first met him, I said, “Shouldn’t you be the one running for national office given the breadth of your experience and the amount you’ve accomplished?” He explained why it didn’t seem right at that time. But to be honest, when I say I’ll return to Naga, if you think about it, the start of our journey on the Straight Path, may have started in Cagayan, started here, started in Tarlac. So, thank you all very much. [Applause]

Let's return to what Butch Abad pointed out in front: To your warm embrace of the Right Path and unwavering support, a great thank you. [Applause]

In our lives, we face crossroads, and we need to make a decision: We can choose what is for others, or we can prioritize ourselves.

You all know what my family went through. Let me start with my father. He had the strongest voice of opposition against the dictatorship. Because of this, he was imprisoned for seven years and seven months. When he had the opportunity to live a normal life abroad, he chose to return to his homeland in need. And as you know, he was assassinated.

As for my mother, you also witnessed, from being a private housewife, how she fought for democracy—from Martial Law, when she served as President, until the last moments of her life.

I, too, as you can see, am experiencing all sorts of insults, humiliation, lies, defamation, mockery, and threats to my life. All of these were done by our opponents, instead of cooperating to serve our Bosses, to whom we all promised to do so. At the same time, they want us to believe that they are the ones who will deliver greater achievements for the country.

But as I said to you: Let us take the Straight Path. And perhaps, as I am about to bid you farewell, let me mention some of its results: The Philippines, from being the Sick Man of Asia, is now one of the most dynamic economies in the world. [Applause] Our unemployment rate is now the lowest in ten years. The Pantawid Pamilya program has been expanded and focused on the truly poor, so that 7.7 million Filipinos have now crossed or risen above the poverty line. The PhilHealth coverage we inherited, they said, was 51 percent; we have now reached 91 percent coverage. When I was a congressman, getting a new classroom was very difficult. But before we step down from office, according to Bro. Armin, we have already built 185,149 classrooms. [Applause]

Since we are talking about classrooms, let me tell you a little story: As the 2004 elections approached, and at that time we were still hoping that Mrs. Arroyo would do the right thing, I mentioned to her once when we met, I said, “Mrs. President…” You know, when you go home to Tarlac, you pass through NLEX, at that time, it exits in Mabalacat, Pampanga. Now, when you exit there, on the national highway, formally called Manila North Road, or the more popularly known MacArthur Highway, as soon as you exit the highway, the potholes are terrible. It really makes even ten-wheeler trucks wobble because you can truly say it’s more hole than road. And so, when I met Mrs. Arroyo, I said to her, “Ma’am, maybe we don’t need to look for issues from the opposition, maybe they should just set up their stages there on those potholes and wobble and say, ‘Did Mrs. Arroyo remember you, her fellow Kapampangan?’”

In fairness, we were listened to, and the roads were repaired before the election arrived. When we met again, I said to her, “Ma’am, thank you. The road was repaired.” She replied to me, “You know these things fall through the cracks, that’s why I depend on the local leaders to tell me about it.” I just thought: My district is the second district of Tarlac. Mabalacat and my district are separated by the third district of Tarlac. So I was the local leader who failed to tell her that there was a problem with the road there. But even so, when the signboards listing all the reasons why the road was repaired came out, my name was included in the praise but not in the help to build the road. But that’s just that.

I would like to add, just so you can see what we went through, I would really like to emphasize: There came a point where we were campaigning for our barangay captains because we were still hoping they would do the right thing. In the 2004 elections, my captains asked me, what can we proudly say Mrs. Arroyo has accomplished, and truthfully, it was rather thin, especially in Central Luzon where she and I both come from. We met again, and I also wanted to help. I said to her, “Ma’am, I think what we’ve accomplished in Central Luzon is a bit thin. Perhaps it would be good, since the congressmen and others have done things, and the executive branch commissioned these, perhaps it would be good to claim them as your own.” And she followed our advice, so when I returned to my district, I was no longer included in all the roads, schools, irrigation, and others that I had built. [Laughter] That is true.

Here in Camarines Sur, we are now completing the infrastructure that you Bicolanos have long awaited. Just now, we visited the completed expansion of the Pili Diversion Road, as well as the replacement of the San Jose bridge, and we will also complete the continuation of these roads.

With the number of things we are accomplishing here in your province, your local leaders, like Mayor San Luis, are mentioning the projects, programs, and infrastructure that have been provided. He said he has a new problem. Before, it was difficult to find something to proudly claim as a success in their town, now he says they are running out of time just to say everything that the Straight Path has done in his area and in your province. [Applause]

With our successes here and throughout the country, including the restored confidence in us from the entire world, is there anyone saying that we should no longer continue the Straight Path?

You know, your Valentine’s Day is coming up, and the “your” is important because I am currently married to the town, to the town, at present, our contract ends on June 30th. So in 2017, it will be our Valentine’s, but it’s still 2016 now, so your Valentine’s Day is approaching, which we know is a time for courtship. It’s like a campaign. There are suitors who will love you completely, but there are also those who will promise you the moon and the stars, but in reality, they can only love themselves, right? [Applause]

Some people asked me, “How will we know who to choose?” My answer is, “Those who deserve our precious votes should have a “K”: Capability, experience, importantly, conscience, truthfulness in word and deed, humility, compassion and love for others, and lastly, Korina. That is Mar Roxas. [Applause]

We wonder: With so many competing for the presidency, why does it seem like Mar is being ganged up on? What has been done to him reminds me of what was done to me at the beginning of my own campaign. It’s true what they say: The tree laden with fruit is the one that is pelted with stones.

For example, when he was in Eastern Samar, Mar came to the aid of those devastated by the typhoon. As Secretary of the DILG, he went around the affected communities to verify the data and identify those with the greatest needs so they could be helped immediately. In this way, the government can address it quickly. And Mar, I repeat, didn’t arrive after the typhoon, he was there, he met the typhoon head-on. We expected him to help report the situation and the continuing needs of our fellow citizens who were affected. But the main gist of the news was his fall from the motorcycle. It was as if they forgot to mention how important what he was doing was and just focused the news on the motorcycle fall. Why was he on a motorcycle? Because the roads were closed due to fallen electric posts, trees, and others. Only a motorcycle could get through.

Our opponents still know the truth: Throughout Mar’s career, he did not steal, and he never used power to gain an advantage over others. [Applause] Mar, full of proof of capability: He has already created many jobs, such as in IT-BPO. Do you know, this year, it is estimated that we might reach 1.3 million people working in the IT-BPO industry, and the amount it will bring to our country is estimated to be no less than $25 billion. [Applause] He also knows how to find solutions to any challenges that a President will face.

All of this, Mar accomplished without complaint, without drama, without showing off. And even as his political opponents showered him with slander, he continued to work. It is true: You can’t put a good Mar down. [Applause]

Of course, the Vice President is a very important position, we cannot afford to lose a leader. If something happens to the leader, there must be someone to replace him who is just as capable, just as good, and just as trustworthy. Of course, who else would be a better partner for Mar than someone with the same integrity: The favorite son of Bicol, Leni Robredo. [Applause]

We know: Throughout Jesse’s service, Leni was his partner. They proved: The sum is greater than the parts. When Jesse passed away, Leni stood as both father and mother to her three children. And truthfully, she could have asked: Is what we have contributed to the country not enough? She could have simply rested and chosen a more comfortable path. She could also have continued serving her district. Reelection might be easier than her first run. But she was called upon to be the Vice Presidential candidate of the Straight Path. Despite the many tears that her family went through because of this, in the end, she agreed to accept the challenge to serve the nation even more. [Applause]

I believe many of you are not aware. When Jesse passed away, we went to Masbate and it exceeded 24 hours without us seeing any trace of Jesse. Jesse had a public life and a political career, and he was trying to have a private life for his family. Like our father did to us, he wanted us to have a more normal life. Because of that, almost none of us really knew Leni. And of course, I am the President, Jesse was a member of my Cabinet, the news should come from me, even if it's bad. I think this was the first time I had a long conversation with Leni during that time. And I was already preparing myself, the tears were there, the resentment was there, the anger was there, whatever emotions would come over you because of Jesse's sudden death.

And believe me, I was surprised by Leni's strength. I didn't deliver good news to her. And because it had exceeded 24 hours, we couldn't expect to have good news. I don't think I saw a single tear from Leni there. Instead, she seemed to be understanding all of us who were grieving. And you are truly amazed, during times of trial, how strong this woman named Leni Robredo is. [Applause] Truly, one of Jesse's benefits, and I think if we had him with us now, he would also say, “I wouldn't have reached everything I reached, I wouldn't have been able to do everything I did if it weren't for a partner named Leni.” [Applause]

My fellow citizens, you know where we came from. You know that our achievements were not accidental. We fought for all our successes. But we cannot yet say that these are permanent, especially if those who replace us will bring us back to corrupt practices, or perhaps we might even elect someone who is not really ready.

That's what I can say: Mar and Leni, without a doubt and without fail, will continue the Straight Path. We, here on stage, appeal to you: Here we are with certainty that you will not be stolen from; here we are with certainty that there is capability; here we are with certainty that we will be led to the fulfillment of our dreams. [Applause] You, the people of Camarines Sur, together with our Bosses, are the strength of the Straight Path—you are the strength of Mar and Leni, and with your help, we will ensure a just and prosperous society for future generations.

You accompanied me in 2007, and especially in 2010. And now, please accompany me in the fight led by Mar and Leni, the tandem that is sure to continue and expand the Straight Path. [Applause]

We have a close friend. And the person who replaced him served as President for nine and a half years. He [the friend] told me, “I cannot forgive him for the almost ten years that were lost to us.” Once time has passed, you can no longer say, “Can we rewind?” It’s over, that’s it. Yesterday, we were there, talking to all the barangay officials throughout the Philippines. And I was surprised that their first project, or one of the projects of their municipality, was providing drinking water to their area. About fifteen wells were built. They told me, “You know, for six decades, if we needed water, we had to walk three kilometers to fetch water.” It’s not said that there was no source, but it’s clear that their voices were not heard until we were able to fulfill their need.

I hope that in these almost six years that we have gone through, we can truly say from the beginning where we are headed. What we used to dream of, which seemed impossible, and many of our countrymen have left the Philippines and lost hope, we have shown what Filipinos are capable of. And for me, we can really continue this, let’s just use our right and power to decide correctly.

My fellow Bicolanos, the next President of the Republic of the Philippines is none other than Mar Roxas.