Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at his meeting with the community and local leaders of Capiz

My beloved Capizeños are truly close to my heart. If it were up to me, every time I visit you here, I would always ask for an extension, if possible, at least for a week. [Applause] I have already been to many of your beaches here. Until now, we are only on the sand, I haven't stepped into the water yet. But on July 1, maybe it will be possible. Aside from your very fresh and delicious seafood, your affection and warm support also fill my heart. From the time I ran for Senator, until my presidency, you have been there, continuously trusting. To all of you, thank you very much.

Today is the official start of the campaign. I said, it’s just right that we are here in Capiz, the hometown of our champion of Straight Path, Mar Roxas. [Applause] Mar introduced me to you and guaranteed your truly overwhelming support. Now, with your help once again, I confidently say: Mar Roxas should indeed be the next President of the Philippines.

You know, every campaign season, we have proven: The tree laden with fruit is pelted with stones. Look at this: In September 2009, according to SWS, even before I decided to run, our rating in the survey already reached 60 percent. My opponents already divided the remaining percentage. Even if you add up all their numbers, we would still win that way. That’s why it’s not surprising that baseless intrigues, fabricated issues, and all sorts of dirty tactics were thrown at me one after another.

But what is good, when we decided to run and the election ended, the votes we received: were 42 percent of all voters. [Applause] All the challenges I faced, I overcame with courage, because I knew you were behind me. According to Pulse, in November 2012, our trust rating reached its highest at 80 percent. This means that even those who didn't vote for us before now support us. Until the latest Pulse survey this December 2015, a majority still trust us: 55 percent is our approval, while only 15 percent disapprove. We will just remind them of what we have done and we will win them back.

In the past five years and eight months of our term, I believe we have come a long way. And this coming election, we can view as a referendum on the 'Straight Path' that we are promoting. You will decide if the change we are enjoying will be permanent, or will just be seen as a temporary vacation in a long history of widespread corruption and poverty. The question is: Is this path we are taking correct? Is it true that from being the 'Sick Man of Asia,' the Philippines is now one of the fastest growing economies in the world? [Applause] Is it true that 7.7 million of our countrymen have been lifted out of poverty? Is it true that the infrastructure that you have long awaited here in Capiz and in other parts of the country are being implemented one after another? Here in your province, the funds allocated by the DPWH for infrastructure from 2011 to 2016: P7.29 billion. This is more than triple the P2.18 billion allocated from 2005 to 2010. Also, is it true that all the sitios we targeted here in Capiz, under the Sitio Electrification Program, were energized as early as January? Is it true that the decades-long lack of education, health, and social services have been addressed, and the scope of those benefiting is expanding throughout the country?

You know, when I first met John Key, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, he told me a story during dinner when I first met him: His son was about to leave his house to study in Paris. Recently, US President Barack Obama, here at APEC, had a similar experience with his son. Of course, when children leave home, you have worries. Despite this, they see it as part of raising their children—in their children becoming independent. As for me, you consider me the father of the nation; and on June 30, 2016, I will step down from office. I must assure you, before I leave, that you are in a better situation, my Bosses. [Applause]

It is important to ensure that the next leaders will continue the 'Straight Path.' Imagine, if the opposite is pursued by the one who will replace me; if he is self-serving, a show-off, and only thinks about staying in power, surely, all our hard work will be wasted and the opportunities opening up for our country will be lost. [Applause] Isn't it more painful to have given false hope to those on the margins of society?

I will not beat around the bush any longer: What we need is someone who shares our vision, someone who loves the Filipino, and someone who will undoubtedly prioritize the country before self. [Applause] It is no other than the tandem of Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

I have known Mar for a long time; our families have also had a long history together. Mar has the ability, has integrity, and has a proven track record. The people have witnessed him demonstrate his willingness to sacrifice for the fulfillment of our collective goals. In 2010, he was the party's first bet for the presidency. He had been preparing for this for a long time, and he had worked hard on his campaign. But what did he do? Without any debate, without lengthy discussions, without asking for anything in return, he voluntarily announced his withdrawal to give way to my candidacy. [Applause]

It is clear: While his opponents are just making promises, Mar has been working for a long time; [applause] he has been with us in promoting transformation in society. While others are excessively flattering, Mar has actually done a lot and implemented reforms. [Applause]

For example, in the fight against crime. When we tasked Mar Roxas as head of the DILG to focus on crime suppression, especially in the National Capital Region, he launched Oplan Lambat-Sibat. Through this, the movements of criminals were carefully studied, and our police were strategically deployed. The result: The previous 919 incidents per week of robbery, theft, and carnapping from January to June 2014, was reduced to 375 from July 2014 to April 2015. That's more than a 50 percent decrease in the number of crimes per week, so we were able to keep more of our countrymen away from danger. Due to the effective implementation of the program, Oplan Lambat-Sibat was also launched in other regions.

He also affirmed his readiness, at any time, to respond to the needs of our Bosses. Whether it's a crisis in Zamboanga, an earthquake in Cebu and Bohol, or during Typhoon Yolanda, whether it's a flood or a fire in the barangay, he is always on the frontline to help and support.

Despite this, what he received from his opponents was relentless criticism and complaints; it was as if dragging him down had become their platform. You can't help but ask: Why is Mar always being attacked? They probably know that Mar is full of potential, that's why they keep throwing stones at him. Our opponents also know who has the “K”: has ability, has experience, has conscience, has loyalty, has care and love for others, and of course, has Korina. [Applause]

Let's look at the criticism of Mar when he responded to Eastern Samar to help those affected by Typhoon Ruby. Because the roads were still closed and cars couldn't pass, Mar chose to ride a motorcycle to reach his destination. When he slipped, they took a picture, spread it around, and criticized him. What many don't know is that when it's night and there's no media coverage, Mar himself drives around the communities to assess what has been done and what still needs to be done. [Applause]

You see, even our opponents have a concept of continuity. What they did to me before, they are still doing to me now, and to the one we endorsed to replace me. When I hadn't made a decision to run, they were already discrediting me. My response: Hello, during that time, I wasn't even a candidate. Now that I'm still being criticized, I can also say to them: Hello, I'm no longer a candidate. [Laughter and applause]

It's clear: Our Bosses see the truth, and they won't be fooled. If before, some with their own agenda were heavily criticizing, and they didn't succeed; now, they still won't succeed. [Applause]

Of course, we also have our bet for Vice President, Leni Robredo. [Applause] From what I understand, when Jesse first saw Leni: it was love at first sight. But you can see, until the end, their love was strengthened by a single spirit and vision. Jesse wouldn't have achieved success without the support and care of his virtuous wife, Leni.

Perhaps, many still don't know Leni well. But I don't know anyone who has met Leni who hasn't been impressed by her. We also salute her willingness to sacrifice. When her district called on her to continue progress in Camarines Sur, she didn't turn her back on it even though she would be facing a powerful family. When we called on her to run for Vice President, no matter how difficult this sacrifice was for her and her children, she accepted it for the sake of our countrymen. [Applause] It's good that she and Jesse raised their three children to be aware of public service, so even though it was heavy on their hearts, they understood and didn't hinder Leni's decision.

It's clear: We didn't choose our bet for VP just for politics, or without a solid basis. It's necessary that her heart is in the right place and that she also has sufficient leadership ability; especially since at any time, she may succeed the President. That is Leni Robredo. [Applause]

This Mar-Leni tandem is comprised of candidates who don't engage in showboating, drama, or gimmicks, but simply work. With the two of them, we don't need to hear grand promises, because Mar and Leni have long been serving, especially those most in need. [Applause]

Once again, our fate is in our hands. It is in our hands whether we will maximize the opportunities opening up in the country. It is in our hands which direction we will take the nation: Whether we will continue the Straight Path, or return to the crooked road.

We who are on the Straight Path, we must do everything we can to further expand employment, aid, and opportunities for every Filipino family. As father of the nation, I can look you in the eye, and say that in the past five years and eight months of my administration, I have been true to you. I have been true to my pledge to serve the people, and bring you to a better state. Now, I also tell you: Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo will nurture what we have sown. [Applause] With the help of the Capizeños and the people, let us continue, strengthen, and defend the Straight Path.

Good morning. Thank you all very much.