Remarks of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the opening of the informal conversation with the Pacific Alliance

[Delivered at PICC on November 18, 2015]

Today, I have the honor of personally welcoming leaders from the Pacific Alliance to our side of the Pacific, and I thank you all for coming all the way here to see our country and our people. Our economies are separated by thousands of miles of ocean, and yet, more and more, we have come to realize that we live in an increasingly shrinking world. These past few years, economies have become increasingly intertwined, and I believe it is an opportune time for us to work more closely with one another—to sit down and discuss, as Pacific neighbors—and as economies with long, shared histories—how we can cooperate and accelerate our collective pursuit of prosperity.

At the retreat tomorrow, APEC Leaders will be discussing how we have progressed towards strengthening our regional economic ties. We will be considering a number of initiatives, such as those regarding structural reform, strengthening quality growth, services trade, and supporting MSMEs, and we know that the economies within the Pacific Alliance are also working on similar initiatives.

My hope is that we can spend this afternoon discussing how APEC can better cooperate with the Pacific Alliance, in order to discover how we can collaborate in our approach to common goals and common issues, concerns which often times place us on the same page, as neighbors in a the region and as growing economies. APEC, after all, will no doubt become stronger if it can nurture a productive engagement with other regional and international process. Thus, today, may we all maximize the time we have to share our ideas, and to listen to the ideas of others, on how to constructively work together to the benefit of both organizations.

On a lighter note, it is my hope that, amid your busy schedules, you will find the time to enjoy the warmth and hospitality of your brethren on this side of the Pacific, and see for yourselves why so many say: Es más divertido en Filipinas.