Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the retirement of Philippine National Police Director-General Ricardo C. Marquez

This is now the last time I will be able to attend a celebration of our Philippine National Police as your President. And it truly becomes more colorful and meaningful to me, especially since it coincides with paying tribute to your chief, Director General Ric Marquez.

You know, before we appointed Ric as the new head of our police force, we didn't really know him that well. We only met when I was already President of the country. But Ric’s competence and track record are truly exceptional, which was the basis for us to choose him to steer the PNP in the final stage of our administration.

Even before becoming chief, Ric was one of our officials who carefully planned to ensure that the epidemic of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-Corona Virus, or MERS-CoV, would not spread in the country.

If you will recall, in 2014, it was reported that we had an OFW who tested positive for the MERS-Corona Virus and returned to the Philippines. We were notified 12 hours after the plane he boarded landed. I remember it was Holy Wednesday, and many were already on vacation among our authorities. People like Ric worked doubly hard then; relentlessly searching for at least 414 passengers who might have been affected by the disease to prevent its spread in the country.

This was followed by his successful leadership in the security of Pope Francis when he visited the Philippines. Ensuring the safety of our Holy Father during that time was no joke. Aside from the threat to his life, we also needed to ensure the safety of thousands of our countrymen who gathered and welcomed Pope Francis’ visit in Manila and Tacloban. Ric led the preparations and every detail of the Holy Father’s security. Thankfully, through the cooperation of our Security Sector, and our Bosses, Pope Francis arrived and left here safely.

When he became the head of the PNP, Ric further demonstrated his excellence. As host, we successfully held the APEC in the country last year, and ensured the safety of the participating leaders and many delegates from various countries throughout the year. Here, aside from the tourism brought by the gathering, we showed the world our readiness and ability to keep pace with development. And most recently, we witnessed the successful and orderly elections this May, led by Ric Marquez, our police, and our Armed Forces.

Of course, the excellence of Ric Marquez’s leadership cannot be confined to large gatherings or occasions. It is also seen in the further increased crime solution efficiency of the PNP. It is seen in the intensified pursuit of most wanted persons. Currently, from July 2010 to June 2016, the PNP has arrested 14,824 most wanted persons; 3,732 of these were arrested during Ric Marquez’s term. In our Internal Security Operations, the police have arrested 62 key personalities of the CPP/NPA/NDF and BIFF; 13 of these were arrested during Ric’s tenure. Through the expanded Oplan Lambat Sibat, the number of crimes in the National Capital Region decreased. According to the latest data: From 35 cases of murder and homicide per week in Metro Manila from January to June 2014, it went down to 21 this June 2016. In robbery, theft, and carnapping for the same period, from the previous 952 cases, the weekly average was only 200 by June 2016—that’s almost an 80 percent decrease.

The good news is that these positive data were not only recorded in Metro Manila. In Regions 3 and 4A, where Limbat Sibat was also implemented, a decrease in the number of seven focus crimes including carnapping, murder, theft, fiscal injury, rape, robbery, and homicide can be seen. In Region 3, the former weekly average of 370 focus crimes from December 2014 to June 2015 was reduced to 153 by April 2016. While in Region 4A, its weekly average, which reached 262 from January 2015 to January 2016, became only 175 as of April 2016.

We can also see the efficiency of the PNP in our strengthened campaign against drugs. From July 2010 to June 2016, 130,165 individuals involved in drugs were arrested, drugs worth 20.95 billion pesos were confiscated, and 23 drug laboratories and chemical warehouses were dismantled. In this data, 42,690 personalities were arrested, 4.3 billion pesos worth of illegal drugs were seized by the PNP, and 4 laboratories were dismantled during Ric Marquez’s term.

Aside from suppressing crime and drugs, Ric Marquez also organized and strengthened the organization of our police force. One of the major challenges faced by the PNP was the existence of many camps or factions. Ric demonstrated the importance of police unity. It was clear to him: instead of serving patrons, the people should be considered the only Bosses. He knew that if we have the people on our side, our mission and fulfillment of duty will truly be easier.

That is the characteristic of Ric Marquez’s leadership: competent, reliable, caring and steadfast in fulfilling the mandate. Ric maximizes every opportunity to further improve the service of our police force. He focused on developing the skills and equipment of our police officers, as well as taking care of your welfare and that of your families. Now, what was once only dreamed of in the police force is happening. It is clear: We stand with Ric in ensuring that those who care for the country are no longer left behind.

We also know Ric as a leader who, when you talk to him, will tell you the truth; he won't put on airs or lie just to make himself look good. So, honestly, he is one of those leaders whose term is ending now that we truly feel a sense of regret about. There are some leaders who, when saying goodbye to the service, others seem to say: “Well, finally, I’m retiring.” But at the end of Ric Marquez’s leadership, I am sure many will feel: “It’s a shame, I wish he could serve longer.”

I am confident that: As Ric enters a new chapter in his life as a private citizen, along with focusing on his family, he will continue to serve his fellowmen and country.

Just two more days, and I will also be stepping down from my position. And I cannot help but look back on every challenge and success that we faced. Even before, you have always done everything you could with what you had. So, to our courageous police force, I want to convey my admiration and heartfelt gratitude. We would not have reached this chapter of our history—the point where we are able to serve the Filipino people better, and the world looks up to us for the changes we are experiencing—without your trust and contribution. To all of you who have been loyal, courageous, and dedicated your lives to serving our Bosses, the people, thank you very much.

Until the very end, it has been an honor to lead the entire ranks of the Philippine National Police in promoting peace in our country. It has been an honor to serve you, and to work with you in serving the Filipino people. It has been an honor to be your partner in our collective aspiration: To leave the country in a far better, more developed, and more peaceful state than we found it.

Once again, to every member of our police force, to our leadership of our police force, thank you very much to all of you.