Statement of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, before his attendance at the 27th ASEAN Summit.

After our successful hosting of APEC 2015, we will be traveling this afternoon to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia to attend the 27th ASEAN Summit.

This November gathering is special because the ASEAN Community will be launched. Through this, cooperation among member countries will be intensified in developing the economy, strengthening security, and protecting citizens, especially those on the margins of society. This will also strengthen the region’s ability to participate in the global exchange of products, services, and knowledge. Because of this, we will be able to open more opportunities for our countrymen to showcase their talents and contribute in various fields.

Also included in this gathering is the presentation of the ASEAN Vision 2025. As you can see, even our neighboring countries recognize the need to plan and act for the long term; not just for tomorrow or the day after, but for future generations. The ASEAN Vision 2025 outlines the single direction that each member country will take, so that no one is left behind in achieving progress, and so that ASEAN is further recognized as a pillar in global discourse.

Of course, as this is my last opportunity to attend the ASEAN as your President, we will also use this occasion to bid farewell to the leaders of Southeast Asia. We will thank them for their trust and support as we trod the Straight Path; for their sympathy during times of disaster; for their cooperation to further strengthen the security of our region; and for being partners in promoting a peaceful and reasonable resolution to the challenges we face.

We will return on the early morning of November 23rd. You can rest assured that, as we always do when traveling abroad, we will exhaust every opportunity to bring home good news to our Bosses. It is clear: As we strengthen our relations with other countries, the positive changes we have sown in our society also flourish. With your continued strengthening of the Straight Path, the capability of the Filipino will be recognized, in the region and throughout the world.

Again, good afternoon to all of you. Thank you very much.