Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the inauguration of the PAGCOR school building at Pavia National High School and the ceremonial lighting of 3618 sitios on the island of Panay that underwent the Sitio Electrification Program.

You know, I am always excited when a visit to Iloilo is on our schedule. Of course, aside from being with my beloved Ilonggos, we are also eager to see the realization of the important projects of the Straight Path here in your province. As I said: From its former potential, the progress of Iloilo is now being realized. Even just arriving here, you can clearly see the big changes: From thriving businesses, large buildings, to wide roads. That’s what they’re asking me now: Why is it that only in Iloilo are the roads this good? Why is it that in the NCR or National Capital Region, what we have is traffic. They say there aren’t roads like this that are beautiful, with bike lanes, and with expansion possible if needed.

This progress in Iloilo is proof of your government’s focus on our Bosses. This is not surprising, especially since our Big Man in the Senate, Senator Frank Drilon, truly cares for your province; [applause] coupled with the excellent leadership of Manong and Governor Art Defensor [applause] who likely suggested to my mother when the old building was built. Of course, there is also your contribution – my Bosses – my beloved Ilonggo Bosses. You are the ones who initiated and continue to make change happen. [Laughter and applause] I have a little more to say later. [Laughter]

Now, we have witnessed another success of collectively treading the Straight Path. We are here at the inauguration of the new school building of Pavia National High School. This project is just part of the implementation of our K to 12 program. I heard that, because the project is now complete, your incoming senior high school students will have classrooms available by June. We thank PAGCOR for funding the project. You can see the results of good governance. Wasn’t it the case before that PAGCOR wasted billions of pesos just on coffee for people we didn’t even know were awake? Now, PAGCOR is helping many students open their minds to knowledge because of the schools it funds.

Of course, we also thank the DepEd and the DPWH for ensuring the completion of this building. You can count on this: Your government is addressing the needs of our basic education, as well as higher education. We will not allow our students to suffer again from insufficient, tattered, and erroneous books; as well as having classes under trees, sometimes with leaves, and sometimes without. And of course, most importantly, the lack of enough teachers.

Aside from the inauguration of your new school building, we also witnessed earlier the ceremonial lighting of 3,618 sitios in Panay Island under the Sitio Electrification Program. We know how important electricity is in our daily lives. Even for students, it’s already a hardship. I, too, when I was young, when there was no electricity – because there were times we also experienced power outages due to strong typhoons – we tried to do homework using a candle. It was really very difficult, and we even more respect people like Jose Rizal, who, using only a single candle, was able to excel.

You know, in 2011, we conducted an inventory to identify the sitios that still needed electricity throughout the country. This comes from the perspective that service should not be a service for only a few, but for the entire nation. There was a previous Barangay Electrification Program. And let's say, if we forget, it was claimed that all barangays in the Philippines were already electrified. When we reviewed it, the former Secretary of Energy told us that once electricity was connected to the barangay hall, the entire barangay was electrified. How many, then, are connected to the meter of the barangay hall in our sitios? [Laughter]

We found out: 32,441 sitios still have no electricity connection. The sad part: Before, the estimate was that P1 million was needed to light up each sitio. And since we are here in a good and very progressive high school, you can multiply 32,000 times 1 million yourselves.

When we took office, the initial estimate was P1 million cost per sitio, we were able to lower that to around P600,000 per sitio. The difference, of course, is P400,000. Now, let's multiply that P400,000 by 32,441 [sitios], that will amount to almost P13 billion. That's more than what we use for our housing program for the uniformed personnel. It turns out that only 60 percent of the funds were used for the project, and that 40 percent, well, it's up to Batman where it went. Under the Straight and Narrow Path, the public treasury is not wasted. The project was implemented correctly, and the excess funds are also allocated for the benefit of our Bosses. They said earlier that the construction of 18 classrooms had savings, and those savings will supplement other shortages, like what I noticed earlier, there are only five chairs, and they are all monoblocks. Let's look at the tables and chairs for our students before the start of classes in June.

In showcasing the efforts of our Department of Energy and the National Electrification Administration, we have brought light to 31,548 sitios identified in the inventory since 2011. There are also sitios that are not practical to connect to the national grid due to their remote location. So instead of forcing them to connect to the grid, we used solar and other technologies. Now, even those in remote areas have been lit up. So there are the results: 97.25 percent of our target sitios now have electricity. We expect: Before we step down from office, all those recorded in 2011, not just in Panay, but throughout the Philippines, will be energized.

Here in Panay Island, you have not been neglected. These 3,618 sitios that we have lit up have surpassed the 2,509 sitios that were given electricity by previous administrations in 13 years. Now, 98.6 percent of the sitios in Panay have electricity; and this March, the promise to us is to reach 100 percent electrification of all 6,214 sitios in Panay Island. [Applause]

The construction of schools, lighting up communities, including the development of infrastructure and social services, are pillars of our agenda of widespread reform. Here in Iloilo, there is strong unity between the government and the people. Here, there is honest payment of taxes, and compliance with policies because you know that it is for the good of your province. Like the peaceful and successful relocation of our informal settler families. As Manong Frank said: Whether rich or poor, if a road is needed, there are no complaints. Even if someone is a Congressman, he agreed to have his house demolished because it was in the right of way. [Laughter]

We have truly come a long way on the Straight Path, and more and more are joining the movement towards good governance. We also know: We still have a lot to do. This is just the beginning, and with our unity, we will reach even greater victories.

In May, the people will once again face a crossroads, where we will choose the next leaders of the country. The question is: Will we allow all our hard work to go to waste because of leaders who are self-serving or lack the sufficient ability to lead the nation? Will we wake up after the election confident that our dreams will be fulfilled, or will we once again live in the nightmare of repeating the mistakes of the past?

For me, there is no doubt: If we want to continue the good things we have started, we need people like Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. They have integrity, ability, and concrete plans to promote the welfare of our Bosses. [Applause] We have proven: They are willing to sacrifice for the good of the majority; they will do what is right and just and prioritize the nation before self.

I am confident: Just like the trust you gave me, my beloved Ilonggos and the Filipino people in 2010, let us further strengthen our unity. Let us continue to move in one direction, and together welcome a prosperous future.

Earlier, I mentioned in my previous speech, when I first met Prime Minister John Key of New Zealand, he was telling me that his daughter was going to Paris to study. And like any father, who is suddenly about to have his child go far away, of course there is some apprehension, some excitement. And I remembered that, because right after APEC, President Barack Obama of America also told a similar story. He said that their daughter was also going to college, that she would soon be separating from them. And like any father, he and Mrs. Michelle Obama talked and discussed, “Are we ready to let our children go? Is what we are doing okay?” I also remembered that, because as you know, I don’t have a Valentine’s Day, so of course it will take me a long time before I worry about something like that. [Laughter] God has mercy, when the time comes, let’s say I have a daughter and someone is courting her, of course I won’t be nervous, because I think I might already be senile. [Laughter]

I will no longer feel it. We are called the father of the nation, as if we all strived to reach the successes we are enjoying now. And in May, the people will return the mandate to decide who should lead us. And that is perhaps what we should take to heart and really think about: We will create the future. What kind of future do you want?

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.