Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III at  the 37th Commencement Exercises for the PNPA Masundayaw Class of 2016

[Translation of the speech delivered at Camp General Mariano Castañeda, Silang, Cavite, on March 10, 2016 ]

This is the last time I am attending a Philippine National Police Academy graduation as President. I stand before you now to witness your transition into a new chapter in your lives as public servants. To the new members of our uniformed services—the Masundayaw Class of 2016—and to your parents and loved ones: Congratulations.

During our nearly six-year journey along the Straight Path, we have made much progress and have achieved many triumphs. We also know there are issues that still need to be addressed, but what is important is that we are working on them, so that my successor will not have to inherit these problems.

All of you know where we came from. You entered this academy as plebes back in 2012, a time when horror stories about policemen during the previous administration were still fresh in our memories. There was the purchase of choppers for a price that indicated they were new, before it was revealed they were secondhand. There were new policemen who—just to acquire a firearm—had to buy the rights from retiring officers. I am also told that, back then, one had to spend a lot of money just to join the police force. The solution of those who really wanted to serve? Take out a loan. Thus, even before these people became policemen and started receiving salaries, they were already thinking of how to pay back their debt.

When I was still a lawmaker, I also discovered the difficult situation in which our firemen found themselves. Whenever there is a fire, there are naturally thick layers of smoke everywhere, and breathing becomes difficult. But because they did not have any breathing apparatus, the firemen would just simply try and shoot water into the burning houses to make a path before responding to the fire itself.

These are only a few of the problems we inherited that concern your sector. It led me to think: In such a situation, how can we expect people like yourselves, who wish to join public service, to do so eagerly? You dedicate yourselves to the State, and yet receive minimal support in return. How could you envision a bright future for your families, if this dream is threatened by a corrupt system?

Those days are over. We have enacted reforms under the straight path; and we emphasized the need for the State to defend and care for those who serve and protect our people. Clearly, when we promise inclusive growth, we also mean our uniformed services.

During my term, we have expanded your capacity to “Shoot, Scoot, and Communicate.” Whereas once, you may have had to render service without a firearm, the Straight Path has helped us reach a one-is-to-one police-to-pistol ratio. In 2013, we were able to distribute 74,8789 Glock 17 9mm pistols to our policemen, together with other equipment, such as 1,490 patrol jeeps, 247 4×4 personnel carriers, 69 light transport vehicles, 1,095 motorcycles, and 12,949 handheld radios.

Apart from entrusting you with the equipment you need to more effectively fight crime, we have also enhanced systems and programs that allow us to craft smarter and more thorough strategies to maintain peace and order. For instance, you now have a modern Integrated Ballistics Identification System, and an Automated Fingerprint Identification System. Let me also mention the PNP’s Closed-Circuit Television Project, which helps patrol areas in the National Capital Region that could be considered crime-prone.

Another issue we have sought to resolve—and PNP Chief Ric Marquez can attest to my persistence—is the distribution of raincoats to our policemen. These may not be of much use during El Niño, but what happens when the rainy season comes? We cannot simply disregard the health and well-being of those in the service, especially when they are undertaking operations. Gen. Marquez is the third or fourth person to whom I’ve given this instruction, and I hope that, by the time I step down, Gen. Marquez will have complied, in large part, with this order.

As I have already mentioned before, we also need to review our PNP Law. By doing this, we might be able to identify and fix provisions that prevent us from immediately punishing leaders who have failed to fulfill their responsibilities. At the same time, this would increase discipline in terms of following policies, and in protecting the rights of all.

Apart from what I have mentioned about our police force, I must also say that I fully support strengthening the capacities of those in the BJMP. During our term, we have allocated 393 million pesos to this agency. Part of this money has gone to purchasing and distributing quality firearms, portable radio systems, and even prisoner vans. For the BFP, on the other hand, we have allocated 4.46 billion pesos over the course of my term. This has been used to buy new firetrucks, new uniforms and protective gear for firemen, and self-contained breathing apparatuses, among others.

I have also signed an executive order that will increase the allowances of our entire uniformed services. This year, monthly hazard pay has increased from 240 pesos to 390 pesos. The EO also increases your provisional allowance depending on your rank, through which some may receive up to 14,214 pesos, as well as the officers’ allowance for those of Senior Inspector rank and above. We have also focused on providing housing for our soldiers and our policemen. Under our housing program, we have completed 61,300 units, and members of the PNP, the BJMP, and the BFP are among the beneficiaries.

Let me emphasize: The benefits and the support you enjoy today are fruits of the reforms we have undertaken along the Straight Path. It was the late Jesse Robredo who started the positive transformation in the DILG; this was continued and expanded by Secretary Mar Roxas, who led your department for almost three years. Now, the legacy of honest and reliable public service is being continued by the current DILG Secretary, Mel Sarmiento.

After all the investments we have made into enhancing your abilities as members of our uniformed services, we are indeed seeing positive results. You have proven: When the State cares for you, all the more do you become vigorous in fulfilling your mandate. Let us look at our crime statistics, for example: in the past, crime reports were only handwritten in logbooks. Today, we are using technology for faster, more efficient crime reporting. Because we now have accurate data, we have likewise been able to put in place more effective strategies to solve crime. As regards our Crime Solution Efficiency: from 18.64 percent in 2010, we have vastly increased this to 51.36 percent in 2015. Through Oplan Lambat-Sibat, we have been able to arrest 746 of the Most Wanted Persons in the National Capital Region, 499 in Region 3, and 580 in Region 4A. Your former DILG Chief even told me, because we arrested the brains and leaders of various syndicates, we have also stalled the movements of these syndicates’ members and underlings—which is why crime has gone down. Together with our efforts to hunt down those with criminal intentions, we have also confiscated or impounded thousands of guns and unlicensed vehicles.

As for our BJMP, from July 2010 to December 2015, you caught 7,237 inmates and visitors bringing in contraband; you likewise intercepted and confiscated 48,699 deadly weapons, over 1,100 grams of shabu and marijuana, and almost 4,900 pieces of drug paraphernalia. For all these achievements: Congratulations.

At the same time, you cannot help but ask: How did these drugs and contraband items even find their way inside our prisons? For my part, I believe we still need to tighten your watch and supervision, as well as the necessary processes, so that we can better serve the public.

It is clear to everyone that we have been able to enhance the strength of your services, without disregarding our country’s other demands. We do not focus on only one thing at a time; we likewise meet the needs of all other sectors. One example of this is the Conditional Cash Transfer Program . Our target for this year: to bring the number of its beneficiaries to 4.6 million households. As a matter of fact, through the help that the program has given, around 7.7 million Filipinos have been lifted above what we call the poverty line. Our goal now: ensure that they do not again fall below that poverty line.

We did all this without adding to the burdens of our Bosses; we did not create any new taxes, apart from the Sin Tax, which has the goal of bettering healthcare.

Now, as new members of the police force and the rest of our uniformed services, you carry on your shoulders the responsibility of continuing the successes we have had so far. What we have always said: this is just the beginning, and it is my hope that you do not let the hard work and sacrifices of those who came before you go to waste.

We all know that another set of elections are coming in May. For our unformed services, this is likewise a time when you are faced with different temptations. Allow me to repeat the challenge I have always put before graduating classes like yours: If you are handed an envelope, in exchange for your honor, will you allow yourself to be bought? If someone promises you a promotion, in exchange for your silence in the face of corruption or abuse, will you accept their offer? If you are asked to choose: country, or self—which will you put first?

I have every faith that you have been molded well by the PNPA, so that you will always remain on the straight path. In the coming months, my marching orders to you: Ensure safe, peaceful, and honest elections—elections that will truly mirror the decisions of our Bosses. Stay true to your responsibilities, and follow the orders of your officials, heads, and of the entire leadership. Always remember: you are not alone. There are so many who stand with you in service, and we will be able to do our jobs better and more thoroughly, if you cooperate with each other thoroughly. We will be able to ensure your welfare all the more, if you show your faith in your fellow public servants, especially in your other brothers and sisters in the uniformed services.

You know, as President, every time I enter our military camps, it is part of their tradition to welcome me with honors. I noticed, earlier, that when it comes to our police force, it seems as if you still do not know what to do. In truth, I am not one to seek attention. Sometimes, if it will not break with tradition, we even waive these kinds of honors. But, at the same time, these simple actions can mirror the whole—how diligent and thorough you are in fulfilling your service.

With the passage of time, and with my having more chances to personally interact with our police, I have come to notice the spirited way that you have always come to attention. Now, you stand more confidently; you salute more strongly. This is proof positive of the greater confidence and the higher regard in which you see yourself, as a result of the transformation that we brought about, and continue to bring about, in your ranks.

And it is true that so many of you have displayed their dedication and skill in service. One example is Senior Inspector Charity Galvez, who successfully led her colleagues in forcing the retreat of 250 rebels who attacked their precinct in Agusan del Sur in 2011. There are also the four policewomen in the persons of Juliet Macabadbad, Delia Langpawen, Marcelina Bantiyag, and Maricel Rueco. New as they were to the service, they bravely responded, confronted, and apprehended members of the Martilyo Gang who stole from a mall in Pasay. To those like them who are excellent models, and to the other members of your ranks who continue to offer your lives in pursuit of peace, let me express my wholehearted thanks.

Let us remember that every day in our lives and in our service to the people, we will face a fork in the path: as a member of our uniformed services, will you care for our people, or will you lengthen their suffering? As members of the PNP, BJMP, and BFP, perhaps more than any other government employee, you will become the face of government in our communities. You play such a large role in safeguarding and ensuring order in our society. It is in you that our people will seek refuge; it is to you that our people will confide their grievances; it is you who are the frontliners during times of need.

They say that, should you try to catch water with your hands—and this was taught to me by my teachers—you will need to exercise utmost care. No space, not even the tiniest crack, must be allowed to open. Because if you allow even the smallest opening—you can compare your own principles to the water that seeps out. You cannot let go of even a small part of your principles; they say that when you allow such an opening, and compromise even the smallest bit, the rest will soon follow.

I am confident that, at all times, you will be honest public servants; you will always choose the side of what is right and what is just; you will always serve our Bosses, the Filipino people. With the help of the Masundayaw Class of 2016, our Bosses, and our Lord Almighty, we will leave behind a country far better, far more progressive, and far more secure than the one we found.

In ending, I would like to remind you: What we do right redounds to the benefit of all; the things we do wrong, likewise redound to the suffering of all. I hope that you will not find it difficult to choose what is right, and turn away from what is wrong.

One more thing, and perhaps this is what our graduates are waiting for: In observance of the time-honored tradition of the Philippine National Police Academy, on the occasion of the graduation of PNPA Masundayaw Class of 2016, I, Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Republic of the Philippines, hereby pardon all outstanding punishment tours and confinement to quarters of BSPS Classes 2017, 2018, and 2019 of the Cadet Corps, Philippine National Police Academy, as recommended by the director of the PNPA, effective today. Granted this tenth day of March, the year of Lord, 2016, at PNPA Camp General Mariano Castañeda, Silang, Cavite.

Good afternoon to all of you. Thank you.