Statement of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, before his attendance at the ASEAN-US Summit and working visit to Los Angeles, California.

Today, we will be going to the United States, at the invitation of President Barack Obama, to further enrich the Strategic Partnership that has been forged between ASEAN and America.

The United States has made a significant contribution to maintaining order, stability, and peace in our region, particularly in the face of the issue of the South China Sea and West Philippine Sea. Together with our fellow ASEAN countries, we stand with the US in promoting the “rule of law” in our seas. Our position is clear: everyone is equal before the law. Recognizing the rights of each country serves as the foundation for a more harmonious and productive relationship, which brings confidence and meaningful opportunities to our part of the world.

This is the last ASEAN Summit that I will attend as President of the Philippines. This is also the last opportunity for me to share with my fellow ASEAN leaders our position on the peace process, which is our contribution to addressing the issue of extremism and instability. Although the Bangsamoro Basic Law proposal was not passed in our Congress, our position on the BBL remains unchanged: it is still the most correct path to peace and development for Mindanao. In our meeting, we will present the concrete steps that we will implement despite the pending status of the BBL.

After our attendance at the Special ASEAN Summit, we will have a working visit to Los Angeles. We were invited by the Los Angeles World Affairs Council (LAWAC) to speak at their forum. Like me, they once invited my father to speak; that was in 1981, when he was serving as the leader of the Philippine opposition. If you recall: My father was planning to return home then to lead the peaceful transition to democracy in our country. At that forum, he had the opportunity to explain the true situation in the Philippines to the United States, and in that way, to encourage their government to reconsider the support they were giving to Mr. Marcos. We recognize the opportunity they gave my father to present the country's problems and gain allies on the path to democracy. As a sign of gratitude, we are really eager to speak at their gathering.

Of course, while in Los Angeles, we will make the most of the opportunity to generate more interest in the Philippines. One of the major companies we will be meeting with is Disney. Our message to all the businessmen we will talk to: It is now a very worthwhile investment to bet on the Filipino; let us together push for greater change in the economy and the nation.

We will not miss the opportunity to interact with the Filipino community in Los Angeles. We will emphasize the extent of the transformation that has taken place in our country, thanks to their contribution, even from afar. We will let them know: The change started with them and they will also continue it.

Bosses, we will return on Friday at dawn. We are just leaving, but I am already looking forward to our return, because surely we will bring back new opportunities and good news for our Bosses. You can count on us that, as always, in our interactions with our fellow leaders, we will proudly declare how far the Philippines has come, and our growing ability to compete with the whole world.

Again, good afternoon. Thank you all very much.