Events like this, where the forces of reform are gathered in one hall, do not come often. This is a reunion of sorts. Many of you have been fighting for a long time for what is right and just.

You may remember, that right before this chapter in our history began, allegations of corruption were rampant. There was the fertilizer scam, the NBN-ZTE deal, allegations of cheating in elections, and many other instances of deceit. Our citizens fell into apathy; many of them almost gave up on their government because it seemed that dismantling the old system was impossible, given that the person who promoted such a system was at the very top. Is it not true that, as the 2010 election neared, our economy experienced faster growth because there was potential for change in our society?

The people clamored, and we responded—and the moment we took office, the weight of responsibility became even clearer. I remember, when my mom took office after the dictatorship, she would joke that it was like she was tasked to make sinigang, when the ingredients left to her were just water and salt. I felt much the same when our term began, perhaps some would say that we just also had some calamansi.

Despite the circumstances, we did our very best, we stood together, and, without doubt, the people who are capable of judging matters fairly and objectively cannot deny how far we have come. I do not think anyone can say that the sinigang we have made lacks flavor.

These past few years, we solved the problems that seemed impossible to solve, and, more than that, we even surpassed our goals. For instance, as regards our classroom backlog: When we took office, we needed to build 66,800 classrooms. According to our initial calculations, we could only fund 8,000 units a year; this amounts to 48,000 in the six years of my term, which should have meant that if we had managed to build 66,800 in that time span, we would have done more than enough and no one would be complaining. But it took us only three years to eliminate the backlog—on top of that, we first eliminated the 61.7 million backlog in textbooks, as well as the 2.5 million backlog in school seats.

On infrastructure: There are so many projects that had been in the making for so long. We were the ones who finished them. Last year, we opened the Aluling Bridge, which was conceptualized in 1978. The Ternate-Nasugbu road, which was started in 1994, is now fully passable. The Jalaur River Multi-Purpose Project in Iloilo, which was planned the year I was born, entered Phase 2 in 2013. The Skyway Stage 3 project, which was promised during the dictatorship, finally began construction last January. These are projects that others aspired for—that others promised—and we were the ones who brought them to life. Are there members of Congress, or LGUs, who can truthfully say that they have been left behind in terms of infrastructure? Apart from those who turn a blind eye to progress, can anyone still say that the national government ignored them when it comes to building roads, bridges, or other similar projects that will accelerate the flow of products and services in their areas?

Another example: When we began, the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, which, according to many different studies, has the potential to end the cycle of poverty, covered only 800,000 households. Now, this project is helping more than 4 million families, and we have even expanded its scope to make certain that beneficiaries can have their children finish high school.

The concept behind the Pantawid Pamilya Program is simple: Give these families incentives to keep themselves healthy, and to keep their children in school, so that, when they grow up, they will have the wherewithal to become productive members of our workforce. The positive effects of this program will become even clearer as time goes by. This is not like instant coffee, which, after preparation, can be tasted completely and immediately. Naturally, the children have to finish school before they can work and contribute to lifting their families out of poverty. This is why I can only laugh at those constantly criticizing this program: If they are aware of some sort of magic that can instantly age children and fill them with the necessary knowledge to work, why don’t they help the situation and let us know about it? The problem is: They continue opposing us as we plant the seeds of progress, but I am certain that, come harvest season, they will be the first to try and take credit.

The fact of the matter is, even now, we can see the initial fruits of our reform efforts. Opportunities are expanding. I was once told by Labor Secretary Linda Baldoz that, at one point, due to the lack of opportunities here in the Philippines, those who had studied to be teachers were leaving the country to work as domestic helpers. Now, there are reports that foreign employers are now finding it difficult to find Filipino helpers, because apart from the fact that the number of Filipinos leaving for jobs like those are decreasing, there are also domestic helpers who are coming home to continue their teaching careers.

You may recall that time when it was so difficult to be proud of being a Filipino—when it seemed like our brand was synonymous to corruption, and to squandered potential and opportunities. But, now, we are living proof that good governance is good economics. Now, whenever we talk to other countries, they listen keenly—they want to learn how we improved our economy in such a short time, even while the global economy was faltering. Now, we are contributing to the discourse on peace, on the laws of the sea, on climate change, and on reforms grounded on good governance.

And regarding the peacekeeping contingent in Golan Heights, as you can see, we are now able to extend our help from people across faraway lands. We recognize that if the situation in the Middle East worsens, oil prices will go up, and we will feel the repercussions. For the longest time, we have sought permission to arm our soldiers with higher-powered guns, given the rise in fighting in the area we have been tasked to protect. Though we were not granted many of our requests, it remained apparent: All the Philippine soldiers there, from the newest private to their colonel, displayed valor and their skill in carrying out their duties. Under duress, they made a plan, they acted on it, and they saved each other from peril. Is this not the same skill that our soldiers displayed in Zamboanga? Of the 197 hostages, they saved 195—two had died not because they were caught in the crossfire during rescue, but because they were killed by the retreating opposing forces.

We are able to achieve this; why could others not? We not only did what we had to do, we went beyond what was expected of us. We not only made the impossible, possible—we made these victories the new normal.

Before, Filipinos had grown indifferent, and they had no desire to help shape society. Now, democracy is well and truly alive: Filipinos are eager to speak up, because they know their voices our heard, and they know that the government listens to them and attends to their needs.

When we were called upon to lead, the suggestion was that simply beginning change would be enough. We have come so far since then; we have surpassed our aims. There is so much good in what we have built together. If our Bosses can see the wealth of opportunities available to them, that problems are addressed more swiftly and efficiently, and that we are achieving that which we had not even dared to dream of before—who in their right mind could insist that we put a stop to this?

We all know that there are those already positioning themselves for the 2016 elections. And I am often asked: How do we make sure that the straight and righteous path goes on?

I still get told, or even get sent text messages: About how it is my duty to look for who will replace me, and to train him for the responsibility. That it is my duty to help further everything we’ve begun. There are even those who say that the surest way to secure the straight and righteous path is if I myself continue leading the country. I cannot disregard the suggestions of open-minded people, of people who have sincerest intentions to help their fellow man.

Of course, the opinions of those who have involved themselves in—or who have been involved in—the dangers of this position matter greatly to me. Last year, if you could remember: There was conflict in Zamboanga, there was an earthquake in Cebu and Bohol, Santi raged, and Yolanda devastated. One compassionate friend told me: Your problems not only come one after the other; they seem to be piling up. For nearly my entire life, I have been called to rise to challenges. I was twelve when Martial Law was declared; from then on, at every waking moment, I endeavored to play a part in creating solutions to the problems we were facing. All of those who have been hurt or had suffered, all of those who have had to set aside their personal aims, just to walk with us along the straight and righteous path, just because I asked them to help forge an agenda of transformation—all of them put a weight on my conscience.

Whenever I dwell about this, it becomes much clearer to me: That none of my decisions stem from personal interest. My first priority has always been what will be good for all, and not just for now, but also for the benefit of future generations of Filipinos. And it thus also becomes clearer that if this is what motivates us, then our continued triumphs cannot rely on just one person or group.

And so, to those who have asked me about who will be tasked carry on: Maybe we are asking the wrong question. Maybe it is not a matter of finding “who”—because there is no better answer to that question than “all of us.”

Our mission is to further our reforms, so our Bosses can see that the sole path to realizing our dreams is the righteousness. Let us work ever harder; let us not be content with what we have already achieved; let us make sure that our gains are secured, and that we can even improve on them, and make them richer.

Allow me to lay down a few issues which we are focused on, and for which we are finding solutions, along with my directives for tackling them in the soonest possible time.

First: on the energy issue. As I mentioned during the SONA, as our economy runs better—as the number of those setting up businesses increase and as our industries are infused with new vigor—so will the demand for energy rise. Also threatening us is El Niño, which will certainly affect hydroelectric plants. If we do not act now, there is a possibility that there will be a shortfall of energy supply in Luzon in the coming summer.

This is why, in order to make sure that your government is sufficiently able to tackle these problems, we are coordinating with the Senate and House of Representatives to approve a Joint Resolution—also in accordance with what is set out in Section 71 of the EPIRA—to give us the authority to contract additional generation capacity. Right now, we are pushing for all the schemes that can ensure the prevention of power outages. Our reasoning: In case there is indeed a shortage of electricity, it is better to be certain that we have somewhere to draw additional power from, rather than merely hope for one should problems arise. This is our mandate to Secretary Icot Petilla of the DOE: Do everything possible to make sure that we are ready, to thwart the possible blackouts next summer.

Second: on the issue of port congestion in Manila. This has resulted in a stack of problems: stuck cargo, rising costs of transporting products by truck, as well as widespread traffic brought about by trucks queuing to collect cargo. News has also reached us that there are those who have lost profit because the products they imported have spoiled or are almost spoiled; as such, some businessmen have been considering whether or not to continue importing, because they cannot ascertain when their goods can be brought out of the port. Also, just a reminder: Christmas is nearing, and we expect an increase in the amount of cargo arriving at the Port of Manila.

Our response: Stronger coordination with the LGUs of Manila and the whole NCR; stronger appeals to execute what has been agreed upon; and tighter implementation of steps to decongest the pier, such as the imposition of a penalty not below 5,000 pesos per day, starting October 1 , for cargos which have already passed through Customs, but which have remained stuck at the pier for more than five days. We have directed Cabinet Secretary Rene Almendras to focus on this issue.

Another hot topic, especially for those in Manila, is this issue on traffic. The number of those with the capacity to buy personal cars has been increasing; we have been catching up on the construction of additional roads, but we know that this is not enough. We need to improve our public transport system.

So for our third issue: Let us look into root of the problems in the MRT. It was built in 1999; a general overhaul should have been undertaken every eight years to ensure the system runs smoothly. In 2006, only a slight overhaul took place. What’s more, their data on what had been and had yet to be repaired, was lacking or missing, so a new analysis was needed in order to determine what needed to be done.

Currently, the process is ongoing for widespread and systematic improvements of the MRT system. You all know that we are expecting the arrival of 48 additional coaches. Each train will be able to tow more coaches. Of course, the power system will also be upgraded because the trains will be consuming more electricity. The new signal system will also be fixed, in order to ensure speedier arrivals at the station and safer journeys. What this means: More commuters will be able to ride the train every day, and train congestion will be eased. We are undertaking all of this simultaneously, along with other necessities like an Automatic Fare Collection System, which will lessen the amount of time commuters spend in line; it has been promised to us that by next year it will be 50 percent operational. Queuing spaces will also be widened, so even if there is need to line up it will be more convenient, and rail tracks will be repaired to ensure safety.

Like you, I also wish that all this had been done long ago. But no plans were left to us, so we had to undertake studies. Of course, we needed to find and collect funds for this. All of these are going through the proper processes under the law; merely procuring the equipment will already take 4 to 6 months. I hope everybody understands that we need time to implement this, that when all this is over, we will have an improved public transport system, and we can also expect traffic to lighten because fewer people will choose to ride their own cars.

Fourth: Let us discuss the issue of peace and order. You have heard that a few wanted personalities have already been caught, and are now waiting in prison to face the cases filed against them. In the case of Enzo Pastor, two suspects have already been arrested; in the case of Mayor Ernesto Balolong, two out of the three suspects have been caught; in the slay of hotel chain owner Richard King, three suspects have been caught, while the search for the remaining one is still ongoing. Let me add: Also in prison now are General Jovito Palparan and the Tiamzon couple, leaders of the NPA. Change is also very clearly manifested in the numbers. According to the latest data, what used to be 31 cases of homicide per week in the NCR has lowered to 20 per week.

It is indeed dismaying sometimes, because we see that if a sensational crime occurs, it reaches the headlines; while if the crime is solved, we would need to scour the pages for a small report on page 20. Is it too much to ask that reportage on crime be balanced?

And because the solution is not adequately covered by media, it cannot be avoided, then, that a number of our countrymen continue to believe that the Philippines is a dangerous and lawless country. To make things worse: adding to the doubts of our people is the spread of baseless “news.” One text message, for example, recently that made the rounds, saying that a student from a prestigious school had been kidnapped. The following week, another text message was sent out, saying this time that the kidnapped student had been killed.

Even after that first text message, members of our police force acted quickly to determine the true situation. What resulted from the investigation and from coordination with that prestigious school: no student was missing.

As a matter of fact, yesterday, there were calls for General Alan Purisima, our chief of the PNP, to resign from his position, because of scalawags in the ranks of the police. Might I ask: is this the first time that we have seen scalawags in the police? It might be true that there are some scalawags in uniform—but who, after all, caught those who held up a businessman in EDSA? It was the police, as well, under the leadership of General Purisima who investigated, pursued, and caught those lawless elements—who, today, are facing the appropriate cases. On top if this, a plethora of crimes has already been solved, including high profile cases. In light of this: Is it fair to call on General Purisima to resign, when he is leading a police force that fulfills their responsibilities?

In fact, the image of the PNP has undergone a vast transformation. This is likewise caused by the transformation that is taking place within their ranks itself—not only in the new equipment, or the care that the state gives them, but also from the new culture that is taking root in the system. Before, once a suspect had been identified, police considered their job done; today, those in charge are relentless in their pursuit, and will not consider a case solved until they have suspects in custody. Before, luck or chance was the key factor in solving crimes; today, a systematic and scientific method is being utilized, to determine which areas and which crimes must be focused on.

And that is what Secretary Mar Roxas brought to the PNP: investigations are based on data and statistics, which lead to more reliable results. I have actually heard that there are some who wish to remain in the old, luck-driven systems where crimes were only solved in sporadic bursts; not everyone, of course, would want to be held accountable for their deliverables. My directive to Sec. Mar: Deepen our knowledge of crime based on the data we have gathered; widen the scope of the programs that have proven successful. After all, when we see a successful system, it is incumbent upon us to double our efforts, so as to improve the situation even more.

The measures related to the issues I have mentioned will prove: we continue to maximize our focus and our efforts to improve the well-being of our Bosses. We will not stray from the straight path; our attention is not on politics, but on results; not on noise and empty promises, but on concrete solutions to the problems of our Bosses; not ambition, but on public service and true love for country.

Apart from this, I ask you to remind our countrymen of the positive results that have come from the straight path. Let me repeat: We are in the right; the benefits of treading the straight path are clear. It will not be difficult to convince our countrymen of the same. If other beliefs and attitudes prevail, we will have no one to blame but ourselves; perhaps we have been too shy to deliver good news to our Bosses; perhaps we ourselves are lacking in that enthusiasm. When there are any who continue to doubt, let us be the first to approach them, and explain. When we are being rained upon by lies, let us fight this with truth and justice. It is only right for us to take the lead in spreading the news of our successes. If we shy away from this, the straight path will indeed be drowned by noise and lies.

Many of us here today have indeed dedicated our entire careers to reform. All of us—colleagues in the executive branch, allies in the Congress including members of the responsible opposition, partymates, coalition-mates, and partners in civil society—are bound together not by personalities, not by the color of the vests we wear in the campaign, not by slogans—but by principles. We are united by the belief that we are bound together by our aspirations for the country. There are no tactical alliances here; we are of the same spirit. At no time have we ever subscribed to the politics of addition as true governance—none of us are willing to sacrifice our principles, and ally with those who stand diametrically opposed to us, just out of the selfish desire to ensure the success of our personal ambition.

I know that the 2016 elections are already on the minds of some. Indeed, the time will soon come when the straight path will choose a new candidate. I hope it isn’t me.

Of course, with that time, those who oppose us will push for their own candidate. And to those who are not with us today because their principles are inherently opposed to ours: is it not also natural for them to oppose everything that we have already done? They oppose the more than 4 million households being assisted by Pantawid Pamilya. They oppose the growing expansion of PhilHealth, not only in number, but also in the kinds of diseases that can be treated under the program. They oppose the 6.2 million graduates of TESDA courses since we have taken office. They oppose the almost 2.5 million Filipinos who have now crossed the poverty line. They oppose the more than 12,000 kilometers of roads that have been built or rehabilitated. They oppose the modern equipment and attention that government has given our uniformed forces. They oppose the fact that today, our airlines can once again travel to Europe, and make even more flights to America. They oppose a DOST whose efforts now play a truly paramount role in saving Filipinos from disasters. They oppose the ocuntless times we have risen in global rankings, because of our growing economy. They oppose lasting peace in the Bangsamoro. They oppose each and every one of the things we have strived and worked for, in order to uplift the lives of Filipinos.

And should they say that they are agreement with our efforts, and that they too have the goal of serving our Bosses, then I will ask them: Why are you not with us? If you are in agreement with our work, why do you choose to oppose the things we are fighting for, as opposed to working with us, and contributing to the positive transformation of society?

To all those who are here, let me remind you: We did not get this far by embodying Juan Tamad, who sat beneath a tree, saw its fruits, and waited for these fruits to fall into his mouth. We achieved all of this because we worked hard, towards a single direction. My belief, my principle is still as strong as ever: The Filipino is worth dying for, worth living for, and definitely worth fighting for. I have faith that, whatever the posturing or lies of others, our Bosses will see the difference between those making empty promises, in order to take advantage of them later on, and those who are ready to fight for them. We need only to renew our efforts every day; we need to double our work; we need to impress on our countrymen that this straight and righteous path—this agenda of reform and of true and honest governance, this is the only way to ensure that we continue on our journey to fulfill all our aspirations for our country.

Thank you, and good day.

_______________________________

Read as pronounced