Statement of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines on Typhoon Lando

[This is the English translation of the statement delivered at Malacañan Palace, Manila on October 16, 2015 ]

My Bosses: I speak to you now to provide information and reminders about Typhoon Lando , which is currently within the Philippine Area of Responsibility.

At this point, the eye of the storm has been observed 510 kilometers east of Baler, Aurora. According to PAGASA’s data, the storm carries winds of up to 130 kph with gusts of 160 kph.

Lando’s movement is restricted by Typhoon Champi behind it. There are also high pressure areas above Lando. Because of this, Lando will be making its way through our country at a slower pace. PAGASA estimates that the heavy rainfall will last for 6 to 12 hours. Furthermore, due to the accelerated evaporation caused by El Niño, there will be an increased intake of moisture, which will consequently increase the rainfall volume. Moreover, according to PAGASA, Lando’s winds may reach up to 185 kph, which means that we may raise Storm Signal Number 4 in affected areas.

We expect the storm to make landfall in the Luzon landmass early Sunday morning. Forecasts show that Regions 1, 2, 3, 4A, 4B, 5, and CAR will feel the effects of Lando. DSWD data estimates that 1.5 million families in these regions will be needing assistance.

I call on all Filipinos to avoid panicking. Let us prepare as we should—monitor the news, and understand the warnings issued by national and local governments, from storm signals, rainfall warnings, storm surge advisories, and advisories regarding the necessary evacuations if needed .

You can rest assured that, through the leadership of the NDRRMC and its Executive Director, Usec. Alex Pama, coordination continues among different government agencies, along with those from the private sector such as telecommunications and oil companies. The World Food Program and other organizations also stand as partners in our efforts.

The DSWD has prepositioned food packs to more quickly bring relief to affected communities and evacuation centers; they are supported by the DPWH as they stockpile relief goods. The DPWH has likewise readied heavy equipment to more immediately clear roads that will be, or may be impeded by debris. The DOE and NEA are prepared to respond to bring power back to affected areas. The DOH has prepared first aid equipment and t he necessary medicines. The DTI is monitoring market prices to ensure that profiteering does not take place.

The DILG, PNP, and the BFP are actively implementing Oplan Listo. Sec. Mel Sarmiento is personally coordinating with our provincial heads and our LGUs to remind them of what needs to be done at this time. The airplanes, boats, and other assets of our Armed Forces and Coast Guard are also on standby. Should you happen to see an increased presence of policemen and soldiers in your communities, please do not worry; I assure you that they are there to help our first responders.

It is clear: Your government is here, in order to ensure that we will meet our goal of zero casualties. But I must emphasize: each local government unit, community, and Filipino that will be affected has the duty to cooperate in the collective action we are taking to overcome the challenges ahead. Let me also remind you that when this typhoon passes, it will bring, or it may bring much-needed relief. Because of the rainfall, the water levels in our dams will rise, thus helping to alleviate the effects of the El Niño.

Thank you, and, God willing, we will all be safe.