Eulogy of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the necrological service for the fallen PNO-SAF troopers

One of my most difficult tasks as President is condoling with the bereaved. As I stand before you today, I cannot help but ask myself: What could I possibly say that would console you?

Every life contains great value. We know that, one day, we will all depart this world, but the question always looms: “Was it really necessary for someone to die in this manner?” This, we ask even as we work constantly to avoid as many unnecessary losses or deaths as possible.

I wish to tell you, the families of our policemen who fell during Sunday’s encounter, that I genuinely understand how you feel. I, too, lost a loved one in a sudden manner. I remember a conversation I had with my father; it was when he had decided it was time to return to our Motherland from the United States.

He said: We are nearing a bloody war. He ended up going home by himself. His only companions were the media, and he was clearly defenseless. He said: Perhaps somehow, Mr. Marcos’s curiosity would be piqued, and he would give me a chance to dialogue with him and convey to him the country’s true situation. In that manner, we could finally begin our country’s peaceful return to democracy.

I remember watching alone the television in our residence in Boston, waiting for news about what had happened to my father. I heard the announcer on the television say: “Opposition leader, Benigno Aquino, was seen lying in a pool of blood; shots were fired.” Then, it was as if time had come to a halt; my surroundings froze and I lost my awareness of things, and my world was turned upside down. I could not explain the shock I felt. Never did we consider the possibility that he would be killed. The worst-case scenario would have been if he had been sent back to prison. What transpired came as a real shock to us. During his return, my father was unable to even set foot in the land in which he was born. He was mercilessly killed as he descended the airplane.

When we confirmed what had happened, I did not allow myself to weep. I stopped my tears and channeled all my energy to anger.

Our father was the head of our family. He was our protector, our guide, our inspiration, and the wellspring of strength supporting our family during Martial Law.

I felt there was no space left for discourse; the person my father wished to dialogue with, along with that person’s companions, were like rabid dogs who had become impossible to engage in a decent conversation. I resolved to pay my respects to my father, and after that, to do to them what they did to my family.

In that moment of absolute misery and pain, several questions occupied my mind: Now that our father is no longer with us, how can we achieve that which we desire for our country? Does this mean we have reached the end of our fight? If transformation could not be achieved even after my father died, had my father’s sacrifice, and that of thousands of Filipinos, gone to waste?

During those days, I could not help but think that the final chapter would end with a bloody revolution. But my perception started to change after I saw the multitudes that flocked to our home at Times, in Quezon City, to stand in solidarity with us. It was as if they were unafraid of Martial Law. It was then that I saw it was possible to carry on the fight after the death of our leader.

To the families of our fallen troopers, I know full well that your lives have been turned upside down with the sudden death of your loved ones. You had plans laid out for your future; you had set your sight towards achieving certain dreams. Now, with this unexpected outcome, the future for you and your families seems to be clouded with uncertainty. So many questions asked today begin with “Why:” Why did this happen? Why did they have to die? Why do families have to suffer?

I must be honest; I do not have the answers to all these questions. But it is during this moment that I remember what was told to me upon the death of my father. As I confessed, the priest said: As Christians, our faith tells us this simple truth: There is a God who created us in His likeness, as a sign of His love for us. And because He loves us, He has a good plan for all of us. When we go through periods in which we could not see this plan, perhaps, we have difficulty because we are only looking at one detail of His grand plan for us. But if we were to see His whole plan, then we would see in full light the beauty of it.

Thus I remember a passage from the Gospel of John; it is chapter 15, verse 13. It says: “There is no greater love than that of giving one’s life for his fellowman.”

To the loved ones of our departed policemen, I know you are aware why they joined our police force. Our 44 fallen heroes from our police force, the youngest at 26 and the most senior at 39 years old, pushed themselves and exerted all their effort to do what they could, not only for themselves and their families, but for our beloved country. They gave up their lives for the kind of peace and order that endures.

As you know, they were in pursuit of two targets during that operation:  Abdul Basit Usman and Zulkipli Bin Hir, who is known as Abu Marwan. I have already mentioned how they are notorious terrorists. They murder without remorse, and work to perfect how to inflict the greatest harm through their terrorism. Marwan, in fact, was a suspect in the bombing in Bali, Indonesia. There, two explosions occurred. After the first bomb went off, they waited for the responders to arrive at the blast site, before detonating a second device. This resulted in the death of 202 people. With the operation that SAF undertook, it is reported that the primary target, Marwan, was killed.

Now, be assured that the second target that eluded us will be captured. You know this: I am a man of my word. Capturing Basit Usman is number one on our list of priorities. I have ordered the authorities to formulate a more effective plan to hunt down and apprehend this criminal. Your government is already working towards this end; in fact, even before speaking to you, we were already taking steps to meet this objective. We will prove that the law truly prevails in the Philippines. I assure you, we will get Usman.

Let us also remember that a board of inquiry has been formed, with the responsibility of uncovering the truth behind what happened and of determining those responsible. We do not want a repeat of incidents like this. As President, even if I want to be angry, I cannot allow myself to be carried away by my emotions. Rash decision-making has no place in these situations. If I were to let my anger dictate my actions, then perhaps instead of resolving the problem, I would only exacerbate it. We will do our utmost to gain justice for all those who perished and for the loved ones they left behind.

Let me also assure you: We will exert every effort to lessen your worries and doubts about the future. We will provide for your needs, in accordance with all laws and regulations. We will do everything in our power to help each family of our fallen heroes in the police. My colleagues in government have already reached out to you, and I have spoken to some of you about this, and I will talk to everyone else.

Your government has already allocated financial assistance for the beneficiaries of each policeman who died, or has been wounded. Every form of assistance that government can render, we will maximize. From providing support for the education of beneficiaries, to assisting families in seeking out jobs and livelihood—these are only a few examples of the aid that government will give.

To reiterate what I said last Wednesday evening, I make a direct appeal to the private sector and to our countrymen: Join the government in recognizing the heroism displayed by the fallen members of the PNP-Special Action Force.

It is clear: Your husbands, brothers, and sons, whom we honor today, are heroes. Our nation owes them a great debt of gratitude. They sacrificed their lives, to bring peace and order to the lives of the vast majority.

This is why our flag flies at half-mast in all police and military camps, and in all government offices. Now that we have brought home their bodies, our flag embraces each and every one of them. This is a sign of the state’s recognition of the courage, dedication, and heroism that they displayed. This is a sign of our grief, a grief not only from their families and friends, but the grief of an entire nation. This is a sign that they live and they died, not for themselves, but for their country.

In the name of the Filipino people, we recognize the valor of our fallen policemen. We thank them for the courage of their sacrifice. We condole and grieve with each family who has lost a loved one.

Earlier, I said: If the death of my father had failed to bring about change, then is it not true that all his sacrifices would have been for nothing? This is why we will not allow the ultimate sacrifice paid by our heroes in the police to go to waste. Should their deaths lead to realizing the peace we all desire, then we would be able to say that their sacrifice was not left in vain. This true, lasting change would become their legacy for the entire Filipino nation.

Thank you.

________________________

Read according to pronunciation