[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FYHlCfo-Um4[/youtube]

Secretary Ping Lacson; Secretary Dinky Soliman; Secretary Mar Roxas; Secretary Volts Gazmin; Secretary Armin Luistro; Secretary Babes Singson; Secretary Jun Abaya; Secretary Francis Tolentino; General Manager Chito Cruz–Chito, please stand up. Here’s the NHA; if you’re encountering problems in housing, then you can help us shave our remaining hair.  Mayor Christopher Sheen Gonzales –earlier, I was not able to recognize your Mayor because, the last time I saw him, he was beset with problems, and in fact even had his arm in a sling. And so I did a double-take earlier—here he is, who now stands as the face of Guiuan. Indeed, so much has changed.

Our NDRRMC Executive Director, Alexander Pama; of course, the honorable members of the House of Representatives, led here by Ben Evardone.  He of course hails from here, and so, we won’t ask him for anything. But we have others who will also approve the budget present here today, like Miro Quimbo , and we’ll have to give them a nudge to pass the budget as soon as they can. There is also Albee Benitez  and Sherwin Tugna . I’m told it’s been approved on third reading at the House. We’re now just waiting for the bicam.

Of course, our good partner Ben Noel has done so much for the region ; Mr. Bernard Kerblat of the UN CHR;  Mr. Marco Boasso of the IOM;  Ms. Lotta Sylwander of UNICEF;  the Kindernothilfe German Organization;  beneficiaries of the Bahay-Kubo Transitional Shelter units; other local government officials of Eastern Samar, fellow workers in government, honored guests: [in local language] a good day to you all.

Sometimes I need to be reminded, because sometimes “maayo” turns to “maupay,” , and then turns to “marhay.” In my province… never mind that. It will become much more complex if we include Kapampangan in the conversation. .

Tropical Storm Yolanda is said to be the strongest storm in history. It came while we were still helping Zamboanga get back on its feet after encountering a crisis of its own, and Bohol and Cebu had just then experienced an earthquake. 44 of our 81 provinces were hit by Yolanda. It devastated six of our regions. Yolanda’s wrath was felt from here in Guiuan to Coron.

1.47 million families were severely affected; 1.17 million homes were damaged. We recorded 6,300 dead. 28,000 were wounded, while around 1,000 are yet to be found. The cost of damage was dizzyingly huge.

As you know: Ours is not a rich country. Back then, we had several questions on our mind: Where will we get funds for all the buildings that had to be rebuilt? How can we take care of and feed all those who need help, and generate livelihood for those whose sources of income were swept away by the typhoon? How do we rise again from such a disaster, and from the challenges that came one on top of the other?

You yourselves bore witness to the scope and intensity of the damage wrought by Yolanda. In the days and weeks immediately following the storm, it was clear that priorities needed to be set so as not to exacerbate the problem. Almost all of our first responders and their equipment were affected, and so we had to bring in policemen, soldiers, firemen, doctors, and medical professionals from outside. If I remember it correctly, Mayor Sheen himself led the evacuation from the homes to higher ground, and chose to endure the downpour rather than get swept away by the storm surge. Do I remember this correctly? It’s good that I’ve not yet gone senile. . We needed communication, which needed electricity. The geothermal plant in Leyte was badly damaged, and so we needed to bring in generator sets. These generator sets needed fuel, which had to be brought in, which in itself was a challenge because of the debris along the roads. You remember this, the electrical lines, the posts, and many others. To bring in the manpower, fuel, and most importantly, the goods for those needing immediate relief, we needed to clear the roads, seaports, and airports.

As my writers said as we were crafting this speech, they themselves remembered: “Which should we take care of first in the long list of things that had to be done? Fuel, food, the trucks to transport these, the first responders?” Of course, we remember how our Air Force did everything they can, but in the end, we had only three C-130s to service the entire region.

It would not be an exaggeration to say that the immediate needs were immediately addressed. The entire government, along with our partners in the private sector, poured everything it could for the affected areas. Our agencies quickly mobilized to commence clearing operations, and to bring in primary needs such as electricity, water, and food could be brought in, all this done to the best of our abilities. From November 2013, for example, until July 2014, the government had been able to distribute a total of 12.2 million family food packs.

After just eight months, we were able to transition from the so-called relief stage, to early recovery, and then to rehabilitation. We continued to give aid, and we continued to render assistance, especially when it comes to the food required by our countrymen in need.

It was our DSWD who led the effort, by working with other agencies, organizations, and volunteers in our repacking sites. The challenge we faced, and continue to face, was immense.

Just think, in the area of relief goods alone: When preparing meals at home, let us say for a family with an average of five members—the mother is able to prepare enough for her husband and children—but then their relatives arrive; suddenly, there are ten people to feed. She is typically able to meet that requirement; there’s only a need to double the recipe. But it doesn’t end there—when the neigbors hear that a meal is being offered next door, of course they want to join in. And then she have to feed 15-20 people. Of course, it gets to the point where the task at hand becomes so much more difficult, and she thinks, “Will I be able to feed all these people?” Just imagine, just try to put yourselves in government’s shoes. Any person who is able to feed all those who visit his home must be very skilled indeed.

Our task, however—how many families did we need to feed and attend to immediately? Allow me to emphasize: 1.47 million families. That is more than five million people who need to eat every day. And of course, while you are feeding them, you also need to ensure that they don’t fall ill, and that their other needs are met.

Let me give you another example: in the sector of livelihood, there were a total of 16 million trees totally damaged by Yolanda. All these damaged trees, whether felled or upright, need to be cleared. The chainsaws we used had the capacity to clear 20 trees a day. In the beginning, we had 1,200 chainsaws at our disposal; an additional 1,500 were acquired recently in order to speed up the clearing of these coconut trees. Suppose that operations continue without pause, and there are no rest days for these chainsaws or their operators; in the 365 days of a year, the 1,200 chainsaws we had initially could only clear 8.76 million trees. I am sure everyone sees that the clearing of all these coconut trees is not a simple matter—for the land to be arable again, for us to commence with intercropping.

If we were to use the analogy of a patient, after the calamity, is it not true that areas most affected by Yolanda could be considered to be in the ICU? The operation is finished, but we cannot say that they are fully healed. And when we had done everything in our power to stabilize the patient, it became clear to us that there was still a lot left to do in order to ensure that he could leave the hospital, with an improved condition.

This is precisely the goal of our agenda to Build Back Better: We will not allow ourselves to be trapped in the so-called vicious cycle of destruction and reconstruction, followed by more destruction, and then again by reconstruction. Perhaps we can allow ourselves to enjoy the repetitive runs of telenovelas. But repeated disasters, especially when devastation can be avoided—I don’t think anyone would enjoy our countrymen going through this again, am I not right? Should another calamity on Yolanda’s scale come, our countrymen should not have to endure such suffering again. They should have been given the support and knowledge that would serve to shield them from the suffering they have already had to endure. We should use the difficult lessons we learned from Yolanda to ensure that such a tragedy does not take place again.

You know, when I looked at these houses—and I am sure you know that these are transitional houses; they are not yet permanent structures. But even if these are transitional houses, when you enter them—I think those who own the houses will certainly agree to live here—to the more than 100 who have not yet been given certificates, your certificates are here already. The 20 I was able to distribute earlier were just for the ceremony. Now, when you see the houses, take a look at how the corrugated roofs were attached to the wood; they were not just nailed or affixed with Vulcaseal. The roofs were attached soundly—how do you say that? With screws and bolts; it is even layered. Even in the structures I was able to inspect, I saw that the corrugated roofs had been folded at the sides, to keep the wind from entering the houses. That is what we mean by Build Back Better. If we followed the old style of building transitional housing, the roof would have been blown off with just a gust of strong wind; then, on my return here, I would see a tarpaulin serving as a roof. With what we are doing here, the structures are indeed stronger.

But of course, we cannot challenge nature. If we were able to withstand winds of 250 kph, perhaps next time, they would reach 340 kph. And if we are able to withstand 340 kph, then the following storm might bring winds of 450 kph. What’s important here is we will not just reconstruct like before. [Building back better] is our goal.

To give you another example: just last Wednesday, I was able to speak with Secretary Babes at a cabinet meeting. He showed us what is referred to as hazard mapping for storm surges. When rainfall reaches high levels and storm surges occur, or when typhoons cause strong waves, these are the areas that will be flooded—from these parts of Leyte, up to here, in Samar. These maps show the breadth and amount of flooding that, for example, Tacloban, Palo, and Tanauan can experience, should another similarly strong typhoon hit our country. Here, you can see that there will again be severe devastation, especially since so many are living near the shore.

Babes, do we have any [visual aids]—unfortunately, we only have the maps on the iPad, which you will not be able to see. Here they are on bond paper, and I think you will at least be able to see the color. Here we have it. [shows the maps] All of the areas rendered in color, these are the ones that are prone to flooding. And if you take note of the top portion of the map, the darker the color, the higher the flooding that these areas will experience. Here in the upper part of the map is where the airport is located. So, the airport will be among the first to be flooded, even before all the communities in the inner portions. And of course, the airport is where our C-130s will land, bringing oil, relief workers, et cetera. When the first area we first have to secure is the area through which aid comes, well, of course it makes no sense to leave the airport there permanently. So there is a need for us to address the problem of the airport—but, with your indulgence, I will return to that topic later. With everything I want to tell you, I find myself rushing and getting ahead of myself.

So: What is government going to do? One of the measures we are studying—and actually, I have already approved it; only my signature is lacking, and I am just waiting for Secretary Babes and the DPWH to transmit the memo. One of our solutions to the problem of flooding is what we call the Tacloban-Palo-Tanauan Road Dike Project of the DPWH. There is already an existing road there. The concept: We will construct roads elevated at around four meters above sea level—it isn’t the road that is four meters in length. It will be four meters above sea level. This road will then serve as a natural wall or dike, to protect areas against flooding. There are, however, some parts where those who are more well-off live—those with resorts who are naturally located by the beach. They are on the side that will not be protected by this dike. But the majority of residents in that area will be relocated to the back of this dike.

So, when the rain pours, this road will serve as a dike, and it will prevent rapid, widespread flooding in the community. In other words: if you live by the shore, where there’s no protection and which is prone to flooding, you’ll end up moving to the evacuation centers. If we reconstruct houses in the same areas, the next floods will come; they will destroy the houses we rebuilt; residents will once again move to evacuation centers; government will again rebuild houses—there would be no progress for any of us. This is what I mean when I say deconstruction, reconstruction, deconstruction, reconstruction. We will not let this happen again. We will ensure that our work redounds to both short-term and long-term benefits.

Once this road is constructed, an estimated 27 square kilometers, equivalent to 29,000 homes and structures, will be protected. Of course, this initiative goes hand-in-hand with others, like the planting of mangroves along the shore. According to the initial studies of a multilateral organization, it might take two years before the construction of this dike project can start. But, since Secretary Babes Singson likes to work quickly, he asked the multilateral organization to give the plans to us, and decided that it would be better for government to take responsibility for this project, so that we can see its completion at the soonest possible time.

Babes, just to be sure. You promised me that this would be completed in 2015?  Let me correct myself: it will be started in 2015. So, in the first quarter—this is an extensive project, 27 square kilometers; and it isn’t just about the length, you also have to raise each portion at least four meters above sea level. But when it comes to Babes, I know he never breaks his promises. So, when he says the first quarter, I don’t think it will even take that long. Because even now, I am already preparing praise for him, that what he accomplished was ahead of schedule.

Of course, there are also some areas where we will prohibit the construction of homes or businsses. If we are certain that there are some areas that are danger zones—and we allow people to remain in those areas, it is almost as if we are telling them, “When the time comes, you will be part of the statistics of casualties or injuries.” There is really no way to avoid severe flooding in these areas. As I mentioned earlier, we also need to confront the need to move the Tacloban Airport farther away from the sea.

As early as 2008, there were already studies that stated the flooding that this airport experiences. Is it not true that, before airplanes can take off and land, it is first necessary for the flooding to ease, and for the runway and surrounding areas to be cleared? Even worse: floodwaters were shown to contribute to the dissolving of the asphalt that makes up the pavement of the airport. Thus: the runway is destroyed, and you have all seen the trouble that this brings us.

The day after Yolanda struck the country, our Air Force arrived in the morning just to clear the airport. By the afternoon, our first C-130 was able to land. Naturally, it would be far better if there were no need to clear the airport; if everything was ready from the beginning. Once the storm subsides: we’re there; our relief is landing.

We know well that in the aftermath of calamities, airports are among those whose operations must be continuous, which is why they must also be far from any danger zones. The good news is that we have already identified another location for the construction of a new Tacloban Airport, or a new airport that will be able to meet your needs. There will need to be more in-depth studies for us to begin this project. That will help us avoid theories, those that say, “These locations look okay.” And then, when you test the soil—there are other factors, like the orientation of the runway, etc. This may seem only like a formality, but we need to have the science. “Good enough” is no longer good enough.

Our desire is to improve the service of this airport to our countrymen, no matter what the situation is. Before we implement any measure, we must first study, plan, and prepare for it. At the same time, even with these initiatives, I am almost certain that, tomorrow, critics will speak up and say that we are abandoning Tacloban. I leave it up to you to determine the identity of those people. And there are other criticisms that reach us, those who say: Just give each family P40,000 instead of implementing these kinds of long-term solutions.

Let me ask you: Is it right for me to make myself look good, hand over to each family the money we would have spent for these projects, and say, “Here’s some cash, what you do with your life is your responsibility.” What would happen? Of course, after giving out 40,000 pesos, we would have no more responsibility. I wonder how quickly this money would run out, once it is spent on meals, education, and all the other needs of a family. And of course, once that money is gone, when another storm comes, nothing would have changed; naturally, the results would be the same. We would be back where we started: no long-term solutions.

Of course, there are some who are able to goad their countrymen to say, “How selfish, how stingy. Just give the money to us. We’ll leave. It will be faster that way, etc.” We leave them up to you for the coming elections; you will be the ones to decide if those who are trying to fool you will be given another chance in public office.

Again, if we give each family P40,000, with 1.47 families or households affected by Yolanda, we would need P58.8 billion in funds. To tell you the truth, it would be easier for government to fund that P58.8 billion, as opposed to 85 billion. 85 billion is what we need for 2015 alone, in order to complete everything we need to do. If it were up to me—and if I wanted just to be able to say that I did something—let us just go with this 58. That is a lot easier to come up with than the 85 we need. At the end of the day, though, if another strong typhoon comes, it will be on my conscience. If you have to suffer through another disaster that could have been averted, I would not be able to face myself. I would also not be able to face my parents. So, now, go ahead, curse me, criticize me, but I believe that we need to do the right thing. My conscience would not be able to bear it, if I were to leave you to fend for yourselves, allow the next tragedy to come, and just say that I have done my duty by you. You are my Bosses; I would not be able to do that to you. In each decision I have to make, I continue to be guided by my consicence, by my obligations, and by the demands of true service. As for those who never seem to grow tired of criticizing our every move, I leave them to the Lord. Perhaps the day will come that our Almighty God will bless them with the added knowledge and good will they need to change their ways.

Like you, I also get impatient. But we need to emphasize: Our agenda of Building Back Better cannot be achieved through hasty, stopgap solutions; buildings and homes cannot be built, roads cannot be constructed after one night’s sleep alone. What is distressing are those who say that we should build infrastructure in any available space, and that would be good enough. As if space were the only requirement. What is important is that we have clear targets, and that we have clear plans in order to achieve these targets.

Let us now turn to the livelihood programs and assistance that DOLE can give. Of their targeted beneficiaries of 44,778 persons, 33,338 have already been given assistance, while 11,440 are currently being helped by the agency. From November 2013 to September 2014, we have also registered 90,226 beneficiaries under the Cash-for-Work Program of the DSWD.

Under TESDA, our target is 24,535 people who will undergo Vocational Educational Technical Skills Training and Capacity Development. This year, 12,843 have already graduated from this program, while 2,692 are undergoing training.

In 2015, we have the goal of implementing new training programs for 24,465 persons, and another 26,915 in 2016. In total: by 2016, 75,915 of our countrymen, after completing their training, will have the necessary skills to support themselves and their families.

As for the sector of agriculture, we have continued to provide support to our farmers, from providing them with thousands of seeds, fertilizer, and farming equipment, to imbuing them with added knowledge and training. Government is exerting double the effort in order to ensure that their harvests and earnings increase vastly.

There is also the assistance we are giving our fishermen. Of the targeted 33,432 fishing boats that we will replace or repair, we have already completed 30,186, while the acquisition or repair of the remaining 3,246 boats is ongoing. Here in Guiuan, I was able to ask Mayor Sheen, and he confirmed that 2,500 new boats have already been turned over. Is that right?  Because if that isn’t right, I will have to speak with Procy Alcala later this afternoon. I will personally look for these boats.  That was only a joke, I believe they have indeed been turned over.

Apart from those we have identified to be provided with livelihood assistance, we have also released a warning that additional boats should not be provided here, in order to avoid overfishing. You know, there are those who say, “You have not helped.” My critics say this. Those we have helped, however, say, “The boats you have replaced are enough. In fact, it is more than enough. There’s a danger of overfishing.” A number of areas have already been told this. And I said, “Wait, our agreement was that we would restore livelihood. How did it happen that the number of partners increased?” Apparently, those who are waiting for coconut trees to grow have turned to fishing in the meantime. So that’s what happened. I thought, all right.

That is why we are also pushing forward with plans to have a blast-freezer and cold-storage facility here in Guiuan, in order to ensure that fish remain fresh longer, consequently ensuring that the earnings of our fisherman are maximized.

Just recently, I asked for an update from Brother Armin, Secretary of DepEd, as regards the education situation in Yolanda-affected areas. Our target is to build 2,313 classrooms; of this, 101 have been completed, while 1,095 are undergoing construction. This is from government’s end; it doesn’t yet count the ones being built by our partners such as (Kindernothilfe) … Secretary Abaya was earlier telling me about how to prononce “sauerkraut” properly.  It seems these words don’t match.

Anyway, as Brother Armin said, we have refined the design of the classrooms, and are making sure that they’re being built on safer ground. We’re moving communities away from danger, and of course they can’t just bring their schools with them. New schools will have to be built. These are all being done, or are about to be done.

The good news: All government-funded classrooms will have been done by June of the following year, 2015. . But to Bro. Armin, let me assure you: None of our countrymen will get angry if you were to finish these projects earlier than June of 2015. [Laughter and applause].

As for textbooks for our schoolchildren, our target stands at 6,470,984. The construction and delivery of these are ongoing, and our target is to hand them over by the end of the year. And we mean this year, 2014. CHED, on the other hand, has assistance and scholarship grants for college students. This year, 45,045 students need support for higher education. We’ve been told that all of them are able to go to school thanks to CHED’s support. We’re targeting to give out a total of 135,000 scholarship grants by 2016.

We have also continued our healthcare efforts in the affected communities, particularly as regards mothers and children. We’re constructing and rehabilitating an additional 280 government health facilities, among them government hospitals, rural health units, and barangay health stations.

The DILG has likewise been hard at work in constructing municipal halls, civic centers, and public markets, so as to hasten and rejuvenate the flow of commerce and services in the communities. .

Secretary Roxas says he’s 88 percent done with his targets, with two more months remaining in the year. . Let me correct that, we’re down to a month and three weeks. I think Secretary Roxas wouldn’t need more than another three weeks to meet his targets. .

Of course, the support and solidarity from the private sector is no small thing. Our records show that, in total, 480 homes have been completed by the private sector, with more than 7,000 undergoing construction. On livelihood: More than a million individuals have been granted business loan assistance, and around 190,000 have been given livelihood kits. I’m sure you made many schoolchildren happy by building 375 classrooms and repairing another 462. These are just a few entries in a very long list of your support. In total, the private sector spent P12.98 billion in terms of infrastructure, social services, housing, and livelihood programs. And so, on behalf of every Filipino who has received support from private companies and industry: Thank you very, very much. . You indeed made us feel that we are not alone in moving our country forward.

To ensure that our next steps are clearly laid out, we have crafted the Yolanda Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan. This contains a detailed plan for the implementation of short- and long-term projects and programs from 2014 to 2016. This focuses on certain priority aspects: First, of course, infrastructure, which would ensure sustained economic growth in affected communities. Second, houses that not only fulfill the most basic needs, but more importantly are far from hazard areas. Third, livelihood, commerce and businesses. And finally, empowering communities and building their capacities for preparedness and resilience in the face of whatever disasters may yet arrive.

We are aware that the plan’s full implementation will face its share of challenges. As a first step, the local government conducted an initial study of its scope and its role in their respective constituencies. As Sheen mentioned earlier, the sooner the plan is done, the sooner the help will come. . Your mayor is obviously ready; I actually thought I was lost on the way here, because Guiuan seems unrecognizable. The Guiuan that I’m seeing today is so drastically different from what I first saw after the storm. Then, houses had tarpaulins for roofs—actually half a roof made of tarpaulins. Today, we see the shiny roofs, as if they were only attached yesterday. .

And now, we have other problems: Not every mayor is as good as yours. Not all municipal engineers are qualified structural engineers. These are structures that need people who are capable of doing the plans. So we looked for these engineers and sent them here. Whenever DPWH runs short on these people, they look for more, to ensure that the plans have started and that they’re able to help finish them. This is on top of other tasks such as accessing calamity funds.

This plan was crafted with deep consultation and consensus among stakeholders, among them our LGUs. The calculations show that we need an additional P167 billion to achieve the goals under the CRRP.

Beyond plans, it is clear that among the most integral factors is the solidarity of our countrymen, including the survivors themselves.

Here in Guiuan, we see the active participation of the LGUs, the citizens, the communities, CSOs, and the private sector to most effectively bring provincial and national support, and even international aid, to the affected areas. I’d like to thank everyone for their help. .

Whatever we have achieved at this point, we have accomplished through the compassion and solidarity of so many people and institutions. Our good Mayor Sheen has expressed his gratitude for this. But as Sec. Mar said, “It was not us; it was you.”  You’ve heard of the song, “You, us, everyone—we are all brothers.” We all need to help each other out. Now don’t ask me to sing; the weather is nice enough. . We don’t want to ruin it.

We are also thankful for the recognition we’ve been getting for our rehabilitation efforts. Let me cite a few examples. From Peter Agnew, senior official ng UN Food and Agriculture Organization in Tacloban, “If this had happened in some other countries in the region, the recovery would certainly not be like this.” From the Honorable Stephen Groff, ADB Vice President on East Asia, Southeast Asia and the Pacific, “Despite challenges, rehabilitation efforts in Eastern Visayas were even ‘moving faster’ than what was seen during the earthquake and tsunami that struck Aceh in Indonesia, ten years ago.”

And according to Luiza Carvalho, outgoing UN Resident Humanitarian Coordinator, “So comparing to other experiences, we can say that the Philippines is in a satisfactory, very positive path. Considering the size of the event, the path of the response is very satisfactory.”

We’ve seen how the entire world has helped out in achieving this level of rehabilitation, and it’s now incumbent upon us to redouble our efforts and document our strategies and processes properly. We all know the risks posed to humanity by climate change. It’s only right for us to clearly lay out the lessons we’ve learned, so that if ever such a disaster hits another part of the world, we will be able to share our knowledge.

Our list of accomplishments is already long, but so much more remains to be done. The task list is so long that the horizon never seems to get closer despite the steps forward we’ve made. Every time I get an update on the Yolanda efforts, despite the projects or programs we’ve implemented, it seems as if the to-do list remains as daunting as ever. On top of this, there are those who do not tire of criticizing our efforts, without even bothering to check on the accuracy of the bad news they’re spreading.

But on these instances when I get to visit the affected areas; whenever I look back on where we started, and examine how far we’ve gone, it really does become clearer to me: Change is happening. Recovery is happening.

And through every trial that we have had to face, we’ve proven that the best thing to do is to begin what needs to be started, to put the left foot in front of the right, and to carry on step by step. In this way, we are helping each other overcome the challenges brought about by Yolanda.

I am certain that, so long that we stand shoulder-to-shoulder, so long as we tread the straight and righteous path, and so long as we remain steadfast in our faith in the Almighty, we will not only achieve our aspirations, but even surpass them.

Good day, and thank you.

____________________________

Read as pronounced