Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines On National Heroes Day

[This is a translation of the speech delivered at the Libingan ng mga Bayani, Taguig City, on August 31, 2015]

As we stand here today, at the Libingan ng mga Bayani, the resting place of our heroes, a memory comes to mind: When my mother passed away, those who represented everything she had fought—and had continued to fight—against immediately suggested to erect a monument in her honor. Their suggestion brought to mind a saying from when I was much younger: “A little rock, a little cement, then you have a monument.” Indeed: It is easy to build a monument; but it will have no meaning, it will stand for nothing if we failed to live out the very principles and ideals fought for by the individuals we honor through such structures.

This is the very spirit of our yearly commemoration of National Heroes Day. We solemnly celebrate and hail the monuments here, to recognize the Filipino heroes who took a stand, rendered sacrifice, and ultimately gave their lives for their countrymen and for our Motherland. Today, we express our gratitude for our fellow Filipinos who wholeheartedly faced peril to fight for what is right and just; those whose responsibilities were tested and their convictions tried—but did not fail; they who faced a crossroads and chose to put the interest of the many above their own. Whether or not a memorial stands in their honor; whether their names are written in the pages of history—with heads held high, we recognize the contributions of each hero, who laid and strengthened the foundations of the peace and progress we enjoy.

On this occasion, we received the first copy of a book entitled “Ang Mamatay ng Dahil Sa ‘Yo (To Die for You)” from the National Historical Commission of the Philippines. This books honors our martyrs and the many Filipino heroes who went up against the dictatorship during Martial Law from the years of 1972 to 1986. They are among those we thank and recognize today. Allow me to quote what the philosopher George Santayana once said: “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” And indeed, this book is something worthy to be passed on to this generation and even to those that will follow, to inform them so that they may avoid the errors of the past and to serve as guide to building a better future.

As we gather, I cannot help but remember what the writer Cynthia Ozick said. About heroism, she said:

“Three ‘participant’ categories of the Holocaust are commonly named: murderers, victims, bystanders. Imagination demands a choosing. Which, of this entangled trio, are we? Which are we most likely to become?

…When a whole population takes on the status of bystander, the victims are without allies; the criminals, unchecked, are strengthened; and only then do we need to speak of heroes. When a field is filled from end to end with sheep, a stag stands out. When a continent is filled end to end with the compliant, we learn what heroism is. And alas for the society that requires heroes.”

Without doubt: Whenever violence or oppression takes place, there is a perpetrator and there is the victim; and if you are not the abuser, and you are not being abused, then we must ask: what did you do? It is in these moments that heroes are needed. It is in these moments, that the courage of the heroic few becomes clear, rising above all.

If we were to think about it, we would realize: This statement is very much true up until today. Whenever there is wrongdoing and injustice in society—if you simply choose to stand on the sidelines and watch, if you choose to follow the dictates of the status quo, or simply complain without putting forward a solution to the problem, is it not true that you have only added to the problem, and thus prolonged the suffering of your fellowmen?

On the other hand, if even one person takes a stand and faces them, in order to say, “What you are doing is wrong. I will not allow you to take advantage of the Filipino people,” then I am certain that the vicious cycle of abuse and impunity, and lack of justice, will be ended.

On this day, we pay tribute to the sacrifices offered by Philippine heroes. As we honor them, so too are we called to do our part and to continue the battle they began—whether in a small, or a big way—for the betterment of our nation.

This must be why the word “bayan” or “nation” forms part of our term for “hero,” or “bayani.” Each one of us possesses the ability to go beyond ourselves for our countrymen and our flag. Whether we are ordinary citizens, or those in the highest echelons of power, each one has the responsibility and the ability to take part in working for the improvement of wider society—from the simple act of following our rules and laws; to reaching out and helping our fellowmen, especially those most in need; to the readiness to fight for what is right and what is just, whatever the time or situation.

In the history of our people—from the 1896 Revolution, to our liberty from Spain in 1898, to the independence we gained from the United States in 1946, to the EDSA People Power Revolution in 1986, and even to the solidarity our nation displayed in 2010—so many Filipinos have proven that we can bring about meaningful change. We can uplift and spur our country to greater progress. The only thing that is needed: that we link arms, act, and work together as one nation; in that way, the heavy burdens we carry as a country need not be carried by a few shoulders alone. Instead, each one will bring a lighter load, and in so doing, we will avoid passing the problems of the present to succeeding generations.

This brings to mind what my father said: “We should not depend on one man. We should depend on all of us.” In the name of each Filipino hero: together, as one nation, let us join hands. I have every confidence that, now that we have begun something so extraordinary, we will continue to journey to our desired destination; the Filipino people will indeed realize our collective aspirations of a better and brighter future for our beloved Philippines.

Thank you, and good day.