Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the signing of the 2016 General Appropriations Act

[This is an English translation of the speech delivered at Rizal Hall, Malacanan Palace, on December 22, 2016 ]

On this day, we mark another historical chapter in our country’s narrative, with the enactment of the 3.002-trillion peso National Budget for 2016. With the meaningful cooperation between the Executive and the Legislative, and with various institutions of government, we have set another record. This is the sixth consecutive year the budget of our people was passed on time. This means, ever since assuming office, until this final stretch for our administration, we were never remiss in passing the budget on time. For this, we extend our gratitude to all those who spearheaded and contributed to crafting our national budget.

Perhaps you might remember: When we came to office, the national budget for 2010 was already in use, and we also inherited the proposed budget for 2011. Thus, we could only address the major errors in the 2011 budget. Consider this: The general appropriations for 2010 was at 1.54 trillion pesos, but we were only left with 100 billion pesos, or 6.5 percent of the total budget, to use freely in the remaining 6 months of the year. We had to ask: Where did the funds go?

Under our predecessor, the budgets—or at least parts of it—were always reenacted. In 2007, for instance, the budget was approved close to April. Is it not right to say that, since they had a reenacted budget until such a late time, the months that had passed should no longer be funded? But what’s worse: The items for which appropriations had already been spent, such as salaries, Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses, and other costs incurred in the first three months of the year, were still listed in the budget. How come those items that were spent on were still there? And where did the excess budget go?

We put an end to this practice. We dismantled the mechanism that made it easier to take advantage of and waste the money of the people. We instituted the right processes. We also knew full well: If we passed the budget at a later time, then services would be delayed, and we would contribute to prolonging the suffering of our countrymen.

Now, we have forged a mechanism that ensures that agencies accomplish their targets in an honest and efficient manner. As I have said: If the budget put forward by the Executive is reasonable and just, dialogue with Congress would be fair and open, and the budget would be passed and enacted at the soonest possible time, thus allowing the immediate delivery of services to our countrymen, our Bosses.

Our objective has always been clear: inclusive growth. By allocating the right funds for our agencies and programs, our countrymen are afforded the opportunity to ride the tide of economic growth. Our method has been to advance a constructive consultation process, where our countrymen, the stakeholders themselves, design and determine the projects to be funded.

Of course, we know that the opportunities being created in the Philippines today can only be maximized if each Filipino has the ability to make the most of their benefits. That is why we have continued to pour massive funds into social services that empower our Bosses.

In the following year, our Department of Education will continue to have the largest share of the budget, with funds of 436.5 billion pesos. After we were able to clear the inherited backlogs of classrooms, textbooks, school seats, and teachers, we turned our sights to the needs of the future. Part of this is the construction of 47,553 classrooms, the procurement of 103.2 million new textbooks, and the filling of 79,691 positions for teaching and non-teaching personnel.

The expansion of our Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program continues, with a funding allocation of 62.7 billion pesos. This aims to assist 4.6 million household beneficiaries in the coming year, including over 218,000 Filipino families who were not included in Listahanan 1 from 2008 to 2009. These include the poor, the indigenous peoples, as well as the homeless families. When it comes to allotting massive funds to these kinds of projects, there is no hesitation on our part, especially because, even now, we are already seeing positive results. According to the initial studies of DSWD, because of CCT, 1.5 million households, equivalent to around 7.5 million Filipinos, have already been lifted above what is called the poverty line.

For the Department of Public Works and Highways, we allotted a budget of 400.4 billion pesos. This will fund, among others, the completion of all national roads, and the implementation of flood control projects to minimize the destruction caused by flooding. If, for 2015, around 4 percent of GDP was allotted to our infrastructure budget, for the next year, we target to allocate 5 percent of GDP to this sector.

As part of our preparations for the effects of climate change and our determination to “Build Back Better,” we have allotted 38.9 billion pesos for the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund. Part of these funds will go to our rehabilitation programs, including the Yolanda Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan. There are also the projects to construct additional evacuation centers and to inspect the quality of public buildings to ensure the safety of our countrymen affected by calamities.

It is clear: In the same way that we build infrastructure, the entire budget is created through a thorough study of the problems we face, and their accompanying correct solutions. Each constructed road, bridge, port, airport, school, farm-to-market road, and other kinds of infrastructure across the entire country is part of our strategy towards inclusive growth. I believe there is no one who can say—with his hand on top of a Bible—that we have neglected their city or province.

It is true: We allocated money to where there was need. Even better: We were able to deliver benefits at the soonest possible time, without putting an additional burden on Filipinos. Under our watch, no new taxes were added, apart from reforming Sin Tax.

Indeed: Our gathering today would not be possible without the individuals and institutions that worked hard to complete the National Budget for 2016. We thank all those who make up the Department of Budget and Management, under the leadership of Secretary Butch Abad. Each page and detail of the volume we have here today underwent intense scrutiny—all towards ensuring that not even a single centavo goes to waste.

We are also grateful for the solidarity of Congress, under the leadership of Senate President Frank Drilon, House Speaker Sonny Belmonte, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Loren Legarda, our honorable Vice Chair Cynthia Villar, House Appropriations Committee Chair Sid Ungab, and House Majority Floor Leader Boyet Gonzales—for the time and dedication you poured into the effort to pass the People’s Budget for 2016.

Most importantly, we express our heartfelt thanks to our Bosses, for your continued contributions to good governance, towards even greater progress for our country. Nothing has changed: You made change, and will continue to make change, possible.

The consistency with which we have passed the National Budget on time and according to the proper mechanisms is only part of the transformation that has taken place along the straight path. Now that our term is coming to end, we have given the next administration the capacity to continue—and even surpass our efforts to continue the transformation, which is taking place in our society. In the pages of this volume are detailed the clear, correct ways through which we can answer the needs of the following year. Our goal: Not to pass on to others the problems that our administration inherited.

Compared to where we started, we have indeed come so far, and through our continued solidarity, I am certain that we can take even greater strides. We have already sown the seeds of reform, and I am hopeful that those who will follow us will nurture them, allowing the inclusive growth we are experience today to flourish even more. The challenge and the call to each one of us: Let us continue to tread the straight path; let us continue to fight for what is right and what is just, and let us wholeheartedly continue to do our part towards a future where no one is left behind.

Thank you, and good day.