Statement of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines On the recent findings of the Mamasapano investigation

[This is the English translation of the statement that was delivered at Heroes Hall, Malacanan, on September 17, 2015 ]

For quite some time now, alternative narratives about the Mamasapano encounter have been circulating. It has even come out in the media: as the story goes, it was not our Special Action Force, or SAF, who killed Marwan. It was allegedly one of Marwan’s companions who killed him—and also cut off his finger and brought it to the SAF.

When the idea of an alternative narrative was presented to us and when we returned to the evidence, we could not dismiss it outright. This alternative version is the complete opposite of the first account of the encounter. It is our responsibility to investigate and to uncover the complete truth, so that the conclusions we arrive at will be correct and just. In doing this, we will ensure that this tragedy does not happen again. That is why we immediately ordered the various agencies of government to scrutinize other angles that present alternative narratives.

Now, my Bosses, the new evidence is before us. I stand before you today to show you photographs we have gathered. We also beg the indulgence and understanding of our countrymen, especially since many of you will be taking your midday meal. Some of the images are of a sensitive nature, but we must show them in order to bring clarity to the issue. That is also why we have chosen to blur out some parts of these photographs in this presentation—precisely because some of the images are not pleasant to look at.

The first picture that was shown to me was apparently only a portion of the whole picture. This has likewise come out in the media. Upon viewing this photo, I am sure I am not the only one who thought that Marwan’s right hand was hidden because this was where the finger was taken.

This next one you see is the photograph in its entirety: we can see one of our SAF troopers beside the body of Marwan, and we can also notice that the fingers on his left hand are still complete.

In the next picture, we can see the same SAF trooper, holding the left hand of Marwan, and in the act of severing the finger.

In the following picture, we can see that the SAF is still present, and in that same picture, we notice that the left hand of Marwan is now missing a finger.

Let us recall: What does the alternative narrative say? It was posited that one of Marwan’s companions killed him—the same one who cut off his finger and gave it to the SAF. But it is clear from the presentation today: the SAF were there; we can no longer doubt that it was the SAF who took Marwan’s finger. This also means: All the other accounts about the alternative narrative are baseless, and consequently have no relevance.

Perhaps there are those who ask: Why did this second photograph come out only now? Allegedly, in the formal investigations about the matter, no one else asked if there were other pictures. In those times, I was the one who asked: Are there no other pictures? Is it not expected that, whether in ordinary situations or these kinds of special circumstances, more than one picture will be taken just to be certain?

That is why we thought it best to ask the broadsheet that had printed the picture; they replied that they only had one picture in their possession. We also asked the SAF, in front of their new director. When I asked him, he said that he could not be certain, at the time, because he had just been appointed to his position. When he confirmed what had happened, he reported back to us, and this was when we discovered that there were many more pictures.

Let me emphasize: we had the cybercrime division of the National Bureau of Investigation analyze the SD cards that contained the pictures. The report, and I quote: “Our forensic examiners concluded that the pictures are authentic and unaltered.”

We must also remember: the bounty imposed on Marwan, whether in or outside our country, was enormous. It should not come as a surprise that there are many who hope to obtain the reward, and are trying to muddle the discussions about the matter. Our investigation has allowed us to gain clarity on the matter.

Now that the conversation about this alternative matter is done, the process of justice, especially for the fallen, can continue. At present, there are 90 individuals who will face fair and thorough procedures for the murder of the 35 Commandos of the 55th Special Action Company, which is part of the SAF.