Today, as we commemorate the 150th birth anniversary of Apolinario Mabini, it is only proper for us to recognize his invaluable contributions to building our nation. Indeed: Mabini embodies the intelligence of the Filipino people—an intelligence that he poured into forging the very principles and systems that shaped the being of this free nation.

As such, it is important for us to remember today three principles and ideas that Mabini lived out in his life—ideas that we strive to realize in our actions to this very day.

First, Mabini emphasized the importance of a legitimate mandate as the foundation of any government. The strength of the state emanates from its citizens. That is why, under the leadership and guidance of Apolinario Mabini, the very first local elections in our country were held in August 1898. Furthermore, it was Mabini himself who led the organization of the first national assembly in Malolos in September of that same year; it was this assembly that elected Aguinaldo in January 1899, thus replacing the revolutionary government that declared our country’s sovereignty in Kawit on June 12, 1898.

Second: Mabini instilled the idea of public service in our national consciousness. He believed: If power comes from the people, then it is only just that this power be used to uphold their interest and welfare. [1] Mabini embodied this conviction even after the revolution against Spain. In the early days of our Republic, the nation was immediately asked to face another war, this time with the Americans. The legislature back then asked: Where will we get the funds for this war? In answer, some members of Congress suggested: We have money, which we can lend to government. Mabini did not agree with this. Was this right—that the very persons who would decide whether government could borrow money in order to finance a war would be the same persons who would earn interest from these loans? Was this not a conflict of interest? Thus, Mabini insisted: No one in a position of power has the right to profit from serving in government.

The third principle held by Mabini is this: Public institutions are established for the sake of the people; thus, it is not right for these very same institutions to obstruct the delivery of benefits to the people. Before the Malolos Congress, Mabini made clear the need for the executive branch to act in a swift, responsive, and sometimes bold manner, precisely because it is tasked with responding to the needs of the people in the soonest possible time. He also called on the legislature: Let us help one another; let us not tie the hands of the executive, so that no opportunity to quickly improve the lot of our people will be wasted.

By reflecting on our history, we see how the tenets held by Mabini resonate with the present. These past few weeks, there have been heated discussions resulting from the Supreme Court’s decision on the Disbursement Acceleration Program.

Let me point out once more: DAP’s objective was to deliver the benefits due our countrymen in a fast and correct way. Through this policy, we maximized the use of public funds, so that the suffering of our people would not prolong.

Under DAP, funds were directed to projects that have benefited and continue to benefit our countrymen; this is true, even though the program itself has been terminated. For instance, in TESDA: Under DAP, 1.6 billion pesos was allocated and used for the training of 223,615 technical education graduates. This means that government invested 7,155 pesos on average for each graduate—and 66 percent of these graduates, or 146,731 Filipinos, have jobs today. The remaining 34 percent are now being assisted and continue to be assisted by TESDA in finding employment. All the pertinent details of these graduates—including names, addresses, and contact numbers—are well-documented and open to the public; anyone can freely examine and investigate them.

To give another example: The benefits of the DREAM-LiDAR project under Project NOAH, which was also funded under DAP, are also undeniable. Now, the water level information we are able to gather during typhoons has become more reliable and exact. Warnings are given no less than six hours before calamity strikes, which gives efficient LGUs, such as those led by  Governor Joey Salceda, enough time to evacuate their people from the path of the storm. In fact, in Governor Salceda’s province of Albay, there was no recorded casualty after the most recent storm that challenged our country, Typhoon Glenda.

In the tourism sector: Out of 202 roads built leading to priority destinations in our country, 66 were funded under DAP in 2012, to the tune of 5 billion pesos. These roads will ensure—and in fact some of them are already ensuring—ease of travel and convenience for our tourists. Furthermore: the completion of these roads and, consequently, the arrival of these tourists in key destinations directly benefit our countrymen who make a living through tourism.

To tell you the truth, undertaking DAP was not a haphazard decision on our part. We did not simply make it up; we based it on laws, most prominently the Administrative Code of 1987, which we believe is in accordance with our Constitution. Apart from this, we are all the more convinced that DAP is legal because the Supreme Court itself has agreed with this type of mechanism.

You may ask why. These are the examples. In July of 2012, the Supreme Court had savings amounting to 1.865 billion pesos. This amount was earmarked to augment the fund meant for the construction of the Manila Hall of Justice. In fact, in August of that year, they already held a groundbreaking event for the building. The problem was that the item in the budget for this project was under the Department of Justice. It is clear then: the Judiciary’s money was earmarked for a project that was supposed to be undertaken by the Executive.

This leads me to a second example. In 2012, the DOJ had 100 million pesos for the Manila Hall of Justice. We received a letter of request from the Supreme Court. Let me read a portion lifted directly from their resolution:

“Wherefore, the court hereby requests the Department of Budget and Management to approve the transfer of the amount of One Hundred Million Pesos which was included in the DOJ-JUSIP for Fiscal Year 2012 budget for the Manila Hall of Justice to the budget of the judiciary, subject to existing policies and procedures, to be used for the construction of the Malabon Hall of Justice.”

They were asking us to transfer to them—the judiciary, a separate branch of government—the funds that were supposed to be used in the construction of buildings that will house the courts. We see nothing wrong with this, since we know that it would only hasten the dispensation of justice in our country. However, the Supreme Court withdrew their request in December 2013, when the discussions surrounding DAP had intensified. Even from these examples alone, it is clear that they intended to do a cross-border transfer, or a transfer of funds from one branch of government to another.

You might notice that, in all these examples, the executive branch did not initiate or offer anything. We never wished to involve ourselves in the jurisdiction or exclusive responsibilities of other branches of government; we never asked for anything in return. The only question we asked ourselves was: Would this benefit our people? If it would help, why should we oppose an opportunity to hasten the delivery of services to our Bosses?

Allow me to emphasize: When we undertook DAP, we already had Sections 38, 39, and 49 of the Administrative Code as basis. The method we used has likewise been used by previous administrations. And seeing that the Supreme Court itself—the institution with the expertise and the sole mandate to interpret the law—did it as well, we became more confident that our method was correct.

In fact, given the clamor and noise surrounding this issue, it seems as if the true meanings of some concepts are being obscured. The first such concept is that of “good faith.” Indeed: in ordinary situations, good faith is used to describe actions driven by good intentions. However, when we speak of “good faith” in terms of the law, it takes on a deeper meaning, which is: If your actions, whether in the past or present, have a legal basis in existing laws, then you acted in good faith. To add to this: Even if those laws are declared invalid or unconstitutional in the future, it still cannot be said that you acted in bad faith.

With their decision, it seems as if the Supreme Court changed both the rules and this long-established understanding of good faith—and in so doing, brought about serious implications on the work of all those in government. We all recognize: Each member of the executive branch must make decisions every day. With this fact, we are reminded of Abraham Lincoln’s saying, “You can please some of the people some of the time; all of the people some of the time; some of the people all of the time; but you can never please all the people all the time.” It is only natural that, in the course of service, there are times when our actions are questioned. In the system that prevails in our country, should someone accuse us of any crime or wrongdoing, it is his obligation to provide proof of this very wrongdoing. For those in government, if you fulfilled your mandate as prescribed by law, and in accordance with the presumption of regularity, then you have nothing to fear. However, with the recent Supreme Court decision, whenever the actions of any government employee are questioned, this employee now has the obligation to prove that he is innocent of any wrongdoing. For example, in the process of bidding out projects, only one bidder can win. Naturally, there are others who lose—and what if these individuals look for loopholes with which to file cases against government officials involved in the bidding process? The unfortunate official who makes the decision to award the bid now has to defend himself from lawsuits. How can you work efficiently if you constantly have to face cases?

Might I ask: Is there anyone who can live up to standards that have yet to be set? How can you work, when, with each step you take, you worry about the possibility of imprisonment because you are presumed guilty until proven innocent? Today, because of the Supreme Court decision, each government official must play a guessing game in predicting if his right actions will be considered unconstitutional in the future. Decision making in the executive becomes disincentivized, and with this hesitance comes a delay in the delivery of benefits to the Filipino people. This is the “chilling effect” that the Supreme Court decision will have on government. I must emphasize: What we call the retroactive effect will truly have a chilling effect because the standard you were following today, when changed in the future, will result in the new standards becoming the basis on which you will be judged: How can you be expected to follow a standard that is yet to be determined?

When it comes to the law, the Supreme Court has the final word. We have no plans of defying rulings. In truth, we are following not only the primary points in the decision; we are also acting in consideration of all the opinions that accompanied it.

Even then, we must never forget that, just as Apolinario Mabini said, whatever power held by any leader in any branch of government comes from the people. Thus, we are all asked to push for any and all actions that redound to the benefit of our Bosses. This principle is why the executive branch has filed a Motion for Reconsideration, which includes all the arguments I have outlined today and in the past. This is a course of action our laws and systems allow us to take. This is a chance to ensure that each and every argument is evaluated carefully, so that we can avoid decisions that may adversely affect our people. The motion for reconsideration is a just act, one that follows due process. It provides a good opportunity to once again lay down all the facts on the table—ensuring that those rendering decisions have the chance to appreciate the points that may have been overlooked in the past, and the well-reasoned arguments that will strengthen all sides.

I have to admit: there are times when I envy those who can focus their full attention on a single advocacy. Sometimes, I envy my colleagues in government, who are entrusted with a mandate for only one aspect of society. As the father of our nation, I am obliged to consider the whole—the big picture—at all times, because my decisions on one sector invariably affect others as well. It is likewise my obligation to shed light on this issue, and help our honorable justices understand, especially because their decision has grave implications not only in the executive, judicial, or legislative branch, but also and more importantly on the entire country. It is my obligation to help my Bosses achieve clarity of thought, and impart to them the necessary information, so that all can see what is right and what is just. This is how we choose to follow the example set by Apolinario Mabini—he who said, “We are bound by one fate, by the same joys and sorrows, and by common aspirations and interests.” [2]

Thank you, and good day.

Read as pronounced.

Footnotes

[1] “Strive for the happiness of your country before your own, making her the reigning influence for reason, justice and work; if your country is happy, you and your family will also be happy.” (Apolinario Mabini, “The True Decalogue,” La Revolucion Filipina Vol. 1. Manila: NHCP, 104.)

“…when the people see that the Government and Congress work together against their welfare, they will have no other recourse except to revolt and destroy the Government and Congress… I want to avoid all of this not primarily for your prestige, but because it will hurt the people.” (Apolinario Mabini to President Aguinaldo, January 14, 1899)

[Back to text]

[2] “Thou shalt consider thy countryman more than thy neighbor; thou shalt see him thy friend, thy brother or at least thy comrade, with whom thou art bound by one fate, by the same joys and sorrows and by common aspirations and interests.” (The True Decalogue)