Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In Recognition of the Most Outstanding Public Servant and Employee of 2015

[Declared at the Rizal Hall, Malacañan Palace, on November 9, 2015]

When we began on the Straight Path, my pledge to our Bosses was: No sirens. We promoted this culture, not only on the roads, but also in the government. We repaired the cracks in the root system of corruption, and championed a government that truly served the people.

Among those we focused on were the corrupt members of the Civil Service. I remember: During my mother’s time, someone reported that he was being extorted. He testified in the local government where the extortion took place. And after that, the corrupt official was punished, but afterwards, he was called to a meeting by other departments of this local government unit. They told him, “You are close to Malacañang, so what? You only have six years there.” Some have made their rise to power an opportunity to lord it over others. Even now, there are still people with this mindset; those who, because of their permanent positions in government, have forgotten to be civil servants. What is painful: They have not only forgotten to be civil, they have also failed to be servants. [Laughter]

We have proven: On the Straight and Narrow Path, this kind of thinking will not work. We immediately established a mechanism ensuring that only honest and competent individuals work in the government. We vigorously seek out and hold accountable those who take advantage, so they no longer reign supreme.

That is why I am truly pleased to be a part of this gathering—the recognition of our government's exemplary employees. On behalf of the people, I sincerely thank our awardees for their dedication and professionalism; for serving with dignity as representatives of the government, and for being partners in change.

Usually, our awardees are not known to the public. They work quietly; even without anyone watching, they still do what is right. Let us take this opportunity to fully recognize them and reveal the good things they have done to reach this point.

We thank Menia Alvidera and Cecilia Vidoy for opening opportunities for young people with disabilities; [applause] Maria Daisy Bercede for her honest and fearless service as an auditor of COA in Cebu; [applause] Claros Vivencio for promoting the welfare and guiding the rehabilitation of inmates at the Rodriguez Municipal Jail; [applause] Roy Esteron for thinking of creative ways to generate savings for their office; [applause] Juvy Gaton for serving as the voice of our government to deliver knowledge about the development of our agriculture; [applause] Trixie Dagame, for her unwavering fulfillment of her duty as an employee of the Bureau of Fire Protection of Tacloban City when Typhoon Yolanda struck. [Applause] Truly admirable: Even though her 1 year and 5 month old child passed away due to the disaster, she wholeheartedly reported to work the next day to respond to a fire that occurred in a community there. [Applause]

We also salute Danny Cachola for his creative program to fund the provision of proper nutrition to student learners; [applause] Jinglebert Collado for increasing the literacy rate in the Ata Manobo community and the Dibabawun tribe in Davao del Norte; [applause] Gloria dela Cruz for her excellent leadership in the Philippine Carabao Center to improve its service; [applause] Virgilio Fuertes for his scientific research to develop products of small businesses in Bukidnon; [applause] Eunice Layugan for her significant contribution to marine life research to protect shells in the Cagayan River; [applause] Albert Ramos for his inventions that have sped up the operations of the Plaridel Water District; [applause] Gilbert Sosa, for initiating the cybercrime section in our police force, [applause] and for forming the first Cyber Cops team, as well as the first batch of certified Digital and Mobile Forensic Examiners; [applause] to Ernesto Rivera, Mary Anne Timbreza, and the COMELEC i-Rehistro Team, who started an innovative way to expedite the service of their office. [Applause]

Likewise, we are impressed with people like Teodora Balangcod for using her knowledge of botany to help our National Greening Program; [applause] Arsenio Ella for sharing knowledge in science and technology to the local community to help them earn a living; [applause] Roberto Guarte for the implementation of projects using agri-industrial equipment that greatly helped in the rehabilitation of areas affected by Typhoon Yolanda; [applause] to Julius Lecciones, Amer Saber, and Lilibeth Martin, for your dedication to improving health services in the community; [applause] to Luz Marcelino, Mario Navasero, Jonar Yago, Dina Genzola, Alma Dickson, and the Office for Agricultural Services, [applause] for your unique contribution to protect and develop our agriculture and fisheries. With your help, thousands of our countrymen who depend on this sector are able to protect their livelihoods. [Applause]

Please understand, if I particularly recognize one of our awardees; a colleague of mine in the Senate and someone I work with every day: Jo Anne Haber. [Applause] It seems like only yesterday I was thinking of filing a complaint with the Commission on Human Rights. Now she is the awardee. [Laughter] Jo Anne Haber's job with me now is to read every paper that passes through or goes to me. She organizes various reports, appointment papers, resignation letters; basically, any document needs to pass through her. After it passes through her, and passes through me, and I approve it, sometimes or often she is also our search engine. That is, I give her what I remember about the document I'm looking for, and she finds a way to find the document in question. [Applause] And that wasn't just last month that went through her. Sometimes it's three years ago, “Can you find me this document?” Sometimes I have a marginal note, “This is all I remember.” I'll tell her what the page is, what the topic is, and then that's in the computer with many fields. But she's not a computer, but it's like that, I enter keywords and let her produce it.

Now, she often gives me briefs on various topics. When the brief reaches me, it's one inch thick. I said, “Isn't the root word of this, ‘brief’?” Her answer to me was, “Sir, that's already brief because it came from 3 feet.” [Laughter] I even asked her, “Maybe one day, you'll set up a recycling center here in Malacañang that will be your livelihood because of the cartloads you send.” Her answer to me was, “I'm just passing on to you what came from ES.” [Laughter] The other thing she passed on to her, I said: When it reaches me, this document should be perfect because if it's wrong, you'll return it to the office, it will be fixed, it will come back to you, you'll read every page again, if it's wrong, back to them again. Sometimes it takes ten times of going back and forth to different places. Someone is waiting, someone is pressuring her. I, on the other hand, pressure her, “We can't sign that until it's correct.” All of this that happened to her, the doctor who takes care of my eyes is also a client of Jo Anne Haber, although she is much younger than us.

That is indeed how it is. This speech I will deliver today is truly important because usually, when something good happens, or often when something bad happens, the head of the agency is held accountable. But with your help, all the heads who are well-known to the public, without their colleagues at work, all the good plans will remain just plans. [Applause]

To Jo Anne and to all our awardees: You are the shining proof of good service in our government. Thank you very much for your contribution and for embodying the principles of the Straight Path.

You can count on this: In good governance, we will continue to hold those who are at fault accountable, and incentivize those who excel in service. There is our Performance Enhancement Incentive which we implemented in 2012.

During our term, we thoroughly studied the situation of salaries in our government. There is Joint Resolution No. 4, which mandates a review every 3 years, and 2015 is the review period. We hired our consultants to ensure that a fair and reasonable aid can be provided to our employees. Because we now have a reliable Civil Service, we have the courage to propose to Congress the Salary Standardization Law 4 we are pushing for; [applause] Congress also has the courage, led by Senate President Frank Drilon and Speaker Sonny Belmonte, to approve it. With the help of our Legislature, we expect this to be implemented in January of next year. [Applause] Our desire is: To provide reasonable salaries to our personnel, and to bring the earnings of those in government closer to those in the private sector.

I have often shared how difficult the job of a President is. I need to immediately address the past, present, and upcoming problems of Filipinos, both within and outside our country. As I said: It’s like watching 200 television channels at the same time. You cannot be confused, and you need to have an immediate response to any question, suggestion, and criticism. But I accepted all criticisms and insults as part of the job. Because I know, I am not alone. There are those like you who wholeheartedly serve our Bosses; there is the citizenry who are walking the Straight Path with us. Together, we are reaching our collective goals and making the once thought impossible, possible.

We have come so far now compared to where we started. This is seen in the continuous growth of our economy, the expansion of social services, and infrastructure that delivers immediate benefits to the citizens. Even the whole world has confidence in our ability to keep up with progress. Surely, we will reach even further if we do not deviate from the direction we are taking. The challenge to us: Nurture our reforms.

In just a few months from now, the citizenry will once again choose the next leaders. Let us choose leaders who are sure to continue our good beginnings; let us choose leaders who are sure to continue correcting mistakes and hold the corrupt accountable; let us choose leaders who are sure to prioritize the nation, before themselves.

My order to every employee of our government: Let us be true to our sworn duty. Let us exert all our efforts to improve the condition of our fellow citizens, especially those who are most in need. With compassion and cooperation, we are sure to reach the prosperous and brighter future that we aspire for.

In closing, may I share this thought with you: During my mother’s time, many approached us and told us that when going to the bureaucracy, most things were supposedly taken care of. Those they spoke with, if they didn’t know the public’s question, would ask. They were truly happy that our citizens were engaging with the bureaucracy. I will admit to you, perhaps those I spoke with were just atypical, but no one has really told me about the significant improvement in working within the bureaucracy. Perhaps when we return to our offices, how can we further bring the bureaucracy closer to our citizens? That is my challenge to you.

Good day. Thank you all very much.