Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In his meeting with local leaders and constituents of Meycauayan, Bulacan

[Declared in the City of Meycauayan, Bulacan, on April 15, 2016]

You know, back in the day in Cebu, actually, there was a senator before Martial Law and he was helping to awaken the people. And when he arrived, there was a rally, he hadn't been able to speak for a long time—during the time of Martial Law, those of us who are as old as I am, right, during Martial Law, if five people gathered, it was an illegal assembly. Illegal assembly: jail, if you were charged, it was up to them. If you were released, it was up to them too, we had no rights. So he arrived, there was an opportunity, he could speak, because he saw, upon his arrival, it was late. He was really late. When he got to the plaza, there were only three people left in the plaza. He said now, “Should I even speak here, I only have three people to talk to?” The emcee said to him, “Sir, it seems like those three aren't convinced yet. Maybe if you speak, we can convince them. Why don't you try?”

He spoke on the stage, halfway through the speech, one person stood up and left, leaving him with only two people to talk to. He was on the stage while speaking, right? It's more practical, if you only have three people to talk to, just have a meeting if you only have three chairs. But he did it on the stage. The speech was almost finished, another one of the two remaining stood up and left again. He looked at the emcee again. “Sir, you're really great. Everyone before you failed to convince those people, it turns out they were just waiting for you. Why don't you finish it, let's get the third one, we'll be a hundred percent here.” So with a little encouragement, he continued the speech, he wasn't left. Afterwards, he approached the man, he said, “Brad, I suppose you're convinced now.” The answer to him was, “You know, even before you arrived, I was already convinced. And proof of that is the sound system you're using, I lent it to you. Now that you're finished, I'll take my sound system back.” [Applause]

Now, I just mentioned that because with so many wearing yellow here, I almost don't know who else I should convince. You might already be convinced. If you are indeed convinced, just to feel it, because sometimes it gets tiring, maybe we can have a little applause. [Applause] I promise you, when we tread the Straight Path, when I step down from office, we can say that what we leave behind is far better than what we inherited.

Now, you are my Boss, so you need a little report card, right? What has the Philippines, and especially Bulacan, gained from treading the Straight Path? Now, I need our code.

First of all, earlier we attended the groundbreaking ceremony of the Bulacan Bulk Water Supply. What is its purpose? In 1992, the Angat [Dam] was promised for Bulacan. There's a dam, the water will be used to increase your water supply. That was in 1992. And Manong Willy has been reminding us from Congress until we reached Malacañang, and now it's already 2016. 24 years, and finally this Bulk Water Supply Project has been started, Bulacan will benefit from Angat and not just Metro Manila. [Applause]

Now, the good thing about this project is that almost all water districts in the Philippines rely on what is called a deep well—groundwater. While we extract water from underground, there's a chance the land will sink. That's called subsidence. And seawater can also enter, becoming increasingly salty. Simply put, groundwater cannot be relied upon for the long term. So we need a new system where we will use surface water. There will be containment areas, dams that will be our source of water which is carried by the 20 typhoons that come to us every year. The template, to organize our water districts, was started here in Bulacan through the Bulacan Bulk Water System. [Applause]

Furthermore, the Angat Dam itself is at risk, it's old. The youngest tunnel of Angat, Manong Willy, is from the 1960s. Is that right? The youngest means there are many that are older. If there's an earthquake, we're worried it will collapse. So, let me just reiterate, here in Bulacan, they are constantly asking for help with the repair of this dam, and I know that it has already been started. But maybe I should just prioritize all our other projects.

Once the Bulacan Bulk Water System Project is finished, there was a bidding process. That is the correct procedure. The cost of the water being passed through, the bulk water rates, is over P20. Once it's finished, it will go down to P8.50—that's the promise of the concessionaire from P20. [Applause] The quality of the water will improve, and there will be more water.

Our PPP projects in Bulacan—the Public Private Partnership Program—are already worth P116.94 billion, a collaboration between the government and the private sector. One of these is MRT 7, which is nearing its groundbreaking, where travel from Quezon City to San Jose del Monte, Bulacan will be made easier. [Applause]

Regarding C6, we were informed by the good Secretary Babes Singson, it's from Taguig to Quezon City. We hear that there are plans to extend C6 to Meycauayan to further ease your travel. [Applause]

Let's go straight to the figures from the budget: From 2005 to 2010, for infrastructure, the budget allocated to you by my predecessor: P5 billion. With our combined efforts, from 2011 to 2016, the budget for infrastructure alone reached: P19.04 billion. [Applause] Almost four times as much.

I won't mention all of these, but I know that the continuous dredging of the Labangan Channel with Hagonoy is also very important. This also includes our dredging of the Marilao-Meycauayan-Ubando River [applause] and Linabel mentioned earlier our Valenzuela-Ubando-Meycauayan project to alleviate your flooding problems. [Applause]

Of course, LV will not stop reminding, we will finish that, let's continue that. I am also happy with the Plaridel Bypass Road. Next year, the Plaridel Bypass Road bridge will be completed. We are just waiting for confirmation from JICA for the extension beyond the bridge, but you have seen the number of factories being built, bringing jobs for you here in Bulacan. Of course, roads and the bridge were only a part of it. For bridges, we built 107,000 lineal meters of bridges during our term and 18,000 kilometers of roads, including the Plaridel Bypass Road, which we built here along the Straight Path.

For irrigation: P1.38 billion has been contributed. P115.86 million, meanwhile, went to post-harvest machineries and equipment. For the Health Facilities Enhancement Program: P181.43 million has been spent. For PhilHealth, 2.47 million Bulakenyos are now covered by the program. They are part of the 93 million Filipinos covered by the program. [Applause]

When I was a congressman with Manong Willy in the 11th, 12th, and 13th Congress, every year, we fought to have schools for our districts. Usually, we would be given eight, if you get ten for your entire district, that’s good. If you reach twelve, that’s exceptional. But under the Straight Path, just in Bulacan, we have already built 6,758 classrooms. [Applause]

Before, 8,000 classrooms were divided among the entire Philippines. Now, in Bulacan alone, it’s almost 7,000, just for you. And 185,000 will be completed by the time we step down. [Applause] Some might ask, what about jobs?

The TWSP program of TESDA, under the leadership of your fellow provincial, Joel Villanueva: 37,000 scholars have already graduated from the TWSP program. And the good news is, before, only 28.5 percent of their graduates found jobs, now it’s 72 percent. [Applause] Those who find jobs, that means six months after graduating, they already have a job.

Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Program: When we assumed office in 2010, only 5,542 households were being helped in Bulacan. And truthfully, you were lucky, because in Batangas, Cavite and other places, not a single household was being helped. Now, 68,348 households are being helped by the 4Ps program. They are part of the 4.6 million households. [Applause]

Now, there are still many of these but I will lower that. It’s really very simple, I think. What were we chasing? How do we change the destiny of the Philippines? Look at this. When we were congressmen, I felt lucky, I had 14 kilometers in the budget for my district in Tarlac. And all districts were more or less like that.

My district had 159 barangays, if you divide that 14 kilometers, it won’t be enough for even 100 meters each. It’s almost like that. And as a congressman, like any public servant, you enter to change the situation of your constituents, right? You look around, you don’t like what you see and you feel you can contribute.

You enter there, that’s what you can do. Someone will approach you, sick. You’ll take out from your pocket P100, P200 to help. You won’t be content with yourself for helping because that’s all you can really do. You see a student studying under a mango tree, sometimes under a coconut tree, sometimes if you’re unlucky, under a banana tree. A banana tree without leaves. Is that right? Then you ask him, “Why don’t you study hard?” How can he do that?

We will create TESDA, Technical Vocational Training, billions of debt were left behind. Then the placement rate, not even one third.

Perhaps, in whatever way we measure it, as we tread the Straight Path, it is truly clear. There is a government that cares for its Bosses, the people who gave the mandate and who fulfilled the promise to change the situation of the Filipino. That is why you are aware of it.

In the field of the economy: Formerly the “Sick Man of Asia,” now “Asia’s Rising Tiger.” Before, Mel Sarmiento recounted that Cesar Purisima of Finance mentioned that during international conferences, there would be a session to approach the representatives more closely. The representative of the Philippines, the chairs and tables were reportedly empty. Mel recounted that someone approached, and Cesar Purisima said, “Finally, someone is interested in the Philippines” when we were starting. They approached to borrow a chair because there weren't enough chairs on the other side. Now, Cesar Purisima has been awarded Finance Minister several times around the world. [Applause]

When we started with Manong Willy and Pedro Pancho in Congress during the 11th, 12th and 13th Congresses, you would approach all departments, and they would always say, “There are no funds.” Now our problem is underspending. There are funds, we need to expedite spending them.

So we are not only helping families keep their children in school. We are helping them get jobs after graduating from school. If there are health problems, we are helping with that too. We are doing everything we can to help. That’s why we say, “That is an investment in the future.”

Now, let's look at our current situation. During the elections, there was courting left and right, a competition of who could court better. But everyone who was courted and did the courting here knows that there is sincere and insincere courting.

Let me give you an example of courting. They all saw that the 4Ps program, 80 percent of Filipinos support it. All of them suddenly said, “We will expand that.” Is that right?

Do you remember someone saying, “That 4Ps is not enough. I will make it 5Ps.” After the 5Ps, “I will lower taxes while expanding the program.” Have you heard that? Okay. There are probably many housewives here. If your husband approaches you and says, “Next month, your budget will be reduced. And while I reduce your budget, you increase what you buy.” How many housewives here could do that?

But the one saying that is amazing! You will reduce the funding but expand the program. Who here in the 4th district of Bulacan would be fooled by that kind of promise?

Someone even said, “Give me three to six months, I will end crime in the Philippines and if I don’t, I will resign.” Of course, I thought of two things: You’re really great! [Applause] But while you’re making that promise, I know that Mar Roxas lowered our crime rate throughout the Philippines because of Oplan Lambat Sibat and their One-Time-Big-Time program. [Applause]

The One-Time-Big-Time, when you listen to it, you’d think it’s bingo. But its only purpose is that when we serve warrants, it’s not on an installment plan. The police serve all warrants at once. What’s the use of that? All those who are hiding have no chance to realize that the police are pursuing them strictly. One day, everyone will be chased, we arrest many. There’s no time to hide. That, it wasn’t a promise, it was done by Mar Roxas and is being done until now by Mel Sarmiento. Many of the most wanted have been arrested. Now, when we get the masterminds, those who initiated it, those involved won’t be able to move. That’s what lowered the crime rate.

Let me add to that. There was also one who said, while running for office, “Let’s increase the SSS pension by P2,000.” Now, just so everyone knows and they even called me uncaring. I just ask you: Is it right that we revived the SSS and GSIS, we improved them. Now, in 2047 we are sure it will be stable, there will be funds available in the SSS. The painful part is, with the P2,000 they are suggesting, the life of the fund will be reduced by 11 or 16 years. Why? In the first year alone, the additional payment will not be recovered by the SSS from its investment, it will lose money.

So I said, “How can I agree to this? 2040 plus, let’s just make it 2027. And you give additional benefits to some now, so that by 2027, no one will receive any benefits anymore.” Every peso that an SSS member puts in has an equivalent benefit of P6 to P15 that they receive. They need to invest that to get that funding.

According to the esteemed individuals from the other side, what I'm saying isn't true because there's a law stating that the SSS cannot be allowed to go bankrupt. Okay, let's assume he's right. My only question is: The SSS is financially stable, not bankrupt, we'll fund it again. Who will we take from? The Department of Education? The Department of Health? Our modernization of the AFP? PhilHealth? The Pantawid Pamilya? Who will we reduce funding for to cover that? So my question here is, do you know what you're saying, or is it just important to you to look good because of the elections? Let Batman deal with it when the time comes to pay up. Isn't that right?

I could have imitated that. I'm already stepping down from my position in 76 days. I'll approve that 2,000 pension for everyone, I'll look good, knowing that program ends in 2027. I could even say, “By 2027, no one will remember me anymore. They won't remember that I was the one who bankrupted it.” And these candidates now, a 6-year term, they're already finished in 2022. Someone else will be held accountable then, but with them, they can look good, lead us into a precarious situation. I think here in Bulacan, that kind of thinking won't pass. Lead us to a good outcome, don't lead us to ruin. Isn't that right? [Applause]

Perhaps just to be very clear, let's just talk about 4Ps. We spoke to a mother, she spoke on a stage like this, I saw her in Pampanga. She told me her son, she has seven. Her husband left her, “You take care of our seven children.” Her job, “patinda-tinda”. Now, my Tagalog might be wrong, but I understand that when you're a 'patinda-tinda' vendor, it's not permanent, it's not certain, it's not guaranteed. Because if it's certain, you're a vendor, right? If it's 'patinda-tinda', sometimes you have something to sell, sometimes someone buys, sometimes you have nothing to sell. So if there's nothing to sell, there's no way to support her family. Because of 4Ps, she was able to finish high school with three of her children who now have jobs, permanent jobs. She's still supporting four others.

Let's say this housewife came, approached us on this stage, and asked all of us, “You know, you might not know, you've helped our family a lot. Almost half of my children have graduated. They have the ability to stand on their own feet. We have a direction.” And probably unlike someone who approaches you asking for money for medicine, a loan. Every time you give a loan, you don't get anything back, and they even hold a grudge against you. Here, no one directly asked us to give money to support her children, but we were still able to help her. She's just one part of the 4.6 million households.

Let's say we were called to the stage here, he said, “You are not a burden to us, you are helping. Our situation is improving. Perhaps, if it isn't too much to ask, let's continue this because I have four children who can now stand on their own feet and we no longer need to carry them.” Who among us would be stingy and say, “Well, we no longer want to help you”?

Now the question is: Can the government fund the 4.6 million? It could have been done, right, 10 years before I took office. That 10-year Pantawid program, we probably had some who already graduated from high school—paying taxes, providing new help to their fellow citizens—but it wasn't done. I'll leave it to your imagination as to why it wasn't done. I just want to emphasize: On the Straight Path, our focus is on our fellow citizens. On the Straight Path our focus is not just words but action that truly leaves things better than we found them.

But it has come, the term you gave me is ending, only 76 days left. I can no longer lead all that we are fighting for. There needs to be someone to continue this. And we've been mentioning it earlier: Mar Roxas, in my opinion, is the only one who is qualified and has the right direction to continue the Straight Path. [Applause]

Mar Roxas is not the type to rush to be the first to respond when there's a disaster, especially when the media is around, just to show off helping, and then that's all. Mar Roxas, when he helps, like in Zamboanga City, he was there for almost three weeks when the crisis happened. He didn't leave until the situation returned to a state where our countrymen in Zamboanga City were no longer in danger. In truth, I wanted to lead from the front, he arrived there before me.

In Yolanda, he didn't wait for Yolanda to make landfall. Before Yolanda arrived, he was already there to sympathize with all those affected, he almost became a statistic himself. Earthquake in Cebu, Bacolod, he was there too. Our typhoon last year hit Samar, circling the entire province, his job was to find out what each local government unit needed. Only a motorcycle could get through, the motorcycle slipped a little, let's read the newspapers, let's listen to TV, we didn't see “Mar Roxas sympathizing” written, “Mar Roxas, the motorcycle slipped.” Isn't that right? Others think that whenever you hear Mar Roxas, it's always criticism. And the criticism of Mar Roxas has been happening since 2004.

So we can't avoid it, some people got lost, what has he done? When he does something good, it won't be said. When there's a small mistake, it needs to be magnified and repeated. But I'll just go back to this. He was with us in designing how this Straight Path is, he was with us so that we would have the opportunity to start this Straight Path. And I think, with your permission and careful consideration, there is only one person who can continue this and we need to continue walking the Straight Path, I'll just repeat, only Mar Roxas, in my opinion, can do that. [Applause]

Vice President, why Leni Robredo? Penny, Penny, we were together then. This Penny, is Jesse Robredo's sister. Penny, I didn't really know her back then. Leni, I didn't know her either, but Jesse wanted to bring Leni, his children into political life, he wanted to give them a normal life. You know our father with Kris, our mother, our father especially, had the same style. When he had someone to talk to in our house, he would quickly have everyone have breakfast, bring them to the office so that our house would be quiet.

The opportunity came, Jesse had an accident. Penny, Leni were with us when Jesse's body was recovered. I asked Leni, “Leni, Jesse's body has been under the sea for several days, and decomposition has begun a little, it's not a good sight. Wouldn't it be better to think about how Jesse was when he was alive instead of seeing him in that state?” I was informed that Jesse's appearance was no longer very good and was decomposing. Leni decided, she said, “I need to see my husband even if it's just for the last time.” And Leni and Penny were with us, and you know what, I was also shocked when I saw Jesse. We've been colleagues for a long time. I felt so sorry for Jesse. Penny, Leni, I didn't see their tears flow during those moments. Quietly, remembering Jesse, praying for Jesse. That's when I started to see how strong Leni is, especially, and with Jesse's siblings.

I saw the weight, not expecting that Jesse would end up like that, but Leni stood firm as a mother, a father to their three children. Leni wasn't given the chance to finish mourning first. She was made to run, to fight a strong opponent, a politician who had been there for a long time in Camarines Sur. She defeated him, with 80 percent of the vote.

Here in this election, she could have also said, “Can I have a time-out now? I need to take care of my children.” She could have said, “Or if you still need me, can we just have a re-election, that would be easier?” But we approached her and told her, “Leni, we need someone like you who, in case something happens to President Mar Roxas, will continue our fight.” And again, my parents taught me, especially my mother, don't endorse someone you can't guarantee. I'll repeat: I can guarantee Leni Robredo; I can guarantee Mar Roxas. A strong request, let's help these two, along with our other colleagues. [Applause]

I remember my mother, I also remember her saying, “Don't speak for too long, especially if you're not a candidate.” But I want to take this opportunity to say goodbye to you all. This Meycauayan, in 1983, during the Tarlac to Tarmac march, was where they blocked us in Meycauayan. I was only 23 years old at that time. And it was really Martial Law, you didn't know what to do when you were blocked here, but I really felt the sympathy, the solidarity of the people of Meycauayan. We didn't hear them say, “What are you doing, you're bothering us too much, can you stop that?” So we can probably say that even then, they really stood firm here in Bulacan, especially in Meycauayan, and neighboring areas to restore the democracy we enjoy today. [Applause]

It's the 30th anniversary of EDSA, it's good to be back here to thank you for your sympathy that day, to thank you for the opportunity to lead a great race like the Filipino people, and it is truly a great honor to serve all of you.

Let me just reiterate: we only have 76 days left. I cannot continue beyond that as your leader, our term is finished. It is important to me that when I say goodbye to you, you are truly in a good place. And I will repeat, excuse me if I’m being repetitive, we just need to, not only vote for Mar and Leni, but also campaign for Mar and Leni because we have some countrymen who are getting lost. [Applause]

Let us not forget the interest of future generations who are relying on our correct decisions. Everything we have achieved now could have been done yesterday and lessened our suffering, but it wasn’t done. Because what happened in the past can happen in the future if we make a mistake.

But the choice is very clear: do we go with the 780,000 people who were previously helped by the Pantawid Pamilya program or the 4.6 million? Do we go with the situation where there are constantly no classrooms or with the situation where classrooms are complete? Do we go with only 51 percent having random access to PhilHealth or with 93 percent being members of PhilHealth? Do we stay with the modernization of the AFP, so that the Air Force is no longer just air and no force, or do we go back to the way things were? Who among us is willing to gamble everything we have worked for? I believe, no one in this hall. But we must remember, in a democracy, the majority decides for everyone.

We can lose if we become lazy, but not because our message is wrong, not because what we did is wrong. What is good can be lost. It might only take one night before the world changes again. Everything that has been done cannot be done if there is an interest in pocketing the public funds. Everything that has been achieved cannot be done if not focused on others. And here we see with Mar and Leni, they rely on you as always because that is really the strength we are proud of.

Please take note of our uniform, it isn't a uniform. It's individual. Isn't it? It's really everyone's contribution. But what are we proud of? Because what we are fighting for is right, the people are there, they will join us and we will succeed.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.