Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In his meeting with local leaders and communities of Sta. Rosa, Laguna

[Declared in Sta. Rosa, Laguna, on March 31, 2016]

Yesterday, I was asked by various members of the media from [various countries of] the world, I attended their conference here in the Philippines, one asked, “Your candidates are only at 20 to 27 percent in the survey. Shouldn't the people be shouting to continue the Straight Path?” I explained. I said, let's remember that our candidates are working; our opponents have been campaigning since 2010. After they were sworn in, they were already campaigning.

I said, let's look at where they came from. To be honest, they were in the single digits in the survey when they started. Now, from four percent, one percent for Leni, they are now at over twenty percent. It's a pretty big leap. The leap they made seems to be the same that their opponents lowered. But what's more important to me when I got here. The “father of the nation,” I don't really like that title anymore. Anyway, ninety plus days, that's no longer my title. Because as I passed by earlier, someone said to me, “Daddy.” I said, “You're taking ‘father of the nation’ too literally.” The child, a little distance away from him, said, “Hey, Mar Roxas, you've arrived. Thank you!” I said, “Okay, Mar Roxas has really won this.” [Laughter] There's just a difference between me and Mar Roxas. His hair is definitely a little thicker. Just a little. That's the only difference.

Here, I was told, “You’ve already won.” I said, “Thank you, but I’m not running.” [Laughter] Perhaps that meant that those who will continue the Straight Path have already won. So thank you as well. [Applause]

On the Straight Path, we truly continue to deliver change. Right here in Laguna, the proof is clear:

Earlier, we visited a company named Kaertech. What they make is called a Smart Electric Toothbrush. First of all, electric. Hey, an electric toothbrush. That’s not common for us. But now, it’s smart. What is ‘smart’ anyway? The smart part is that the toothbrush communicates with your smartphone, telling you if your brushing is a little off, where you need to improve. But what’s important is that there are applications on the smartphone that they turn into a game for children while brushing. Like you get points when you revisit areas you need to revisit. What’s important isn’t the toothbrush’s capability; what’s important is that this high-tech toothbrush is made here in the Philippines. And Kaertech doesn’t just make that product, they make many more. Right here in Laguna, these very high-tech things are made.

The business is really doing well, so they plan to expand here. Of course, the result of this is that our manufacturing and technology sector will become stronger, which will bring more jobs. But what’s most important to me isn’t just their investment, it’s the training they provide to our countrymen on how to design this kind of product, how to make this kind of product, how to assemble this kind of product.

Why is that important to me? In 2010, as you all know, even electric fans. We used to manufacture a lot of electric fans in the Philippines, but it went to other countries. We were importing electric fans that weren't that complicated. Now, many electric fans are being brought back. But we are skipping from electric fans and going straight to these high-tech products.

This kind of industry, and the communities, of course, needs proper infrastructure. So in public works, from 2011 to 2016, we allocated P12.61 billion for Laguna. That's just from the infrastructure budget of the DPWH. Before, the amount we allocated for the same period—six years, from 2005 to 2010—was not P12 billion brought to Laguna, [but] only P3.68 billion.

Here are some of our projects for you: The Lipa-Alaminos Road has been concreted; the Manila South Road is also being widened. The Sta. Rosa-Ulat-Tagaytay Road and San Pedro Bridge will be four lanes, as promised by the DPWH. Throughout the country, we have repaired more than 18,000 kilometers of national roads and 107,000 lineal meters of bridges.

Just a while ago, on my way here from Biñan, I saw the road, you have so many factories here, so much activity, the road is very narrow. I even asked Mayor Arcillas, “Why was this overlooked?” The answer to me was, “Private road.” I asked who the owner was, and he said, “It seems like a friend of ours. Maybe we can ask him nicely.” Maybe Dan Fernandez will even join me in asking, so we can utilize it, widen it even more.

The South Luzon Expressway Toll Road 4 and the North-South Railway Project South Line are also being constructed. With these large projects, which also mark a big difference from our predecessors, we have awarded the 44.63-km Cavite-Laguna Expressway or CALAX, where we are already getting the infrastructure we need, and we were even paid P27.30 billion for the right to build that infrastructure we need. Just imagine, instead of us buying the road, if you think about it, we are being helped to have infrastructure immediately, and they believe they will profit from that project so they even paid us P27.30 billion to build what we need.

For the Health Facilities Enhancement Program, P195.74 million has been allocated from 2010 to 2014 for hospitals, rural health units or urban health centers, and barangay health stations here in Laguna.

At the same time, we expanded PhilHealth, which provides benefits to 2.59 million residents of Laguna. They are among the 93 million supported by PhilHealth nationwide.

For the Pantawid Pamilya program in Laguna, in 2010, when we first took office, we knew that only 903 households were being helped by 4Ps. Now, 44,550 households are being helped in Laguna. Throughout the Philippines, if what we inherited was less than 800,000 households, this year, we will reach our target of 4.6 million beneficiary households. 7.7 million individuals have already crossed the poverty line—lifted out of poverty.

According to a survey: 4 out of 5 Filipinos would vote for those who will continue the Pantawid Pamilya program. Now, those who previously criticized it are all claiming that the program will surely improve under them. Let me repeat that: Before, in 2013, there were only criticisms of Pantawid. Now that there's a survey showing that 80 percent of the electorate will vote for those who will continue Pantawid, they are all claiming ownership of the program and promising to expand it. I know that Filipinos are not senile; they remember what they said before.

My Bosses, let me emphasize, for you and the whole world to see: What was once impossible is now possible. On the Straight Path, we even fulfilled promises we didn't even make. We achieved this without adding to the burden of the people, except for the reform in the Sin Tax. My request: Help us continue delivering benefits without adding to your burden.

We can proudly say on the Straight Path: We did not steal. We also did not claim the change. We didn't always say “I, I, I” when we spoke, but always said “we”—we were the ones who made all these changes. We will continue all the changes we are enjoying. That is very important. [Applause]

We were able to achieve all of this because of your support. That is why we fully support the reliable sons and daughters of Laguna.

Let's start with those who promised, Dan Fernandez, perhaps he will remember his promise. [Applause] Of course, Arlene Arcillas and Len Alonte, truly, just looking at you two, Laguna is already a jackpot. You are both so hardworking and truly dedicated, that's why you can see how impressed we are with all the changes that have happened in your areas. Manong Jun Chipeco, we are also with him, Benjie Agarao, our colleagues, and ten others of our companions who we were with today.

Everything we have achieved, let us remember, could have been done ten years ago because before I took office, there was an opportunity, wasn't there? But where did it lead us? If we hadn't had what we call a “lost decade,” those ten lost years under our predecessors, I wonder: How developed would Laguna be now? How developed would the entire Philippines be? How many more beneficiaries of the 4Ps program would have diligently graduated from high school if many of them had already done so today.

Perhaps it is clear to you all what the Straight Path and good governance mean. Let's not forget that before we came into office, things were completely reversed. But I promised change. You elected me and we really focused on all the reforms we were doing. But as I am nearing the end of my term, let us remember that the benefits you have are not permanent.

Yesterday, I attended a meeting. And we were told there, that the Filipino perspective on the Philippines is really very different now. Do you agree that before we took office, our newspapers, TV, and radio always had stories about the number of Filipinos leaving the Philippines? Is that right? It seemed like the only ambition of every Filipino: How can I escape the Philippines because of the lack of hope in our country? Now you know, they are starting to return. Of the estimated 10 million OFWs, 9.4 million or 9.2 million is the official record of our tally while our unemployment rate in the Philippines is decreasing.

It is clear that if someone like us succeeds us, the comfort and services will continue. Everything that is happening to us will continue. But it is also clear that if someone who is the opposite of us succeeds us, if they have a different perspective, if they consider different people as their Bosses, they might change their mind, and might pursue what they think is the opposite of what we are doing, and just stop all our programs. The question is: Will we gamble our future? It is up to you whether the change will be permanent, or if we just took a vacation here for almost six years and will return to the dire situation we found ourselves in, like in 2010.

Let me share this with you: I recently came from Pampanga. There was a housewife. She stood on stage. She is part of the 4Ps program. Her story was like this: Her husband left her. He left her with her seven children and her livelihood was just selling things. As I understand it, 'selling things' means sometimes she has something to sell, sometimes she doesn't. Sometimes she can feed her seven children, sometimes she can't. She said that with the help of Pantawid Pamilya, three of her seven children have already graduated and have permanent jobs. Four are still studying. Just imagine, if this mother was in front of you, abandoned by her husband, left to raise her seven children. If this housewife were to talk to any of you and ask you this question, “You helped me with my three children, I still have four to put through school. While you are helping me, I didn't ask you for alms. I didn't burden your lives. You are already helping me, you are paying the right taxes, we have a government that is using those taxes correctly.”

Those four are still hoping for a little more support. If we help these four, we help the seven, we help the mother—let me repeat—we are not taking from our own pockets, we are just doing what is right. They will stand on their own two feet, work hard, support themselves, and they have done that because we all helped. If we are asked, “Can I count on you to continue this support?” I hope you won't gamble it, because the plea is, this mother speaking, might say, “You already helped me without burdening you. You can easily help me a little more. And after that, you won't have us as a problem anymore.” We will say, “Okay, let's gamble.” I don't think any of us here would say, “We will begrudge you help and support.” Rather, we should strengthen it further. Bosses, my request is, let's complete the help. Let's continue the Straight Path.

Perhaps, no one would think that the job of the President is easy. Every day you have to face heavy decisions. Now that the election is approaching, many will sing to you and woo you. And although I don't want to be called daddy because I don't have a wife or children yet. I am also a father of the nation, it is my obligation to share a little puzzle with you. It might help.

To be honest, I am not a direct opponent of the presidential candidates. But like you, when I retire, I will just be an ordinary citizen. I will also be affected by the decisions of the next leader of the country. That is why, I believe that those who are presenting to replace me should be questioned.

There is a candidate there. His claim: The President should be in a secure location during a major crisis. But I saw with my own mother, during the time of the coups against her, with various challenges including Pinatubo, the President himself should “lead from the front.” We were trained not to be order-givers. Before you order someone to do something, make sure you can do it yourself first.

This is exactly what we demonstrated when we went to Zamboanga City when it was attacked. The people, especially those in Zamboanga and throughout the country, needed to see that their President would not abandon them. My question is, will the candidate who spoke accept that he still has a lot to understand before aspiring for the highest position?

You know, I grew up valuing democracy. I believe in consensus building and uniting voices. But there is another candidate, a different candidate, who, when he speaks, acts as if he is the only one who is right and should be followed. He even said that his promise is: three to six months, crime will be eradicated, and if not, he will resign. Is that right? You are a leader, you ran with a promise, and if you don't fulfill it, you will pass the job to your Vice and say, it seems he is telling us all, “Let Batman handle it.”

You yourself, you are the Chief Executive of your city, you know that every day there are challenges, there are days when success is quickly achieved, there are days when success is difficult, there are days when it seems like there is no success. It seems nice that you have “honor,” but can a leader just suddenly give up? For me, leading the country is like getting married, although my knowledge of it is just from Dan’s lecture. The priest says, “For better or for worse.” You should be there. Is that right? [Applause] Our elders say, “It’s not like hot rice that you blow on, if you get burned, you’ll just spit it out.” Let’s just remember that everyone who runs—I don’t know if there’s anyone who was forced to run. What I know is that some are forcing themselves to run, and when you get there, you’ll have a hard time, you’ll say, “I don’t want to anymore.” No. As President, you ran, your contract with the people is six years, and there’s no contract that says, “When I become President, only the happy times will do.” Of course, the sad times are included too. And most likely, you’ll be the first one to experience those sad times. Right? You are the leader. These kinds of promises are not possible.

Another candidate said: He will expand the 4Ps to 5Ps, while reducing our taxes. [Laughter] Let’s just think about that a little. I see many women here. I think there are housewives here. If your husband says, “I will reduce your budget, and after I reduce it, you increase what you buy,” how many wives do you think will agree with that? They’ll say, “Okay.” What’s unclear about this politician is that in 2013, his own son wanted to have the Pantawid Pamilya investigated.

The question is: How will you expand the program while reducing its funding? Are you serious about expanding a program that your own son had investigated? It reminds me of an appropriate or fitting question. When we meet, I think I’ll say to him, “Kuya, what’s really going on?”

Let me clarify: I consider everyone running for president as a friend. But principle outweighs friendship for me. If you ask me, there is one candidate who I am sure will continue the reforms, because he himself sacrificed and was with us in implementing the journey on the Straight Path from the very beginning.

The BPO sector, which he championed, has now created more than one million direct jobs, and we expect it to grow this year to 1.3 million direct employees, along with $25 billion entering our economy because of the industry he founded.

His candidate didn't just focus on photo opportunities. Others just do photo ops, saying, “Hey, there’s a disaster. I’ll go there, let’s take a picture here. I’m here, I sympathize.” What’s important is, when there’s a disaster, what should be done to restore our countrymen to a proper condition? I can say that he wasn’t just with me in addressing disasters. In truth, there were times when he was even ahead in solving various problems like the crisis in Zamboanga, the earthquakes in Cebu and Bohol, as well as the devastation of Yolanda and many others. He was there. In public service, he confronted those who needed to be confronted, for our countrymen. He did what was right, not only when he was part of our administration but even when we were all in the opposition. That is no other than Mar Roxas—not just sound bites and empty promises, he believes in reaching a consensus, has integrity, doesn’t complain, doesn’t create drama, he just focuses on work. [Applause]

Our candidate for Vice President is Leni Robredo. You know, what Jesse achieved, if it weren't for Leni, it might not have been as high. Jesse, we can say, “He fought the good fight and he kept the faith.” Like Mar, he prioritized the country before himself, and fought against large interests. In all of this, of course, he was accompanied by his good wife, Leni. Leni is the same. We admire the strength of her resilience. When Jesse died, Leni was the one taking care of all of us.

You know, that day was a Saturday. I was informed that the plane carrying our Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, Jesse Robredo, was missing. And to be honest, I was informed late in the afternoon, and I wanted to go to where the plane was last reported to have crashed. Masbate airport could no longer accept planes when it was dark. So at six in the morning, as soon as the airport opened, we were already there. And we personally led the operations to find Jesse.

The time came when I needed to tell Leni, “Leni, it’s been more than 24 hours since Jesse disappeared.” And I really didn’t know Leni. Jesse chose to keep his wife and children away from political life. So there really weren’t many people who knew her well. But as a father of the nation, as a member of the Cabinet, I needed to tell her this bad news. And it’s natural, I suppose, if Leni burst into tears. It would have been good if Leni also expressed anger. Of course, when all of us suddenly lose someone, we ask, “Why, why, why?” But Leni was very strong, she listened to the information we had gathered.

And truly, from that time on, from when Jesse’s body was recovered, decomposition had already begun when Jesse’s body was found. I told Leni, “Leni, wouldn’t it be better to just remember Jesse when he was alive than to see the state of his body now? Let that be his memory?” She said, “I really need to see him.” So we went with her to the morgue, and she looked. I was a friend of Jesse, and I had been with him for a long time, but his wife had just celebrated their 25th anniversary. Then to see it, suddenly, it was really… I can still see it in my mind, what Jesse looked like during that time.

Now, when the 2013 elections came, her constituents said, “Can you run for congressman?” Leni could have said at that time, “Why are you asking us again, can’t someone else run?” She was convinced by her fellow townspeople that she was the unifying factor, she had a strong opponent, a family that had been in politics in their area for a long time. Even borrowing a sound system was difficult, they said they wouldn’t lend the plaza if they went to a barangay, they wouldn’t lend the covered court. But the will of the people prevailed there and Leni won by a large margin.

In 2016, she could seek re-election. Most likely, running would be easier there. But we need her, and again, I pleaded, Mar pleaded, many pleaded with her, “Leni, you really seem to be the most suitable to run as Vice President.” Let us just remember, the Vice President is not a spare tire. The qualifications of the President should also be the qualifications of the Vice President. Because if the President is suddenly called upon, his Vice President must immediately be able to fill his position. And I, from what I have seen in her sincerity, her diligence, her strength of will, Leni Robredo is truly well prepared. That’s why I am earnestly asking, let us help Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo thoroughly. [Applause]

My Bosses, you have given me only 91 days remaining in my mandate. When noon strikes on June 30th, I will be just an ordinary Filipino once more. I will no longer be in a position where you can call on me at any time and I am ready to help and assist you. But what is important is that I am at peace knowing that I will leave you in good hands, and those are the hands of Mar and Leni, who can serve you, fight for you, and truly be true to you, not just in the future, but in the present and even in the past, they have always been true to you.

They are the ones who will continue the Straight Path. My appeal to Mar and Leni, and to all of us: It is not enough to simply vote for them. Let us just remember: Everything that is important is earned through hard work. Therefore, let us elect them, campaign for them, fight for them, because they are the ones who will fight for us. That is my earnest request to each and every one of you today. [Applause]

I will be honest with you: Some advised me, “Just be practical.” Just keep quiet, so that I will no longer be noticed, especially by those we have stepped on. They say that their anger towards us might not increase—many have been affected by their livelihood because we pursued what is right. But we worked hard for the successes we have achieved. There is no place in the entire Philippines where I cannot go because I am ashamed of our performance there. We have a lot to be proud of everywhere. Time, sweat, blood, tears, even lives, we have offered so that we can reach where we are now. Not just our own, but also the hard work of all those who came before us just to reach where we stand today.

Let us not waste this opportunity. We have already sown much, we have already reaped much, but even greater harvests await the Filipino people. That is why I am here, until the last moment of my term, serving you. I will not step down from office, only to tell you afterwards, “You are on your own.” No. Now, I share with you the knowledge I have gathered to guide you in making the right decisions, and to lead us to a more prosperous tomorrow. As always, our direction is in your hands; let us use our rights correctly, and let us elect the right people for the good of our fellow citizens.

Good afternoon. Thank you very much.