Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In his meeting with local leaders and communities of Zambales

[Declared at the Zambales Sports Complex Gymnasium, Iba, Zambales, on April 5, 2016]

Usually, we are introduced to different places. Aside from Subic, this is my fourth time in Zambales. As far as I remember, I was with Governor Ebdane then, my mother visited after Pinatubo. And we really saw how… We in Tarlac were not spared by Pinatubo, right? But here, all the places, it seemed, were covered with a terrifying amount of ashfall and sand.

And to be honest, it seemed like the people during that time were fighters. Their spirit did not break even though Pinatubo erupted.

You know, there's one scene I will never forget: That person—I was telling you this story—was resilient. We really see them standing up and standing up again. But one thing really stuck in my mind: I saw a water buffalo. And that water buffalo—wasn't it covered in grass—hadn't eaten anything for a long time. And I think, that was the first time and, I think, the only time I saw a water buffalo with its ribs showing because it really hadn't eaten anything. Then, it was looking at people and you really felt sorry for the look of this water buffalo because people, right, are being helped by the government; this water buffalo, even if you wanted to feed it, you couldn't find anything around to feed it because it was covered in all that lava flow.

Now, why did I start with that? Because things are really very different now. Earlier, we went around the entire Iba and it's very clear, your economy is really very vibrant. We've seen so many shopping centers here, malls, and all sorts of things being sold and full of people. One store I passed wasn't just selling life vests for going to the beach. Another one, tons of children's vehicles. I said, maybe I haven't been to a mall in a long time, I haven't seen that, but imagine, there's a market in Zambales that I think doesn't have these cheap vehicles. So again: It's a sign of how big and how well your economy is running.

Brothers and sisters, usually in the past, when we go around a place, there are places until this day, as I pass through the convoy, someone will say “Hey, it’s… it’s… it’s…” Until I leave, I suddenly hear from a distance, “Who was that again?” [Laughter] When I'm lucky, especially back then, when I'm introduced, “Son of Ninoy.” Then, when my father was gone, it became “Son of Cory.” After that, “Son of Ninoy and Cory.” The next introduction to me, they would say “Kris’ brother.” [Laughter]

You know, I'm okay with all of that, as long as we know each other. My only problem is, the most important introduction is always forgotten. I said, “When you introduce me like that, you should say ‘Ninoy and Cory’s favorite son.’” [Laughter and applause] Especially those on the left, I passed by them earlier on my way here. That's important. Without a doubt, I really am their favorite son. If you ask “Why?” I have four sisters. So we are sure, favorite son: That's me. [Laughter and applause] With all of this, we are really pleased.

Our term is nearing its end, the mandate you have given us. In just 86 days, I will step down from office. As they say, there is no need for further introductions. But this warm welcome you have given us in all the places we've been to here in Iba, the people on the streets under the heat of the sun, is perhaps… like their greeting to me, I thought I was lost, I ended up in Tarlac. The welcome was so warm, you truly treat me as one of your own. And for me, this seems like a sign of your appreciation for the successes we have achieved together here in Zambales. And again, thank you very much for the opportunity, and for everything we have accomplished. [Applause]

Most likely, this is the last time we will come here, so please allow me to report to all of you on some of the things we have worked on together for your beloved province.

Here, the budget allocated by our predecessor for infrastructure from 2005 to 2010 amounted to P2.19 billion. We, from 2011 to 2016, allocated P6.05 billion for infrastructure—highways, bridges, roads. It is clear that there is a significant difference. [Applause]

Included in that, the Gapan-San Fernando-Olongapo Road Project Phase 2 has been completed. The Olongapo-Bugallon Road and the Dampay Salaza Access Road are nearing completion. [Applause] Especially the one on the left that passes through there, if it doesn't push through, I will join you in complaining to Babes Singson if it isn't finished. But all of Babes Singson’s promises, normally, are ahead of schedule instead of late.

For almost six years, we have repaired and constructed over 18,000 kilometers of national roads and 107,000 linear meters of bridges. Governor Ebdane knows this is significant because he was also formerly the Secretary of Public Works and Highways.

To support our farmers, from 2011 to 2016, we allocated P230 million for the construction of farm-to-market roads, and P362.95 million for irrigation systems.

Again, from 2011 to 2015, we constructed production post-harvest facilities worth P57 million. P22.83 million was also allocated for the development of your Subic Fish Port, which is targeted for completion this October. Of course, someone else will inaugurate it. We will just read about it in the newspapers and watch it on TV during the inauguration, but rest assured, we will be smiling from ear to ear when that project is finished.

In our National Greening Program, the restoration of our forests: 7.19 million seeds have already been planted in almost 12,000 hectares in Zambales. Imagine, when these trees grow, really imagine, Zambales will have many forests again. Nationwide, our National Greening Program targets 1.5 billion seeds to be planted in 1.5 million hectares. Currently, it has generated 3.18 million jobs.

In the Training for Work Scholarship Program, 9,631 have already graduated here in Zambales from 2010 to 2015. They are part of the 9 million course graduates of TESDA in our country. If before, the placement rate of TESDA scholars was 28.5 percent, now the placement rate is 72 percent. What is the placement rate? It means that if you graduated from a TESDA program, you found a job within six months. And before, only 28 percent; now, 72 percent are able to find jobs. [Applause]

If Joel preceded me or if you heard Joel, he often says that after I finish this job, I will apply for a scholarship at TESDA because usually, their graduates earn twice the salary of the President of the Republic of the Philippines. So probably, after one year, that’s where I will ask for a scholarship so I can have a better job. [Applause]

In Zambales, in the field of electricity, NEA—National Electrification Administration—told us that in 2011, 87 of your sitios had no electricity; this March, it was completed: 100 percent of those listed in 2011 are now energized. Nationwide, this is part of the 32,441 sitios identified in the 2011 inventory that now have electricity.

Our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program: 4.6 million households will now be covered by the country's program, from the less than 800,000 households during the time we took office—2010. You know, I was surprised, the former 4Ps member here in Zambales: 1,111. I said, “How did they find that number, 1-1-1-1?” It’s like, I don’t know if you can bet that on the lotto, something like that. Our number, based on Listahanan, where the most needy were listed. A scientific methodology to determine who is most in need, and those are the ones we help.

As we mentioned, those are just some of the accomplishments we achieved under the Straight Path. What we did was simple: we upheld a government that truly fulfills its mandate. And that mandate is: to serve and care for our Bosses, the people. [Applause]

Now, the reforms we made under the Straight Path, we all know, could have been done before, but it didn't happen. For example, we had a turnover of new fire trucks and patrol jeeps to our LGUs just yesterday. And you can see the big change. Secretary Mel reported to us: what we succeeded, because we followed him, he came first. Naturally, their expenses back then should have been cheaper because, right, they said prices were rising, ours should have been higher. But the truth is, there is a type of fire truck with a capacity of 1,000 gallons. They bought their trucks, and the last delivery in 2010 was P9 million per fire truck. Ours, the last ones delivered yesterday, are also 1,000 gallons and have greater capabilities, the cost is not P9 million; the cost is P6 million pesos. I just want to emphasize that. Back then, their fire truck was P9 million. Now, our fire truck is P6 million. [Applause] And they even told us that before, the truck was fitted with an agricultural bomb—that was the water pump during a fire. Ours, however, is a real fire truck.

In terms of capacity, what we bought is truly superior. The capacity of this in pumping water, the machine can pump water while running. It's not the type that hangs. Our vehicle now has a compartment for seven firefighters. I think we all saw the image of a firefighter hanging on a fire truck. Is that right? And he just has to pray that while responding to a disaster, he won't be a victim of the disaster.

Let me give you another example of what we went through. Here in Zambales, Hanjin is located, a large shipbuilding company. This company has provided great help to the country. The number of jobs recorded is 28,462 people. They say that globally, we are now the fourth largest shipbuilding nation, just remember that we are world-class in the field of ship building.

Despite this, whenever we hear the company Hanjin, I still can't help but remember what happened during the time of our predecessors, especially when we were newly appointed and learned about the problems. One of the problems here is that these four companies were given an incentive plan in five locations where our predecessor said that the electricity would not increase. The electricity is permanent—the lowest for 10 years, some reached 15 years, and some even 25 years.

What does that mean? The incentive given, to one of the companies, Hanjin, is that if you set up here, we will guarantee that your electricity will not increase. It sounds good, perhaps all of us who consume electricity, it would be good to be told that electricity will not increase. But it is increasing. Why? There is a part of our so-called energy mix, 42 percent of which we import. We have no control over the price of what we import. We have no control over the price of your expenses, how can you say you can maintain the price of your sale? Is that right?

The result of that, when we took office, we were estimated to pay P42 billion pesos—let me repeat that, P42 billion—to fulfill that promise that should not have been made. We fixed that. We negotiated a lot there, we found a solution so that we wouldn't break our word as a country.

Now, why are we mentioning this? Of course, the election is approaching, many are courting us. If we compare, aren't we all going through life where we have had a crush? We thought, “It would be nice to date this person.” When we got to know them better, we thought, it looks like we'd be okay to date, but it might be difficult to introduce you to my mother and father. Is that right? Not everyone, of course, passes that.

There is one candidate whose statements and promises all seem to depend on who he is talking to. For example: He recently said he would build a hospital in every town. And the question is: Does he even know what that means? What is every town? Because in the Philippines, there are around 1,400 municipalities. You do the math on how much 1,400 hospitals would cost. But building a hospital is relatively simple. The difficult part is the salaries of doctors, nurses, and medical technicians, the medicine to be used, the electricity costs, etc. Then, let's multiply that again by more than 1,400 municipalities. Now the question is: If you have a budget—will you divide it among all the municipalities, or if the municipalities are close together, and the travel isn't too far—wouldn't it be better to have one fully-equipped hospital with all the necessary facilities, personnel, and equipment, and pour all your resources into that, since everyone from all the towns can go there instead of spreading its capabilities thin? Of course, the legitimate question is: Did you think of this before? It sounds good now, but is it really doable? And if it hasn't been thoroughly studied, are you really ready?

There's another candidate who says, “I won’t just continue the 4Ps program, I’ll make it 5Ps.” [Laughter] And while I’m making it 5Ps, I’ll also lower taxes.” There are many women here, I presume many of you are housewives. If your husband comes home and tells you, “Next month, I’m going to reduce your budget. And while I’m reducing your budget, you need to buy more things with that reduced budget.” How many housewives here would agree that’s possible? If there are any, raise your hand, I’ll make you my DBM [Department of Budget and Management]. Fewer people, more can be done. And it’s even more painful that his own son said the 4Ps program should be investigated. Now, he’s going to make it 5Ps. So I think we can ask: Sir, what exactly do you want to happen when you become President?

There's another one who says, just give him three to six months, and he'll solve the crime problem in the entire country. And if he doesn't succeed, he'll resign. You know, I just thought about it: Isn't it that when you run, you're offering yourself, and when you win, you have a contract with the people? That contract, as our elders say, is like marriage: It's not like hot rice that you spit out when you get burned. Once you're there, you promised to solve it, you must fulfill your promise until you're exhausted, right?

For us, we believe that Filipinos make good decisions. We trust the leaders who will continue the Straight Path. One of them, let me start with our good friend—as I call him—Ka Jun, our good Governor Jun Ebdane. You know, we met in November 1986. You'll ask, “Why do I know that so well?” That was the Manila Hotel crisis. Governor Ebdane, during that time, was with the Philippine Constabulary, unlike now. Now he’s a smiling man. Back then, he always had that tiger look. [Applause] Honestly, he’s been through a lot. It’s no exaggeration to say that during the times when there were coups against my mother, Jun Ebdane was one of the strong pillars that prevented those coups from succeeding. [Applause]

There was a joke back in Congress: They say that a congressman, whenever someone asks for a signature, just signs and signs. What my parents taught me is important: if you endorse someone, you need to be able to guarantee them. Considering how far we've come—we're almost reaching three decades. It turns out that in November, it will be three decades since we've known each other, but when we first met, what was I then—let's clarify—just past being a teenager. [Laughter] He, on the other hand, is a graduate of PMA. But anyway, the point is, if we simplify it, how did I get to know Jun Ebdane? It's very simple: When he speaks, I believe I've never heard anything untrue come out of his mouth in three decades. [Applause] I wouldn't say our views on everything have always been the same, but there's one thing I can stand by before you: When Jun Ebdane speaks, truth comes out of his mouth. [Applause] That's why I have a request for you to really bring back to the capitol: Hermogenes Ebdane. [Applause]

Let me talk about this: We went to a rally and perhaps, this is really the summary of what I want to say to all of you. I heard a woman who is a member of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. I heard her in Pampanga. She told her life story: she has seven children. Her husband left her. It was like saying, “You're on your own with our seven children.” She said that because of 4Ps, or the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, three of her seven children have finished high school and have permanent jobs. She said that before, her only source of income was selling things here and there. As I understand it, when someone says 'pantinda-tinda,' it means they don't sell things every day or have something to sell, but sometimes they do.

I don't think that problem is different from many of our countrymen: how do you take care of your children if you don't have a stable job, if you don't have a stable source of income? So she said, let me repeat, because of 4Ps, three of her children finished their studies and now have permanent jobs. If—and this is my question to everyone—this woman came and faced us. And I think here in Zambales, there are also the same stories. She might say to us, “You know, first of all, thank you. You probably don't know, but you've helped us, our family, a lot. You may not know me, you may not have felt that you contributed, but you really did contribute. The lives of these three children of mine are much better because of your help. I still have four children.”

If we all here are asked, “Are you, now that you are clearly helping, are you going to risk the situation where the next four children can also be taken care of, can also be helped? Are we going to change the path we are taking? Can you allow me to continue this help that is not a burden to you?”

Now, many changes have happened in our country. And I was advised many times, since I am about to retire, that I should just keep quiet, not make enemies. If I don’t endorse anyone, everyone is my friend. Isn’t it? Who would want to look for a fight? Who would want to have what is called in English a “conflict”? But I will go back to, like in 2009 and other times in my life, I always remember what my parents taught me. And they told me—especially my mother said it best: If she were called to run in the snap election, why did she decide to run? She said—and I will paraphrase, I will translate it into Tagalog—if she knew she could do something and didn’t do it, and after that, the situation worsened, she said she wouldn’t be able to live with herself again. Like in English: I cannot live with myself.

And I feel the same way. When I was first suggested in 2009, I said, “Wait a moment. You want me to run for President, if I win there, all the problems will be mine, and if I don’t resolve it in a day or two or a week, you will all be angry at me. That’s quite a burden.” I opposed it. I am the one who needs to solve it, then maybe there’s a big chance you won’t be happy. That’s why earlier, in your welcome to me, as we are nearing the end, 86 days left, I really said, it seems you really saw what we can achieve, what we can do together, what we can change in the history and story of our beloved Motherland.

Now, as others say—I will just go back to the story I told you earlier—campaign season. There were many suitors, many admirers, they all tried to sweeten their words, sweeten their actions, sweeten their ads, sweeten their left and right approaches, to get your sweet “yes.” I’m probably not the only one who has courted here. You, I think, have courted, some even succeeded, found their true partner. We have courted many, but of course, the one we married is special. And that’s what we need to decide on. So now, we in our organization, we don’t make promises except for one thing: We will continue what is happening in our country. All the changes, all the return to the right path, we will continue it. That’s the simple promise. [Applause]

The promise of this organization, I will repeat, is not a promise from the air; a promise that has already shown you proof for six years. Let us remember, in 2010, before that, newspapers, TV, there were always stories about how many Filipinos were leaving the Philippines. Now our story is, our fellow OFWs are returning, and that’s what should happen.

But I will return to this: Who should we choose here? I already mentioned it. I ask you, examine everything that all the contenders are saying, and I believe you will reach the same conclusion as mine. I asked all the candidates. Why did I decide to intervene, instead of just keeping silent? Because I don't want all that we've done in six years to be wasted. I don't want us to go back and believe that the tragedy we experienced in the past is the fate of the Filipino, that is the destiny of the Filipino. No. What is happening now, I believe, is the beginning of the true destiny of the Filipino. Who will continue this? In my view, there is no one but Mar Roxas. [Applause]

Let's examine, you will ask: Why Mar Roxas? Wasn't he with us from the very beginning in traversing this Straight Path? There are many out there, maybe more popular than him, more known to you because whenever there's a disaster, they rush there for a photo opportunity, handing out a relief good, it's in our minds. Not good at speaking, sometimes good at speaking, but very talkative, packed with all issues so it's immediately with us.

Mar Roxas, let's differentiate. Mar Roxas works and works, fulfills his promises. When the Zamboanga incident happened, was I the first one there? No. He was the first, along with the Secretary of National Defense. When Yolanda happened, he was there too. When did they arrive? Before Yolanda even hit. When did they leave? Weeks were spent until it was organized, especially in Leyte. Zamboanga, he didn't leave until the attacks of the rogue MNLF subsided. Repeatedly, there are so many stories like that.

Does Mar have the ability? They always say, vote for me, we will have new jobs. Mar, what is the proof? He was the one who thought of bringing the BPO industry, the call centers, to the Philippines. Where is the BPO that he started now? This year, we expect 1.3 million employees in the BPO sector. How much has it contributed to the economy? $25 billion. Let me repeat: $25 billion was brought to our economy. The members of the BPO are almost like OFWs in the Philippines who work here and not abroad.

Perhaps the main reason, all of us here don't boast. We didn't steal, that's why we can afford to buy all the ads on TV. But I believe there is proof of where we went. Everything we've done, why did PhilHealth expand? Why are there more roads? Why did TESDA become stronger? All of that, is because of good governance. Not just for show, but real hard work every day to maximize the opportunities for all Filipinos. That is the Straight Path. [Applause]

As for our opponents… I'll simplify it. I've spoken for a while now, I apologize. I took advantage of my last opportunity with you. Our opponents, everything they can do is promise. We, I believe, have proof. So that's the question: Do we stay here with what we've done and can still do? Or do we go to the other side with “maybe”? Maybe they'll continue, maybe what they say is true, maybe. There are so many “maybes” over there.

And I'll just go back to this: For me, when I vote, I'll look at the image of a mother raising seven children. Can I risk the future of her remaining four children who haven't yet received the opportunity to improve their lives? Can I risk the health of 93 million current PhilHealth members because the direction will be changed again? There are many “maybes,” maybe they will improve. With Mar Roxas here, I can tell you, he guarantees and surely will continue the Straight Path. [Applause]

As for Leni Robredo. We voted for Mar, we didn't include Leni, later on, where will we end up? It's very simple: The Vice President of the Republic has qualifications just as important as the President. Because in an instant, in a moment, the President could be gone. We need, if that's the decision—to continue the Straight Path? This is a referendum. Or will we stop it? Vote for Mar, include Leni, we are sure that what is happening will continue. [Applause] Of course, include Jun Ebdane. [Applause] Maybe we'll look for how we can carry everything that needs to be carried?

You know earlier, your Governor, is a truly hardworking person. So, they are already doing the additions to the President Magsaysay Memorial Hospital. While it's being done, he said it's not enough. I said, that's what a hardworking person does. We haven't even finished it, and it's already not enough. [Applause] Do you want it to be so much that nothing fits?

You know, before, we were told that all barangays in the Philippines have electricity. So we thought, “Wow, the whole Philippines has electricity!” You saw the report I gave you earlier: 32,000 sitios don't have it because apparently, they said that once it's connected to the barangay hall, the barangay has electricity, they just whispered about the “hall.” It wasn't the whole barangay. And what's painful is that the 32,000—it's almost 36,000 now—some weren't connected to the grid, some are solar power, and others used renewable energy.

Please excuse me, I really spoke for a long time. First of all, I thank you all. And let me say again to all of you that we forced ourselves to do everything we could to make true what I told you: “I will leave it far better than I found it.” Because you trusted us and I really had the honor of leading a generation, a race that is truly admirable of the Filipino people.

There is nothing we cannot achieve as long as we are united and truly decide to do things properly, right? To examine all promises. But of course, I will go back to… You know, you might say I'm getting married so I always talk about getting married, right? [Applause] That is still my ambition. But truthfully, when we vote, it's not a marriage for life, but it's a commitment for six years, right? If the decision is right, we wake up every day smiling, right? If the decision is wrong, we don't want to wake up every day, right? Because “What new problem will happen again?” So let me repeat: It's very important. It's probably clear, not just “Okay, just six years.” No. We spent six years, what changes happened in the Philippines? If something happened, maybe we'll say, “Continue the Straight Path.” If nothing changed, if your condition worsened, well, you fire us. That's your right.

I humbly request that we use our rights, our power, to truly work together to further maximize opportunities for every Filipino. And with your permission, allow me to introduce to you next, the next President of the Republic of the Philippines, none other than Mar Roxas.