Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In his meeting with local leaders and communities of Batangas

[Delivered at the San Pascual Multipurpose Gym, Bauan, Batangas, on April 21, 2016]

Of course, we are in campaign mode, it is my job to convince [people], but with the warmth of your welcome, with the intensity of your applause, I am thinking, who else would I convince here? [Applause]

But perhaps it would be good if I told you a story. I will take advantage of this opportunity. I am about to say goodbye to you, I will tell my story of where we have reached.

You know, yesterday, I was at the graduation of Manuel L. Quezon University. Well, during the graduation, they gave me an Honorary Degree, there was a robe to wear, and then there was the donning of the cap and the hood. Those who wore it on me weren't very experienced, and I wasn't used to it either. So when they were putting it on, I said, “I don’t think this is right.” Someone stood up on the stage and said, “It’s backwards, backwards.” But it was okay. What was important there was that our good governance program was recognized, so we were given the honor.

What should I tell you first? My first run was as a congressman, second district of Tarlac. And there, they have what they call Kalye Onse (Street Eleven). At first, I said, “This Street Eleven is really long.” There was one barangay, they took me to Kalye Onse, the next barangay, there was another Kalye Onse. Almost every barangay we went to had a Kalye Onse. I said, “This name is really long, and why didn’t they think of any other name besides Kalye Onse? Shouldn’t a street normally honor a person?” It turned out that it was actually our slang in Tarlac. Kalye Onse refers to all the houses along the train tracks, so you know, train tracks have two rails side by side, so that’s why it’s called Onse (Eleven). [Laughter]

But that, and that really stuck with me, when we were campaigning, going house to house, I spoke to a woman who said to me, “You know, to be honest, no matter who runs, gets elected, after their term, when they were campaigning, we were poor, when they were in office, we were still poor, when they left, we were still poor.” And there’s some truth to what she said.

So what’s my point, why am I telling you this? When I was offered, asked, challenged to run in 2010, I first had to answer in my mind, “If I stand there, give in to the people, become President, and nothing changes, then I shouldn’t bother.” It’s like a merry-go-round: you sit, you ride, you go around and around. When it’s over, you’re back where you started. I shouldn’t bother. This is just a foolish thing we’re doing. We should have a conscience about the people we’re giving false hope to who gain nothing.

So, I think that's a good place to start. What have we gained from treading the Straight Path? I need this code, there are too many of them, the ones we remember.

Okay, one thing, let me use this for a moment, this paper is quite thick. Here in Batangas, what have we gained from the Straight Path? Perhaps 4Ps, let's talk about it. Earlier, someone spoke, a member of 4Ps, right? Okay, regarding the 4Ps: Batangas, we can't say we were lucky back then. In 2010, when we took office, the number of families or households who were members of 4Ps in 2010 was zero. Not a single household in the entire province of Batangas was a member of 4Ps. On the Straight Path, we are now helping 89,000 households and that happened because you made the choice to tread the Straight Path. [Applause] Sorry, just to be exact: 86,999 are our beneficiary households in Pantawid. They are part of the 4.6 million households we are currently helping. And because of this program, an estimated 7.7 million of our countrymen are being lifted out of poverty.

When I was a congressman, yearly, the National Budget could support, the construction of schools: 8,000—to be divided among the entire Philippines. So if you were a congressman, you went home with 10 classrooms, you were great. If you got 12, you were really great. In Batangas alone… So 8,000 a year right? You gave me 6 years. 8,000 times 6, right, 48,000 classrooms. But we lacked 66,800. When I finished my term, I still had a debt. That wouldn't do. I told you, what we leave behind will be far better than what we inherited. So because you gave me a chance, you helped me, what was the result? In Batangas alone: Not 8, 10, 12 classrooms, 4,087 classrooms have been built and are currently being built—included in the 185,000 classrooms we have built and are building throughout the Philippines. [Applause]

Let's move on to health. The DOH, Department of Health, has allocated at least P309.89 million for the Health Facilities Enhancement Program. What does that mean? We have a barangay health station, when you go there, usually there's a table, a chair, maybe a midwife, maybe a nurse. When you go there, you get a consultation, the nurse or midwife will examine you, there are no instruments, you can't get your temperature, weight, blood pressure checked. In other words, the chairs and tables in barangay health stations in many places are places for you to chat. But that's a barangay health station. So this P309 million was used to buy instruments, and also to help provide midwives, nurses, doctors to all our health facilities. Again, just in Batangas: P309.89 million.

In Batangas as well, 2.54 million Batangueños are now members of PhilHealth—almost 96 percent, as I was told. [Applause] Throughout the Philippines: 93 million Filipinos are now PhilHealth members. Earlier, I think with the 4Ps beneficiary, her child got sick with a kidney ailment, and PhilHealth reportedly helped them.

In the field of the economy: There’s what’s called the First Philippine Industrial Park. It’s in Sto. Tomas, Batangas, right? When we assumed office, there were 52 companies there. Now: there are 106 companies there providing jobs for our countrymen. During my first visit there, there were still many wide-open spaces that were undeveloped. During my last visit, I asked, “Can we still expand here?” They said, “Yes.” Then they pointed, it was quite far. And what they were pointing to wasn’t flat anymore, it was hilly, somewhat mountainous. They said it was already at its limit. So now there are 106, 52 before, meaning 54 companies were established during our term. We surpassed the three administrations before us, which only established 52 companies. Again, you made that happen. [Applause]

In the field of infrastructure: The budget allocated for Batangas, 2005 to 2010, before our time: P4.33 billion. From 2011 to 2016, when we were already in office: P16.49 billion, more than four times the budget you had, I think. [Applause]

Earlier, we inaugurated the Lipa-Alaminos Road. That’s included in the more than 18,500 kilometers of national roads that we have built, along with 107,500 linear meters of bridges. I’m adding that, it’s already completed. The current project, we are also nearing completion near Batangas City. The Batangas Port is getting busier. The problem is, when the cargo from ships is unloaded, it causes traffic in Batangas City, affecting everyone.

So, Secretary Singson has already started the Batangas City Bypass Road so that it will go directly from the pier, connecting to STAR, so as not to disturb the people of Batangas City with traffic. But I repeat, it is just starting, we are already in the parcillary survey. What is the actual route, who are the landowners, so that we can start acquiring the right of way. I only have 70 days left, I will no longer see its completion.

Let's add this: There is another road, Lobo-San Juan. This is like a coastal road and both ends have been started, they will meet. What is the benefit to Batangas? Many of them have very beautiful coastlines for tourism. It will be easier to go here, there will be developers of resorts, there will be additional jobs for the Batangueños and we know that every foreign tourist who arrives in the Philippines, it is estimated that one job is created. Now, approximately, we will reach 6 million foreign tourist arrivals in the Philippines this year. That is what will happen next here in Batangas. [Applause]

In agriculture: We already have farm-to-market roads and irrigation, worth P1.6 billion. There are also four intercropping sites in Balete, Lobo, Lipa and San Juan. What are intercropping sites? For those who plant coconuts, when they plant coconuts, one hectare, I was told, the income if only copra is sold is P20,000 per year. It's a little small. So when we analyze, who is the poorest sector of farmers? It's always those who plant coconuts.

What is intercropping? The space between the trees will be planted with corn, coffee, cocoa and others. If coffee is planted, it is estimated that the income will be from P20,000 to P170,000 plus per hectare, per year. That's far from P20,000. This is already being pilot tested and, four areas here in Batangas are included in the testing program.

My fellow countrymen, perhaps it's fitting that I'm here in Batangas, saying goodbye. During the snap election, for 11 days out of the 45 days, I was here in Batangas campaigning for my mother. So here, we can say, is where I truly honed my skills in national campaigning. I will also end here, and I suppose that's what we call “come full circle.”

It's important, I think, to explain what we tried to do in six years. The easiest way for me to explain it is what happened in a town in Negros Occidental that we visited recently. The name of that town is Talisay. The airport of Bacolod City before was in Bacolod. It has now been moved to Silay. And when we arrived at the new airport, I spoke with their good governor, Freddie Marañon. I said, “Manong Freddie, when you exit this airport, if you're not from around here, you'll get lost. It's important that the airport is easy to get to, easy to leave. So maybe he needs a new road here.” You know, because Governor Marañon is a reasonable person to talk to, he said to me, “We will do that. We have funds.”

I just want to say that Governor Marañon is not exploitative. The President offered, do you need a road here, even if you already have funds, others would say, “We need it.” Then they will transfer the funds to something else. Why am I telling you this?

From Silay, passing through Talisay, reaching Bacolod City. Let's just talk about Talisay. The government built a road there, formerly just farmlands. Talisay, a typical municipality, right, all activities in the town, around the municipality. Then nothing. Because the road was opened, Ayala Corporation and Megaworld thought it looked like a good place to develop. What did they do? They bought land. They bought land, fenced it off. Because of the land purchases, the value of the land has increased there now. Because the value increased, the Real Property Tax, the amount collected by the government, also increased.

Because their collections increased, where did the Talisay government put the money? It was reported to us that they placed it in what they call the Special Education Fund. What is the Special Education Fund? Because of this, teachers assigned to remote, far-flung areas received increased allowances. With that additional funding, they were able to buy their own school bus, build their own buildings, and buy computers, IT equipment. They also have a feeding program for kindergarten through grade 3 every day there is class—because that is where there is the highest chance of students not continuing their education due to poor health. They also increased the students’ supplies.

So what I want to emphasize here is: the government should do what is right, with roads in good condition. Then, cooperate with the private sector, and the changes lifted are huge. Now, Ayala and Megaworld have only built fences, and that’s already the result. When the time comes that their development is finished there, they will build buildings, factories, call centers, malls, and various others, right? Of course, the economy of Talisay will grow even more. Of course, the government’s capacity to meet the needs of its constituents will increase. Of course, it will add opportunities for our countrymen to have decent jobs.

So on the Straight Path, I promised you, when I leave, it will be far better than what I found. And that’s what we worked on. And we didn’t work on things one by one. It wasn’t my habit, nor that of my ten colleagues in the cabinet and in the legislature, to… You know, when I was first a congressman, it was like my predecessor, who has already passed away, had roads that needed to be built. Instead of roads being built, they prioritized a waiting shed. So the waiting shed came before the road, in a place with no road, no one would use the waiting shed. No vehicles would pass through there. I said, this is really great.

Here in Batangas, don’t be offended, there’s a road, Ternate-Nasugbu. It only took a short time, it’s only six kilometers. But we did 18,500 plus kilometers across the country in 6 years. The 6 kilometers of Ternate-Nasugbu took only a short time: two decades. 20 years to complete the 6 kilometer road. I was told that many were interested in the rising value of the land, left and right, so the project wasn’t continued until all the land along the road was bought. That wasn’t the Straight Path.

So what is the point? My father said, maybe that's where we should start: The first freedom that needs to be achieved is freedom from hunger. If you are not free from hunger, if you are always thinking about where you will get your next meal, freedom of assembly, freedom of religion, freedom of the press, freedom of information, all those freedoms are meaningless. And I, my training is as an economist. I also believe in the saying, “Instead of giving a man a fish, teach him how to fish.” How did we do that?

Our school population in 2008 reached approximately 2.9 million out-of-school youth. Now, there are only 1.2 million out-of-school youth and we are still working to get them back in school.

What is Pantawid Pamilya? The condition: Keep your child in school, and the state will help you. We increased it, it wasn't just grade school in 2014, but also high school, because the government has the capacity to fund until high school. In 2015, we graduated the first batch of over 300,000 who were supported by this program. Once they finish high school—according to a study by PIDS, which is a think tank—the difference in salary between a high school graduate and a grade school graduate is 40 percent. Now we are also helping some college students who are beneficiaries of 4Ps. If the government's capacity increases, why wouldn't we be able to help everyone who wants to go to college, to finish college? We funded their education, we improved their health, what else did we do?

In the past, it was a tragedy, there were students. The first popular course was Physical Occupational Therapy. A four-year course, took the board exam, spent five years. After spending those five years, and the expenses to study, they expected to enter a job they trained for. After graduating, those jobs—Physical Occupational Therapy—were gone. They switched to Nursing—because the course was hot at the time, it was Nursing. Parents would spend half a million pesos at the very least to educate their child in nursing. Another four years, then another five for the board exam, they passed, got a license, and there were no jobs in nursing. That was the tragedy.

So what did we do? We wanted to reverse that. That means, we spoke with the industry. What kind of workers do you need two years from now? Four years from now? Six years from now?

Or, TESDA helped 9 million course graduates. When we came in, the number who found jobs after graduation: 28 percent. Now, the average: 72 percent. In some sectors, 90 to 96 percent, it’s like once you enter TESDA, you’re guaranteed a job, and that job isn’t just for a decade. The definition, the placement rate is 6 months after you graduate, you already have a job. That is the Straight Path.

But let me repeat, perhaps this is the summary of the message: Everything we are doing now could have been done before but wasn’t done. Here with you in Batangas, let me repeat. Are there poor people in Batangas? There are. Have they only become poor now? No. Now, we are helping: 86,900 plus. Before, not a single one was helped. Before, the slogan of the one I replaced was, “Cares.” Has compassion. But I think, we didn’t use “We Care” as our slogan. But you truly feel that we have compassion for all of you. Our ambition: to maximize the opportunity for every Filipino to truly improve their lives.

Now, I’ll go back to the story Mel Sarmiento told. Mel is a mayor in Calbayog, and sometimes, he is invited to speak at international gatherings. So he said, his story, maybe some of you have heard it, I don’t know, Mayor, maybe you’ve heard it. He said he went to the airport in another country, and the person in front of him was from Japan. They looked at the passport. “Oh, you’re from Japan. Welcome, please enter.” Then someone from Singapore arrived, “Oh, from Singapore. We’re so pleased to greet you, please enter.” Then Mel Sarmiento arrived, showed his passport, Philippine passport, “Wow, from the Philippines.” They looked at Mel’s face, looked down to his feet, looked back at the top of his head, back and forth, looked at the photo. When they were satisfied that the photo and Mel were the same, they asked, “Purpose of visit?” He said, “I’m invited to speak at this conference.” “Proof of the invitation?” He was really put through a hard time. He was let in, though.

He arrived at the conference. Of course, when you're there, you mingle with different mayors from various parts of the world. They say that when the one from the Philippines moves around, the other mayors distance themselves because they believe that once the Filipino is there, they will ask for an ambulance, ask for a fire truck, ask for this and that. That was back then.

On the Straight Path, Mel was the one distributing patrol vehicles and fire trucks throughout the Philippines. [Applause] I told him, you're not alone, partner. When I, your newly elected President, visited, my first obligation when going abroad was to visit the ASEAN members. You need to visit nine countries. That's the courtesy, you introduce yourself to your fellow Heads of Government of ASEAN. And not just ASEAN, there are other countries, I won't mention which ones. But honestly, I really felt it and it was a little painful for me, of course we Filipinos are proud. When they faced me, it felt like they were just obliging me. It felt like they were obligated to talk to me. There were even two of them who were lecturing me. They said the Philippines should be like this, the Philippines should be like that. But we didn't have anything to be proud of yet. I just swallowed it for the time being. That was then.

We had a conference, the one where I really had a hard time talking to, a waste of time. He said to me, “Mr. President,” he said, “President Aquino, the Philippines grew by…”—during that time, our GDP growth was around 6.8 percent, theirs was 1.2 percent—”Your economy grew by 6.8 percent. Ours grew by 1.2 percent. What is the secret?” Well, somewhat, isn't it said in English, “He used to be eyeing us.” Did you know what “eyeing us” means? They used to look down on us. [Laughter] Now, they are asking us for advice on what to do. [Applause]

Of course, I just said, “You're still catching up to us, we'll give you the secret.” So I just said, “Well, we're copying you.” And he was pleased, the conversation stopped. That's how it is now. So before, we admit that in the past, we were the Sick Man of Asia. But now, we are Asia’s Bright Spot, Asia’s Rising Tiger.

Let me just reiterate: How did we reach this point? Because of you. Why? You gave me the opportunity, you believed in what we were thinking. And while I was in office, I had peace of mind, no matter what challenges I faced, you were behind me. We can overcome any challenge. That's why we have these results now. [Applause]

I just looked at my watch because I remembered my mother. My mother said the other day, even during the snap election, “Just a reminder to you. You are not a candidate so don’t speak too long.” [Laughter] I don’t want to get scolded by her at my age.

Perhaps, what I want to leave with you is very simple. Everything we’ve accomplished, could have been accomplished by those before me, but they didn’t do it. Their motives were different, their direction was different. They just wanted to stay in power, that’s it. When something is achieved, they would say, “Our unemployment rate has improved.” That is true. How was it done? During the survey period, they hired street sweepers, right? So there’s a job, you’re listed, you have a job. When the survey was finished, that number was no longer needed, and the job was gone again.

We changed that. If we help, let’s really make it long-term. Now, perhaps it’s good to discuss this. Is the job of the President of the Republic of the Philippines easy? Everyone who believes it’s easy, just raise your hand. That’s it. In the next election, I will campaign for you. [Laughter]

Sample of a problem: As soon as I sat down, there was trouble on the Korean Peninsula: North and South Korea, a South Korean ship was sunk or seemingly torpedoed [torpedo] actually, and a South Korean island was shelled. What our media was saying: War was about to break out in North and South Korea. What was our problem with that? Our problem during that time in 2010: 50,000. Again, please: 50,000 Filipinos were in South Korea. If a war broke out, they would be affected. In North Korea, I was surprised, there were also Filipinos: 9 Filipinos in North Korea. I said, “What are they doing in North Korea?” It turns out they were members of the UN, that’s where they really were.

The problem is, if a conflict breaks out there, it is my obligation, the obligation of our government, to protect our countrymen. Right? We need to evacuate them, bring them, keep them out of danger. What did we have during that time? I asked our Armed Forces, “How will we retrieve our countrymen? Do we have any planes we can use?” “Yes, sir.” “What kind?” “C-130.” Okay. “How many people can it carry?” “100.” “100 what?” “100 people per flight.” You do the math. 50,000, 100 people per flight, how long will that take? The trip is four hours to get there, two hours to load, four hours back. So, ten hours. Of course, when there’s fighting in times like these, it might be over in just a few days.

I said, “What else can we use?” “We have ships, sir.” “How many can they carry?” “1,000.” Well, the situation is getting better. “How long is the trip?” “10 days.” [Laughter] I didn’t ask if that was 10 days to get there and 10 days back. Of course, as the leader, I need to remain optimistic, but that was the truth. One plane to retrieve our 50,000 countrymen in South Korea. In short, it was a good thing the conflict didn’t happen. But if a conflict had occurred, we had a country nearby where we could bring our countrymen. It was like the plan was complete.

Back then, we had one C-130. What I’m leaving with you now are four. There’s another one coming, which will make it five C-130s. [Applause] What’s the use of that? Whenever there’s a typhoon, we’re an archipelago, there’s a problem on one island, we can send aid immediately, to supplement what is already prepositioned.

Airplane: You’ve probably seen the FA-50 already. Our last jet we operated before this was in 2005. Now, we have two of these new Lead-In Fighter Trainers. Next year, their 10 siblings will arrive, and we will have 12 Lead-In Fighter Aircraft. How did we do it? When we were in Congress, if you bought just one C-130, we probably didn’t have enough funds for it. Now, what has been added is four. Then the Fighter jets, the last one was in 2005, I arrived in 2010, now, the 2 have been delivered, with 10 more coming next year.

Business, jobs: We met someone in America, I can’t mention the name of his company. There’s a need to announce it first in their country before announcing it here. This foreign company’s workers in China: 600,000 workers. He wants to transfer some of their operations here, for example, many of their operations. He watched the Philippines, it was being talked about, he hasn’t visited the Philippines yet, he said, “Why shouldn’t I try the Philippines?” The company owner has already made two trips here. They are now almost finished, they call it due diligence. Simply put, we met last week, I think. I said, “You’re back. Must be good news.” He looked at me and said, “I think so.” That means 10 percent of the 600,000. That’s 60,000 additional jobs for Filipinos. But the better news is that their product is high-tech. Okay, he doesn’t just want to bring the jobs here, not just the manufacturing here, but also the research. He also wants to bring the Research and Development here in the Philippines because he believes Filipinos are capable. That’s how they see us now. [Applause]

We only have about five minutes left. So colleagues, I think you remember, when I first ran, I never promised you anything. “Elect me, and within 6 years, I will erase all your problems.” If I told you that, I wouldn’t have respected you. That’s flattery, right? A young person, to maximize their opportunity, is studying now, and when they graduate, they will have a job. When they have a job, they can help their family.

Let me give you an example. There’s a woman in Pampanga, she has seven children, and her husband left her. Her job is selling things. You Tagalogs, right, when you say “nagtitinda-tinda,” it’s like she doesn’t always sell, it’s like sometimes. When you say “What’s your job?” “I sell things.” Right, it’s permanent. When you say “What’s your job?” “Patinda-tinda.” It’s not permanent. So there are many situations like that. Seven children, how can she support them? She said that because of 4Ps, her three children have finished high school and have permanent jobs. There are four more she needs to send to school. I think if she were given the opportunity, she would come here now and tell all of you, “When you gave us the chance to take the Straight Path, that became the path for us to have light in our lives.”

Now, what if he comes back here again? He said, “You already helped me with my three children, I think, you didn't feel it, you didn't directly take from your own pockets to help me. But your help was significant. I still have four more that I need help with.” Who among us here could be stingy? When we are not being inconvenienced, we are not burdened, we are helping others, just a little help for the remaining four, and they will be able to stand on their own feet.

Now, perhaps this is the last thing I want to leave with you. It is difficult to be the leader of the Republic. Question: Who is qualified? Let me explain. You want to, you thought about setting up a business, the business you thought of, a restaurant. Of course, the first thing you need to do is ensure you have delicious food so that customers will really come back, right? To have delicious food, you need a good cook. You hire employees, people apply. Let's say someone applied. “What is your educational attainment?” Mechanic. But he's good at making people laugh, or somewhat attention-grabbing when he opens his mouth, or good at dancing, good at singing. Just any reason, except for “do you know how to cook,” you hired him. You forced the mechanic to be a cook, the food was bad, you had no customers, your business failed. Who would you blame? The mechanic? Or you who hired the mechanic? Isn't that right?

Now, if we say qualified, let me mention Mar Roxas. His opponents, one opponent, said, “If you elect me, millions of jobs every year.” They make promises, Mar Roxas, the BPO industry, he was the one who thought of that. The direct workers this year: 1.3 million Filipinos—working in the BPO that Mar Roxas thought of. What is added to our economy? $25 billion.

What else is added to that? Of course, those in the call centers, there are convenience stores: 7-11, Selects. Someone needs to staff them: additional employees. There is transportation, taxis going there, there are drivers: additional jobs. The indirect employment created by the BPO: three to four people. There is one million direct—1.3 million—let's multiply that by 3 or 4, that is how many have benefited from what Mar thought of pushing here in our Motherland, this BPO industry. I repeat, others promise jobs, Mar has created them, they are already being enjoyed. [Applause]

Some people say that someone spoke, that he will stop crime. Just give him 3 to 6 months, and if he doesn't succeed, he will resign. When I heard that, I said, “Just a moment.” I remembered the saying of the elders, “A marriage is not like hot rice that, when burned, you spit out.” If you find it difficult, you don't want it anymore. Goodbye. But no, it's not like that. This is like a marriage, someone will stand, will ask for your mandate, and once you grant it, you are both bound for six years. Is that right? But they say he has changed what he said now. He will just suppress it, he will no longer stop it, that's the promise.

Mar Roxas started Lambat Bitag, One Time Big Time, Oplan Katok. Let me just explain. Oplan Katok: It's very simple, there are licensed firearms, before the 2013 elections, they went to the houses of all the people who said, we live here and we have a gun. If the license is expired, renew it. It was discovered there, the house they said they lived in or the office was fictitious—there was no one in that house. We have been pursuing 60,000 loose firearms since 2013. Who thought of that? These loose firearms, the start of the process of who bought them? To whom were they passed? Remove the gun from the hands of bad elements, reduce the crime rate.

The One Time Big Time operations that Mel continues, when there are warrants of arrest, they arrest everyone in a town at once, not on an installment plan. What that means is, when the police arrive, they serve the warrant of arrest, there is no chance for others to be tipped off, “Hey, there's an operation, let's hide first.” Result: many Most Wanted individuals have been arrested, and the mastermind, the network, can no longer commit crimes because there is no command. Mar Roxas already did this.

Let's go to Leni. We all know how strong Leni's character is. Leni studied to become a lawyer, she could have chosen and could have entered law firms in Makati, where she could have earned money. But that's not what she chose, she started as a public attorney. After that, she helped an NGO for 15 years, helping those on the margins of society. In this run of hers, she could have just run for reelection, it might have been easier. We pleaded with her, “Leni, we need you.” We need someone we can trust, that if something happens to the President, she is more than capable of stepping up and following in his footsteps and continuing what we are doing.

So, let me repeat, and with emphasis, in my view, Mar Roxas is qualified. Leni Robredo is qualified.

Later, when you get home, just try this. Get a piece of paper, get a pencil, “Grace Poe is qualified because ________.” Write down the reason. “Jejomar Binay is qualified because ________.” “Digong Duterte is qualified because ________.” If you can’t fill in the blank, well, I think we should think about it.

Let's repeat: Paolo said it earlier, how long will we vote for? The exchange is six years. And that's a sure exchange. But what if it's like during Martial Law? Given two terms, eight years, then stopped for 13 years, exceeding his two terms. You probably shouldn't think about how important it is to put someone deserving in place. It's simple for me, judge for yourselves, has our journey on the Straight Path benefited you? Has the Philippines changed? Are we far from where we were? If the answer is “Yes”, we should help Mar and Leni [applause] and I’ll include my request: Vote. Thank you. But I think this is our all’s future. And in a democratic system, the majority decides for everyone. We need to multiply our numbers. For that to happen, let's campaign for the one who will truly continue our journey on the Straight Path. [Applause]

I am not joking when I look at my watch, because I feel like I see my mother in front of me.

So, this is how it is. First, I wanted to say goodbye to all of you. I want to thank you from the deepest part of my heart, because it is truly an honor and a privilege to serve the Filipino people. Through all the trials I've faced, during times when others wondered why I was so strong, I told them there are two reasons: First, I have a God I believe in who has a good plan for all of us. But the other consideration, just as important, is that I am sure that when we do what is right, the people are behind us and we will overcome whatever difficulties and problems we are currently facing. So, I will repeat to you: Thank you very much for the opportunity you have given me. [Applause]

Now, this is really the last time. Currently, Kris and my two nephews are living with me. As you know, I am not married, of course I don't have a child. Bimby is just nine years old. But I am a human being, so when there are days when the problems you carry feel heavy, when you are tired, just playing with the child, talking to him, reminds me of my ambition. The most tragic thing that could happen to this child when he grows up is if he goes through all the problems I went through when I was growing up. That doesn't have to happen. We can definitely continue this Straight Path we are taking so that the next generation will look at us and say, “Thank you for the legacy you left, which is far better than what they inherited.”

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.