Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

During his meeting with local leaders and communities of Kawit, Cavite

[Declared in Kawit, Cavite, on April 1, 2016]

On that day, Martial Law arrived, and gatherings of people were prohibited. If more than three people gathered, it was considered an “illegal assembly.” A time came when there was an election somehow. But when my father was assassinated, that’s when many people started rallying. One of the first rallies in 1984 was in Cebu.

In 1984, there was a Senator in Cebu who arrived late to the rally. When he arrived, the people he found in the plaza were only three. He said to the emcee, “Should I still speak, there are only three people left?” [Laughter] The emcee said to him, “He knows, maybe you are the only one they are waiting for. We haven’t convinced these three yet. Why don’t you try.”

Let's say you saw three people you wanted to talk to, what would you do? Would you go on stage or just approach them? Well, he hasn't held a microphone in a long time. He went on stage and gave a speech to talk to the three people in the plaza.

Midway through the speech, one person stood up. He looked at the emcee, “Sir, it seems you’ve convinced him. Continue, there are only two left.” [Laughter] As he was finishing his speech, another person stood up. So there was only one person left in the plaza talking to him. He said, “What now?” “Sir, everyone you talked to wasn’t convinced. You were the only one they were waiting for. Please continue. Once we get the last one, we’ll be one hundred percent.”

His speech finished, he wasn't left alone. He approached him and said, “Bro, are you convinced now?” The reply was, “Sir, even before you arrived, I was already convinced.” “Really?” “Yes. I was the one who lent you the sound system you’re using. [Laughter] Now that you’re finished, if it’s okay, I’ll pack it up. I’m going home.”

Why is that my problem now? Because I saw this sister here. We’ve been together since 2010. Maybe even since 2007, I was with you too. Maybe even my mother was with you too! How do you convince someone who is already convinced? That’s the problem. We’ll still try. Maybe we can help you teach those who aren’t here who aren’t yet convinced. That’s our job now.

If it weren't cloudy today, instead of giving a speech, I would have just sung. [Applause] We came from Dasmariñas. I saw one of our flood control projects there. It's still under construction. Cloudy, [then] I sing, the flood control project we're building gets flooded, and then. Anyway, El Niño didn't hit Luzon severely.

In Cavite, we inaugurated something here, named: Ternate-Nasugbu Road. It's nice. The problem is, it's only six kilometers long. How long did it take to build that six-kilometer road? Just a little: two decades. The child born when the road started was already a college graduate when it was finished. [Laughter] And what's worse, that was included in what we built, but we weren't the ones who promised it before. Why did it have to take so long? That's what we found.

The accomplishments of the Straight Path, nationwide, we now have 18,000 kilometers of roads, 107,000 lineal meters of bridges. [Applause] That doesn't include the PPPs. Isn't the MCX being used by you now? The CALAX, is coming soon. All the trains, of LRT 1… there are two of them. Then there's also an integrated bus terminal… transport terminal… that's also coming. Our large train, the rail system, will go from Malolos to Tutuban, to Calamba, to Bicol. [Applause] That's a new train. We won't be able to use it next year yet, but the funding for it that we requested from Japan—and the Japanese country is really kind to us—instead of giving it to us on an installment plan, they will give us the concessional loan in one [tranche], all at once, so that the train can really be started and finished clearly. Of course, the next part of it that I won't cover, will go to us in the North. But first is Malolos, Tutuban, Calamba, and towards Bicol.

The 4Ps program, a survey came out saying that four out of five Filipinos will vote for those who will continue [it]. We all saw that, right? The next day, “We will all continue that!” True or false? But go online—especially in 2013. What were the opponents saying back then? “That program should have a beginning, an end… It should be stopped… It should be investigated… So much is being spent.” So many criticisms. You will be surprised if you do an internet search, all those who criticized are now saying they will “continue” the 4Ps. [Applause] You said it yourselves, there's even a 5Ps. [Laughter]

I also heard the person you are referring to say, “4Ps, I will make it 5Ps, while reducing your taxes and increasing the program.” Here, most are women. Probably there are housewives here. Oh, there are only three housewives here. Now, if your husband comes home and says, “Starting next month, I will reduce your budget. And when I reduce your budget, you increase what you buy.” Please ask 5Ps. [Laughter and applause]

We in Daang Matuwid (Straight Path), it is important that what you say is true. In 2010, you might remember, I said I would not raise taxes. We will first take the taxes that are already in the law. And that is what we did. And that tax is what is responsible for the 18,000 kilometers of roads we built; 107,000 lineal meters of bridges; 4.6 million members of the 4Ps program—not 5Ps, okay; 93 million PhilHealth beneficiaries. The list is long, it’s right here and it’s 1 ½ pages long.

I have no place in the entire Philippines that I cannot go to because I did not neglect anyone. It really came true that when we step down from office—there are only 90 days left—I can really say that we have come a long way from where we started. [Applause]

They say that the life of a politician is like this: if you are asked nine times and you grant it, the person is happy. But if they ask for a tenth thing that you cannot give, only the tenth thing is remembered. The nine good things are no longer remembered. We cannot avoid it: I will sit, you will make a difficult decision, some will be happy, some will be angry. You can’t always make everyone happy. It’s probably not always the case that everyone is angry with you either. How will we be when it’s over?

Yesterday I was in Laguna, and an older woman approached me. She told me, “You’ve already won!” I said, “Maybe I look like Mar Roxas, so thank you!” [Laughter] It will lead to that—because there were two of them, one older, one young. The young one said, “Mar Roxas, how are you?” “I’m doing well. Long live!” [Laughter] Mar needs help, Leni needs help too.

Let’s think about this: The person I replaced sat in that position for nine and a half years. What we accomplished in six years could have been done in those nine and a half years. Maybe I can forgive the half a year, let’s make it ten years. In those ten years, even with K to 12 already in place, the student was almost finished when his term began. And where is the older one now? What if they had taken TESDA seriously?

The TESDA placement rate they showed me was, I think, the highest… What was the placement rate? If you trained at TESDA, how many people found jobs after six months of training? During their time, it was 28 percent. During our time, 72 percent. [Applause] “I trained at TESDA…” then silence, you’re a little nervous. “We trained at TESDA and this is the job we got…”

Let’s complete this: What skills does the market need? That’s what TESDA taught. When a person graduates, they have a job waiting for them. If they had done it in 10 years, at the beginning of his term, where would we be now?

What we spend on training for those entering the BPO, after just one year of work by the graduate, is already paid for by taxes—what they paid in taxes exceeds what the country spent to educate them. That means, when they pay taxes, we can help another person. It’s a continuous cycle. And of course, they won’t just work for one year. Thirty years of taxes, we can perhaps say “We gave one person an opportunity, and thirty will benefit, at minimum.” [Applause]

Let me explain to you a story I heard: We were in Pampanga, and there were beneficiaries of our program who went on stage and shared their experiences. One who stood up was a mother of seven children. The first thing she said was, “I am a mother, I have seven children. My husband left me and what we live on is selling—selling things.” Now, I am Kapampangan, so I might be mistaken in my understanding. 'Patinda-tinda,' means sometimes you sell, sometimes you don’t. To raise seven children like that, relying on chance.

She said, “Because of 4Ps, my three children finished high school. Those three children who finished high school—one with a high school equivalency—all have permanent jobs.” So all of them are helping her take care of the four remaining children. And she said, “If it weren’t for 4Ps, I wouldn’t have been able to do this.”

Perhaps what we are fighting for is very simple: Imagine that mother, in another situation, standing on this stage and telling all of us, “You know, you’ve helped my family so much. Three of my seven children are now able to eat on their own and are standing on their own two feet.” And you might not feel it or you might not know that you helped, because your taxes were used to fund this 4Ps.

Often, when we are asked for help, there are beggars, those who ask for small amounts. Mel Sarmiento said that when he was mayor in Samar, when the PTA called a meeting, the child would go home and tell his parent, “Oh no! Dad, another contribution.” Isn't it that every time we help, even in a small way, it's like giving a small amount? Here, we don't directly give a small amount; we paid the correct taxes, and we helped not only mothers in Pampanga—4.6 million households are being helped this year. That's about 23 million people. [Applause]

You helped. What are the conditions of 4Ps? Keep your child in school; when they finish studying, they gain additional skills, making it easier to get employed. Is that right? We can even expand that because our economy is growing, the government's resources are strengthening, there are scholarship programs for college for 4Ps beneficiaries as well, we can expand that. But I won't be able to do that anymore—I only have 90 days left.

The point here is very simple: You yourselves said, has the Philippines changed a lot since 2010 or not? If all of this is happening, and it's clear that there's been a big change, the question here is… Because the other day, we had a meeting, and many of our countrymen, it's like in 2010—let's go back to the internet, let's look at the newspapers from that time, and I think you, you have friends… Six years ago, when we talked about it, we might often read in the newspaper: Many Filipinos are leaving the Philippines, they have lost hope. Now they are returning. I'm not saying that many have returned; an estimated 600,000 OFWs have returned.

But the point here is: Some of our countrymen say, “No matter who continues this, we've gained momentum, we can't back down anymore.” Do we believe that's the situation? That no matter who we choose as leader, what's happening will continue? What if they are insensitive? What if they are blatantly deceiving us? What if we can't say they are deceiving us but we don't understand what they are saying?

Because one of them said, “I will run, I will not run. I will run, I will not run. I was forced to run. If I become your President, I will fix this problem. If I don’t fix it in six months, I will resign.” There’s a saying in Tagalog: A marriage is not like hot rice that you spit out when it burns you. Here, it’s like you got married to the country. We can’t have a contract like a prenuptial agreement. Isn’t it that everyone who runs volunteers? No one forces anyone to say, “Stand there! File your Certificate of Candidacy! Run!” No, it’s voluntary.

When I went to you, what was my promise? I will leave things far better than I found them. That means, in six years, through happy times, sad times, uplifting times, dismaying times, frustrating times, in hardship and in ease, we won’t let go. We have a contract. But if you’re just running, you’re already saying that if this happens, I’ll resign; if that happens, I’ll resign; if so and so happens, I’ll resign. Just a moment, boss. Do you want it or not? Please explain, sir. Is that right? That’s a reasonable question.

Let’s go to Leni Robredo first. Listen to Leni, talk to Leni, see Leni’s picture. Just by looking at them, who among them can you trust to run as Vice President? Just the picture alone, Leni is ahead. But when you hear her speak, you really feel completely confident. She really is different. [Applause]

You know, Leni is a really strong person—I won’t mention everything she’s been through. But the point is: She was forced to run in her district—Jesse died in August. Of course, the period of mourning came after, all of that was in September. In October, after the 40 days, maybe you can continue Jesse’s service. Many wives might think, “I’m raising three children, my husband is gone, why do I have to continue that? Maybe we can have a little normalcy back in our lives.”

But it was seen that he was needed. He also said that if you could have done something, you turned your back, the situation worsened, it was your fault. He is a part of it, with the same beliefs, and he ran. In 2013, it was much easier to get re-elected. He was the incumbent. Then we asked him again, “We need a really strong candidate for Vice President.”

Let us not forget: The Vice President is not a spare tire. When something happens to the President, the Vice President needs to be just as good, needs to be going in the same direction, needs to be just as competent and skilled as the President because suddenly, one day, everything might suddenly fall on his shoulders. Now, it cannot be “Okay, I’ll just give the Vice Presidency to my friend.” No. As serious as we are in choosing the President, let us also take the Vice President seriously.

Why Mar? The BPO Center was mentioned earlier. Maybe someone is saying, “Elect me, and I’ll give you jobs.” Mar has already done that. He was Secretary of DTI, Trade and Industry. He saw that we could have these call centers and other BPO industries. He started it. Now, the number of people directly employed in call centers—actually, it exceeded 1 million people last year—this year, 1.3 million are expected to be directly employed.

Direct? What does that mean? Is there anything not direct? The call center is in a building. The building has a 7-Eleven, restaurants, transportation needed by them, the people who work in the building, the cleaners—it is estimated that three to four people, for every one position in the BPO, jobs are created. That 1.3 million, is like five million additional jobs. And it’s not just Metro Manila, it’s spread throughout the country. And the help to our economy: $25 billion. Added to the economy that circulates within us, helping us grow.

Well, Mar, it's good to say, “I am the President. He is my Secretary, a good follower.” But truthfully, there were so many times when there was a crisis, instead of me being the first, Mar was the first. Example: Zamboanga. He was there four days ahead of me. Yolanda [Typhoon Haiyan]: He was already there before Yolanda even hit. The other officials there weren't, the local ones. Mar, Secretary of Local Government, was there, along with the Secretary of National Defense. Earthquake in Bohol and Cebu: he was there. There was a typhoon that hit us last year, the roads were closed, logs were down, trees were down, he had to go around to see the situation in the area where the typhoon hit, he rode a motorcycle. Did you read it in the newspaper, hear it on TV or the radio that Mar went around to check on the condition of our countrymen? I think what you saw: Mar, the motorcycle crashed.

I think, you will be the witnesses. This is not a person who always puts himself forward and always tries to look good. Just, you know, when there's something good, he's always in the picture. When there's a problem, “I have nothing to do with that.” That's why it's hard, it's hard to say goodbye to you. I wanted to say, “I hope everything we need to do is finished.” But you know where we came from and there is still a lot to do. The trains I mentioned to you, we have finished resolving the conflicting laws, finding the funds, creating the design—the process has been long, but the next one will continue it.

The summary of the message I want to give you—and when we talk to our other countrymen, please ask this… Let's go back: A mother from Pampanga came. She went on stage—maybe here in Cavite, there are also such situations. Then she told us all, “You know, you may not be aware, you have already helped me because my seven children who we didn't know where they would eat, three of them are now helping their four siblings.” [Applause]

For example, she came here and told us all, “You have already helped us. Now that we are starting to rise, will you leave us?” Will you risk continuing this program truthfully? Or now that we finally feel like we have a solution, will you leave us again because another group stopped it? A large amount of funds is being spent there. You need to be prepared to fund it, knowing that when they finish high school—K to 12, that's a long time—that's when we will really feel the benefits.

You know, when I was just starting out, the congressman I replaced in our area, his style was to have something to boast about. He built a waiting shed. The problem was, the road didn't exist yet, the waiting shed came first. [Laughter] When they said they were building a road, in front of our barangay captain's house, it wasn't a road, it was a parking lot. The barangay service vehicle, the cement was exactly its size. There was a parking space—and not two lanes—whatever fit the length and width of the barangay service vehicle, that's how long and wide the cement was. On the other side, nothing—a dirt road. If you're facing one direction, that's the only place there's a road. That was the thinking of the person who worked for 20 years on the Ternate-Nasugbu road.

We are now on a different level, we are progressing. We can guarantee that what is happening now will not only continue, but will become even stronger.

I earnestly ask you: On May 9th, let our votes be the same. Can I do it alone? Clearly not. I need each and every one of you as before. From the beginning, we have been proud: We are with the people, who are our Boss. Combine your strength with ours, and truly, we will shape a future where we are all smiling. I hope that in 2022, we didn't make a mistake we made in 2016. We are all looking down. And we are singing “Why did this happen?” [Laughter] And that will happen if we become complacent.

If we let the noisy ones speak, they might convince the undecided. “It seems like they really are the ones.” We need to keep up. That is democracy: an exchange of perspectives. And if our message is right, they will join us. But I repeat: Can I do it alone? Can Boy Blue do it alone? Can Manong Del? No. Can Aika, Paolo, Mar, Leni? Of course not. Our strength always begins because we unite, we move forward, we take steps on the right path. That is the Straight Path. [Applause]

Now, make sure you are members of PhilHealth. We don't know when we will have a honeymoon. [Laughter] It's important that we maintain our health. But seriously, almost every time I go on stage these days, it feels like I'm saying goodbye. 90 days left. And of course, it's important to me that everything we've worked for, everything we've paid for with sweat, tears, and blood, becomes a permanent change. I pushed as much as I could, with your help, to do what we can. I repeat: We were really down when we started. I was worried that you might get impatient with the changes and drive me away. But I saw Ate, so I was really touched—complete with ribbon and baller. But in 2007, we didn't have baller yet, so you really are still the key. We all made this happen. We all will continue this. Let's really not neglect the country. Let's help Mar and Leni, along with our colleagues in the Straight Path, to the fullest. [Applause]

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.