Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the gathering of the seventh League of Provinces

[Declared at the Century Park Hotel, Manila City, on March 15, 2016]

Let us begin here: Mel said something good earlier. You are the ones people run to in your provinces, you are the most popular. You will be running, there are so many problems that will be passed on to you. I went through that too, only not every day because I went through it as a congressman at the local level. He is a mayor, you are governors, every day, 24/7. As for me, when there are no more sessions, starting on Thursday, my share is until Sunday.

In my experience in Tarlac, water problems were common. What is the problem with water? During the summer, the Tarlac River is missing in action. It's just a stream, almost the sand is wet. But when the rainy season comes, the water rushes, really destroying all our infrastructure.

I ran, and it was probably the DPWH that was in charge of flood control at that time. They told me, “You are covered by Lower Agno.” I asked the Lower Agno office what help they could give us. They told us, “Oh, you are mistaken. You should go to the Pampanga Delta River,” and so on. We went to Pampanga, and they told us, “Oh, you are mistaken again. We are not the ones covering your area.” I said, “Where should we go?” “To Lower Agno.” So this is what being a congressman is like. When you approach them, they’ll just pass you around like a ping pong ball.

In the end, we used the congressional district funds, the PDAF, to have a creek in Tarlac—it’s called Masalasak Creek. That’s what was clogging up and causing the MacArthur Highway to flood. The MacArthur Highway—national road, Manila North Road—the PDAF also funded the repairs on our part. I started in 1998, that was during the Asian Financial Crisis, you’re on your own.

Why do we start there? Well, I look at your faces, and I really can’t think of a province I’ve been to where we haven’t worked together on many things. Is that right? I also want to emphasize: It’s a pleasure to work with many of you.

For instance, Junjun Davide is here. Junjun, during the height of Yolanda, Bantayan Island was hit. I called him, “Jun, what do you need there?” He told me, “We’re okay here.” And he even did more, they set up a repacking center to help other areas like Leyte which were more devastated. Dominic can probably attest to that.

When we asked Freddie Marañon of Negros Occidental, I noticed, upon landing at the airport, the road from the airport to the highway was winding. I said, this system doesn't seem efficient. Tourists, businessmen, and other travelers arrive, why do we need to take them that way? I offered, “Sir, it seems we need to build a better road. One that goes straight to your highway.” He replied to me, “We already have funds for that. We don't need it.”

There were so many instances where I truly felt that you were with me in all that we worked on together. Back then, things were really lacking. When a program or project would come to you, it felt like a reward, a stroke of luck. For example, the DPWH reports to us that we now have 18,000 kilometers of national road that has been paved, repaired, rehabilitated, improved. This includes 1,500 [kilometers] of tourism roads. In terms of bridges, we have 107,000 lineal meters, including more than 12,000 lineal meters of temporary bridges that have been made permanent.

Here in the airports, Ed Chato is very excited about the Panglao airport where it will be a bridge from 500,000 tourists in Tagbilaran now, to 1.7 million tourists. When 1.7 million tourists arrive, Ed says, “Don't give me any IRA anymore. We don't need it.” [Laughter] Now, it is estimated that each foreign tourist spends $1,000 while here. And Panglao is envisioned to be either the next Boracay, or equivalent to Boracay.

When it comes to those who approach you, especially regarding health, we have PhilHealth. It is helping 93 million people now. Before, it was always out-of-pocket, especially for you governors. It was like, “Where will we really get the funds for all of this?”

You know, it seems wrong for me to enumerate everything we’ve done. But I think you’ll agree, when I ran in 2010, I had some of you with me, and some not with me. When I assumed office, I believe, surely no one can say that we neglected any province. Show us the need, as long as your need is clear, why shouldn’t we do it, and why shouldn’t we help each other?

I think one thing I can say that is a personal source of pride, is something I asked, for example, Manong Kit Bersamin of Abra, Cordillera, “How should we address the Cordillera?” The Cordillera has few votes. When a politician runs during a time when there’s PDAF, they say, “Why should we bring resources there when the returns aren’t good?” You pour in a lot of funds, and you get few votes in return. In short, the Cordillera was always forgotten and pitied.

I am more familiar with Apayao—Butchie is from there. Boy said that we’ve reached a point in Apayao where we have physical limitations. Right? They have many infrastructure needs. It’s expensive in the mountains there. They’ve reached physical limitations. What that means is, we’ve opened some roads. Now, we’ve reached a point where the roads we’ve opened need two years of rainy season to compact the soil. We no longer have those two years of rainy season left. But the others that were ready, that we opened earlier, are finished, we’ve pushed to do everything we can in Apayao. This doesn’t mean there’s nothing left to do in Apayao. There is still a need to do things in Apayao. But perhaps the point here is: If we look at the many depressed provinces in this region, we can really say that the time is beginning when they can catch up with the rest of the country.

Someone spoke in Apayao too. He told us when we visited there, in the past, if someone got sick, they had to cross the forest. The forest became like a cemetery. It took two days to walk to the hospital, they didn’t make it to the hospital, they were just buried in the forest. Now, he says it takes only minutes because the road is there.

Perhaps the point of my facing you today, and if my voice is a bit hoarse, is that I speak and move around everywhere daily. I wasn't with Governor Umali wherever he was going, for the record. [Laughter] They seem to know something I don't, so many are smiling.

But when I campaigned, didn't I tell you that when I assume office, my ambition is to look back at where we came from and say that what I will leave behind is far better than what we inherited. And I think you are the ones who will tell me if I have fulfilled that or not.

Now, the question is very simple: Before, we were crawling, now we are standing, we have learned to walk. We were called the “Sick Man of Asia.” Like what Mel was telling, during his time as mayor, he would be invited to foreign conferences. When the Japanese passed through Immigration, they would say, “Oh Japan. Please, welcome to the country.” That’s how it was. When the Taiwanese arrived, it was the same. “Welcome to the country.” When the Philippines arrived, Mel. They looked at his passport, looked at his face, looked at the passport again, looked at his face again, looked at the visa, looked at the watchlist. They looked at so many things. Then they asked him at the end, “What is the purpose of your visit?” [Laughter] He said, “I was invited to this conference.” “Do you have proof?” He even presented the document inviting him. So when he arrived at the conference, exchanging business cards, his business card, a hundred were given out going there. Upon his return, still a hundred. [Laughter] Apparently, no one approached him, perhaps fearing he would be asked to solicit a firetruck or an ambulance. But now, he says, things are different.

And truthfully, I said, “Mel, we aren't that different.” When I started, there were other heads of government, heads of state, that I felt obligated to face. I don't know, maybe I'm just sensitive, but they really seemed to look down on us. There were even one or two who lectured me, when I had just assumed office. Those who lectured us then and looked down on us and held their noses high, now they are asking us for advice on what we did with our country. That at a time when the world economy was bad, we grew and grew. [Applause] We simply replied: Good governance is good economics.

Comrades, there are only 106 days left for me. Boy said earlier, was I approved for the proposed amendments to the laws? Boy, I don't think I have anything more to say to Congress. One hundred six [days left], they can already ignore me. Most of them won't pay attention to me after 106 days. Maybe I can just offer advice. First piece of advice: Just a reminder, when we talk about amendments, our Constitution is from 1987, not 1997. That might be the reason why it wasn't passed in Congress. But seriously, all of us who entered public service, I think we only have one ambition: to improve the lives of our countrymen.

During my time, when we were given 10 kilometers per year for my district, I had 159 barangays. Now you divide 159. You're lucky if you get 1 kilometer per barangay, and it might even be in installments. Honestly, what I found was, they called it a “road.” A barangay road. That barangay road was exactly enough space to park the barangay captain’s car. Not two lanes, no. Literally: a dirt road, with a piece of cement. Their barangay service vehicle was parked there. That was the barangay road. When I arrived, we were able to add to it—everything we did was fresh concrete—200 meters here, 300 there, 400 over there. I really feel what you're feeling. So many needs, so few resources.

Currently, we have an economy that has had the biggest growth spurt in the last 40 years, I think—an average of 6.2 [percent]. Those 40 years include the Martial Law period. During Martial Law, many cronies were given sovereign guarantees and established businesses left and right, which boosted our economy until the time of repayment. They borrowed money, established businesses, and you include them in the list of new factories, new investments, and so on. But most of those investments were meaningless. So that's the debt we're paying off—but that's a different discussion.

Let me go back to that. Whether you're with the party or not, whether you're with the coalition or not, I challenge anyone to say that there is a real need that has not been addressed. Someone said earlier that your IRA will increase as the economy grows. Let's run the economy correctly. Let's create an environment with a truly level playing field. The Philippines has a lot of potential. Why wouldn't businessmen be encouraged to establish businesses that will grow our economy? And not just short-term growth, but continuous growth.

So at the end of the day, I think like me, many of you are saying that our ambition to truly serve our countrymen, we are really achieving that. And it's like others, especially the new ones, will say, “So this job is actually this easy.” Because it's not about running around everywhere, and when someone talks to you, they'll say, “Sorry, we don't have funds. Sorry, we can't afford it.” Now, aren't we reaching a point where before your needs are even mentioned, the solution is already included? I think Procy, has gone to your area many times and said, “We are ready here at our trading center. We are ready here for cloud seeding,” and so on.

So, I will go back to that. The Americans have a saying, “If it ain’t broke, why fix it?” I will ask you again now: Especially to those running unopposed, you are really being looked at by your countrymen. Where should our direction be? What should we do here? And we can go to different paths. I said, maybe some will turn us left; maybe some will turn us right. The most painful thing is being U-turned.

What is a U-turn? If someone comes to you, it's made into a reward. Instead of the obligation of those in local government to help you, it's like a candy that further tempts the child. It shouldn't be like that. You should feed the child. Complete it, nutritious. You can do it. You shouldn't even think about “Should I give it or not?” You can, it's your obligation to help your fellow man. Even the… Sorry if I have a lot to say to you. Actually, this should be short. After the first two, I think they already said everything that needed to be said.

But perhaps my main point here is: Suppose these six years have just been like a vacation and our situation is like before. There are illnesses, let Batman handle it. You have no roads, let Batman handle it again. There's a flood, you're on your own. Every problem you face, you're on your own. Who here would be happy to return to that system? As opposed to having a storm, you already have a warning from PAGASA. PAGASA issues a warning, DSWD, DPWH stand up, and prepare what is needed to address it. The storm arrives, your province is hit. The relief is immediate, we don't wait, it's already there. But after that, the rehabilitation: How will we rise again, and rise better? The plan becomes clear. Your current capacity for a rehabilitation plan requires structural engineers. Each municipality, each city, each province will create their own plans. You have also been capacitated there. The DILG’s [Oplan] Listo system…

We have already accomplished so much, in short. We were able to do it because we simply did what was right. Perhaps my biggest request to all of you here is to think about it. Here, we are not making promises, we have already shown what can be done. I implore you all: If your lives improve and become easier, especially the lives of your fellow countrymen whom we promised to improve, whom we will truly serve, I believe, especially the governors in each province, the main thing we should carry forward is to continue on the Straight Path.

And let me reiterate to you, in my view, I endorsed Mar Roxas, I endorsed Leni Robredo. There is no doubt, I can guarantee what they will do. With others, the best that can be said is “maybe” they will continue. There are some there, I am sure they will not continue. The question here is, the clarity of the choices is: certain, maybe. Maybe one is better, maybe they will continue. There are those who will surely not continue and will make us U-turn. There are those who are unclear where they will take us. One “maybe” might become clear as to where they will lead us, but even now, it is already blurry. So that is the choice we face.

Let me repeat to you: We came together because you know—I don't want to be called your older brother because I know many of you are older than me—maybe I can just be your ally. Throughout everything you have gone through in these six years, I was true to you, I was true especially to our beloved countrymen. And it is there, truly in our hands, that when God calls us, finished or not, pass your paper, we can say: We were true to our promise to our countrymen. We were true to our promise to God, and truly, what we leave behind is far better than what we inherited.

Let me repeat, we can do this. All we need to do is: Do it.

Good day. Thank you very much.