Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

During his meeting with local leaders and communities of Batangas

[Declared in the City of Batangas, Batangas, on May 16, 2016]

You know, I am Kapampangan. And from my perspective, the Kapampangan and Batangueño are not so different because we are all humble, modest.

Recently, about two days ago, I was talking to my fellow provincemates in Tarlac, we met, we were discussing this campaign. When our meeting ended, someone told me, “You know, boss, we from Tarlac are really different.” I asked why. “We have an elderly provincial mate whose hobby is raising water buffalo. He has been caring for the water buffalo since it was young and treated it like a dog, following him everywhere. The water buffalo became docile and gentle.

There came a point where he needed to go to Manila, to take care of paperwork regarding his retirement: pensions, benefits. He went to the bus station, and when he got off, the conductor saw him and said, “Boss, just a moment. This bus is for people. Water buffalo are not allowed to ride.” Our elderly compatriot said, “Let that water buffalo be. Teach it. It knows what it needs to do.”

The bus left the terminal. The water buffalo was there, with its owner, following along. The driver now said, “Boss, your water buffalo is following.” “Let it be. It’s learning. It doesn’t need to be led anymore.” The driver now said, “It might cause an accident or someone might get into an accident because of it. I need to speed up this bus to leave it behind.” So when he drove at 30 kph, the driver looked back, the water buffalo was chasing; he drove at 40 kph, it was still chasing. He said, “That’s still not enough.”

So the bus drove at 70 kph. When he looked in the rearview mirror, he saw the water buffalo with its tongue hanging out. [Laughter] He now said to the owner, “Boss, your water buffalo is tired.” He said, “Why?” “Well, the water buffalo has its tongue hanging out.” “Where is the tongue pointing?” The driver looked again, “To the left.” “Son, be careful. It’s about to overtake.” [Laughter and applause] That is our water buffalo from Tarlac. So you see, you here in Batangas, we in Tarlac, we are all humble.

You know, I really learned a lot, especially during the snap election. We were sent to all sorts of remote parts of Luzon, helping to campaign for my mother. During that time, not many people assisted me, only two friends were with me. And Batangas really grew close to us during those times.

When I ran for senator in 2007, many people really helped me and I became a senator. But in 2010, I remember we had a meeting here nearby. And even then, I felt the success and our victory. So I will just repeat: Thank you very much for the trust then, and until now you are still with me. [Applause]

The question now is: What have we achieved together? You know, as I go around the Philippines, we only have about 105 days left, I think. Out of the six years you gave me, there are only 105 days to go. And now is the opportunity, perhaps we can raise our own accomplishments so we can tell our Bosses—you—what we have achieved through our cooperation. It’s clear: In almost six years of treading the Straight Path, Batangas was never left behind, we never overlooked it.

Let me lay out some of the evidence. First, in infrastructure: During the time of our predecessors, from 2005 to 2010, only P4.54 billion was allocated for infrastructure. From 2011 to 2016, the same number of years, we increased the budget for infrastructure in Batangas to P16.66 billion. [Applause] With this, we built roads, bridges, ports, flood control projects, and other structures. Earlier, I interviewed some of your mayors, and they told me that one of your roads, 7 km long, took an hour and a half to travel because it was narrow. You know, if we continue the Straight Path, that road will widen, and traffic will ease up. [Applause] The first one that was improved, if I’m not mistaken, is Lipa City, Batangas, Ate Vi.

Many of our countrymen have had an easier journey with the Southern Tagalog Arterial Road (STAR) Project-Stage 2 Phase 2 that we built, which connected Sto. Tomas, Tanauan, Malvar, Lipa, and Ibaan. Our STAR Project, which is a PPP Project, we requested to be expanded and have 2 more lanes added to the road to ensure that accidents are avoided—because originally, it was only one lane in each direction. Aside from this, we also completed the Lipa-Alaminos Road, Bauan-Mabini Circumferential Road, and Lake Taal Circumferential Road, which Cong. Sonny Collantes often reminds us about. [Applause] When my term ends, Cong. Sonny invited me to taste bulalo there in Taal, and he said that the journey on that circumferential road is now smooth. [Laughter]

On well-maintained roads, more tourists are attracted to visit your province. In 2012, your tourist arrivals were at 402,815; by 2014, this reached 616,305. And if each tourist creates one job, plus the so-called multiplier effect, truly a great number of our countrymen are helped by the growth of tourism.

With the great benefits brought by developed infrastructure, even projects that were waited for or planned for decades, we were able to finish them during our term. For example, we talked about tourism, this Ternate-Nasugbu Road of ours, the length: only six kilometers—that road isn’t that long—but it took two decades from the time it was thought of until it was finished. Different people thought of it, different people conceptualized it, truthfully, we were the ones who finished it. You can see it, here on the Straight Path, in almost six years, we were able to build and repair more than 18,000 kilometers of national roads and 107,000 lineal meters of bridges.

Regarding ports, we declared your Batangas port as an extension of the port of Manila due to the congestion experienced there. Because of this, we put in place incentives to encourage ships to dock here, and your services truly flourished. [Applause] Because of the incentives we gave to shippers docking at Batangas Port, such as discounted rates, the results were truly positive. From 757,766 metric tons of cargo that entered Batangas Port in 2013, this increased to 1.17 million metric tons in 2014, and there is no reason why it shouldn’t grow even more. [Applause] In the briefing they told me, it was like one ship arriving per day. Now, I think seven ships per day is the average.

To further develop the capacity of Batangas Port to accommodate our passengers, we allocated P343.4 million from 2011 to 2016 for the repair and maintenance of this facility. From 5.2 million passengers in 2013, this was increased to almost 5.6 million passengers in the following year.

Here in Batangas is also the factory of Atlantic Gulf & Pacific, or AG&P. Here, Filipinos are making products in the field of steel fabrication, engineering firms, oil, mining, power, and civil infrastructure markets in Asia. This proves it: Filipino talent is world-class. Filipinos working here are sent to the Middle East, Africa, Russia, and other countries. With this investment, so many jobs have already been created for our countrymen. I clearly remember that AG&P made the British Petroleum factory, the module was made in the Philippines to be brought to Indianapolis, America.

We are also planning to have a 121-kilometer transmission pipeline that will transport natural gas from Batangas, Laguna, Cavite and Metro Manila. The so-called Batangas-Manila Natural Gas Pipeline Project or BatMan1, the value of this project is: P10.53 billion. And it is in the final stage of study. It has great potential to benefit our countrymen, once this is implemented. Even Global Climate Change can be mitigated if more people use this natural gas.

In the agricultural sector: To maximize the income of our farmers, we have allocated P1.6 billion for the construction of farm-to-market roads and irrigation systems. With this, we were able to build 250 farm-to-market roads, 71 irrigation projects that are being benefited by thousands of farmers here in Batangas.

We have also established 16 block farms here, totaling 715.75 hectares of land since 2012. And here, we train our farmers in farm management and the use of modern machinery. This led to the growth of their production. For example, this is in the field of sugar, from cropping year 2013 to 2014, the areas under the Lucban Multipurpose Cooperative Block Farm in Balayan recorded a 37 percent increase in their production; from 37 tons of sugarcane per hectare it was increased to 50.58 tons per hectare. The same thing happened at the Kamahari Agri-based Multipurpose Cooperative in Nasugbu. Here, their production increased by 31 percent. Naturally, their income will also increase. In our two mentioned cooperatives, their income increased by more than P37,000 per hectare.

Besides these, we also provided your province with P75.88 million worth of production and postharvest machineries and equipment from 2011 to 2015. To support the coconut industry, we established four intercropping sites here in Batangas in Balete, Lobo, San Juan, and here in Lipa, under the KAANIB Enterprise Development Project. Here, we encourage our farmers to plant various seeds and raise livestock in between coconut trees. With this help, their income also increases. For example: Farmers who used to earn only P20,000 per year per hectare because they relied on copra, due to intercropping, their income has increased to P52,855 per year. Their income has more than doubled because of this intercropping.

We also have Shared Service Facilities or SSF here in your province that help grow your businesses. In Batangas, we already have 25 SSFs, and among those supported by these facilities are meat processing, sugarcane presser, fish processing, and other skills. One of the beneficiaries of this is the Kamahari Agri-based Multipurpose Cooperative which packages muscovado. With the help of the SSF, in 2013, their monthly income was P18,000. Their monthly income has doubled to P36,000. For the fish processing of the Calatagan Women’s Organization, in 2013, their income was only P2,000 per day. Now it is P5,000 because of the SSF. That is the service delivered by the Straight Path. [Applause] Sorry for that; the list is a bit long, but someone might still say I forgot Batangas.

When it comes to caring for our countrymen, the service of the Straight Path continues in Batangas. From 2010 to 2014, a total of P309.89 million has been allocated by us for the repair or construction of your various health facilities. Currently, 2.6 million of our countrymen in your province are covered by PhilHealth; [applause] they are among the total of 93 million beneficiaries in the country, according to PhilHealth.

The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, we also expanded it greatly. The number of beneficiaries in the Pantawid Pamilya program nationwide in 2010 was almost 800,000, not even reaching that. If we divide this by 80 provinces instead of 81, to make it easier to calculate: 800,000 divided by 80, the result is an average of 10,000 beneficiaries per province. I thought the number of beneficiaries in Cebu was already low. Recently, we saw in Cebu that it was their stronghold, only 5,600 households were being helped. When we went to Bohol, it was even worse, instead of 10,000 households, they were far from the average because only 531 households were included. When we went to Cavite, what was reported to me, the members of 4Ps, or Pantawid Pamilya, in Cavite was like yours in Batangas: Not even ten thousand, not even a thousand, not even ten, in truth, zero. There were no Pantawid members in Cavite and Batangas in 2010. Then of course they boasted, “GMA Cares?”

We did not allow such negligence in the Straight Path: In Cebu, from 5,000, there are now 149,900 beneficiaries; [applause] in Bohol, from 563, there are now 59,222; in Cavite, from zero, 50,827 homes are being helped. For you, from zero, 86,952 homes have beneficiaries. [Applause] We did not have this many in Batangas because Governor Vi is very strong with me, she is really strong with me. But that is based on data. Where are our fellow countrymen at the margins of society who need to be cared for? And here we discovered that there are this many who should have been helped a long time ago, but were only helped when you allowed me to lead, and only now are they really being helped.

Now, even in the initial results of the Pantawid Pamilya, the program is a great help. According to that study, 7.7 million individuals have already crossed or risen above the so-called “poverty line.” We continue our efforts to further distance those who have surpassed the poverty line from the so-called “poor condition” because they are now “near poor.” Those who are “near poor,” might get seriously ill, back to being poor. If a typhoon hits, they lose all their possessions, back to being poor. We aim to distance them further and further from the condition where they can fall back below the poverty line. That’s why, those candidates who say this is a dole out, just look at the results. This is clearly empowering millions of families—families who once saw no good future, students who couldn’t study, youth who couldn’t be vaccinated—now, the fulfillment of their dreams is truly within reach. [Applause]

Recently, a survey came out saying that 4 out of 5 Filipinos will vote for a candidate who will continue the Pantawid Pamilya. Our opponents suddenly rushed to claim 4Ps. They make promises, but have no proof of their ability to deliver. One of them is touting that he will expand the Pantawid Pamilya. Someone told me, 4Ps is not enough, he says he will make it 5Ps. And while making it 5Ps, he will reduce the taxes that we use to fund this program. I ask you, if he can really do that, then I will join him. But this is it, I promised you from the very beginning, we will not raise taxes, we will first collect what is already there. And we used it correctly, we lifted 7.7 million Filipinos out of poverty. That person speaking, his son even said that the 4Ps should be investigated. With so many allegations surrounding them, the benefits of the Pantawid Pamilya will likely be diluted under his leadership. This research I ordered, all those claiming to expand, all those saying they will improve, these are the things they said from 2013 to the present. Most often they say, the 4Ps should be investigated; the 4Ps should be stopped; that program should have a beginning, it should also have an end. Now that the survey has come out, they say they will expand it. You be the judge of who we should believe: what they said recently, what they are saying now, or what they will say tomorrow? Like me, I might be getting dizzy wondering who to believe. [Applause]

Those that we have achieved together, those are just samples, there is more in our briefer. But it is clear to me: All these successes, we achieved because of our cooperation. As I said: You are the ones who made and continue to make change. To my Bosses, the Batangueños, to everyone we have worked with, for your trust from the very beginning, from the snap [election] to my run for President, once again, thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

We would like to express our gratitude to your local leaders who brought us to you. First and foremost, to Gov. Vilma Santos-Recto. From being the Mayor of Lipa, to serving as the mother of the entire Batangas, she has been a beacon to help you realize your potential for progress. Who wouldn't admire Ate Vi? When she ran, she had perhaps one opponent, now there are five running against her. Truly: Batangas no longer needs to be promised heaven and stars; with Gov. Vi, you already have a “star for all seasons,” not just in showbiz, but more importantly, in public service.

Let us also include her long-time partner in serving our beloved Batangueños, none other than Senator Ralph Recto. Truly, in our meetings, he desires the continued progress of Batangas. There are also those younger than us by about two sleeps, like Mark Leviste, the always diligent Sonny Collantes, and Manong Eddie Dimacuha who got us a long time ago. [Applause] We are confident that the welfare of the Batangueños is in good hands.

On May 9th, we will once again face a crossroads, where we will choose our next leaders. For me, if the question is who has the ability, experience, conscience, and will undoubtedly continue our successes: That is the Right Pair, Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

Mar is very far ahead of the other candidates. Mar has done a lot for our Bosses. That BPO sector that he has been focusing on for a long time, he was the one who brought it to the Philippines; now, more than a million direct jobs have been created by the IT-BPO sector. And it is estimated that before I leave office, there will be 1.3 million direct employees, not including the multiplier effect, those in convenience stores, those who drive taxis, those who built the building. There are three or four times more jobs created because of the IT-BPO industry that Mar started.

In addition to his lowering of crime in Manila and other regions, and on many occasions, he truly sympathized and sacrificed with our countrymen. Throughout his long service, we never once heard Mar complain or ask for anything in return. Never, Mar did not steal. That is Mar Roxas, whom I am endorsing once again as President of the Philippines.

You know, the life of a President is difficult. You know how we are insulted, cursed, and disrespected by columnists and others. This job is really difficult. Others even highlight that when there is a disaster, this person arrives, giving some relief goods. The next day, it's on the front page, as if he did something great. Mar Roxas, even before the disaster, while the storm was still approaching, he was already in the area, watching over our countrymen. When the storm arrives, he goes around to see who has the greatest need. I don't know if I'm the only one who sees it, but it's rare to hear about what Mar does. But the area in Samar valued him, he couldn't go around by car, he used a motorcycle. Instead of saying he persevered and went around the areas where communication was cut off, they highlighted that Mar's motorcycle slipped, instead of Mar's purpose. Did Mar complain? No. That's part of the job, he's okay with it.

With us also is the champion of the Straight Path for Vice President, Leni Robredo. [Applause] When Jesse Robredo's accident happened, it was a Saturday. The time came when we rushed to Masbate and the news wasn't good. We didn't know, we hadn't found out where Jesse was. And as time went on, especially the first 24 hours that passed, how could you say we could still hope for good news when we hadn't received any news yet?

As President, as father of the nation, naturally, as a member of my Cabinet, I should be the first to express condolences and support, to help his wife and family. The problem was, none of us at that time knew Leni very well. Jesse, like my father, wanted to give us a private life. He would keep his wife and children away from public life so they would have some privacy and peace.

So when I faced Leni, I was trying to steel myself. If she were to really cry a lot and break down, including anger, and all the negative things that could happen, I prepared myself because losing a beloved husband is truly heavy. But when I mentioned to her that we shouldn't expect any good news, not a single tear fell from Leni's eyes. I really saw her strength.

And after it was confirmed that Jesse had passed away, because of the goodness of Jesse's service, many people approached, wanting to help Jesse's wife and children. And not once did we see even a hint of taking advantage from Leni. She accepted what she considered appropriate help and rejected many offers because she felt they were not deserving. The help was given willingly. No one would be angry at her for accepting it. But she said, “This is not what my husband and I stood for. Only what is right is needed.”

So when she was called upon, after Jesse's death, in the 2013 elections, she was asked by her constituents to maintain or keep their organization together, she needed to be a symbol of their unity. She could have refused, saying that she still had two children studying and three children in total. She wanted to get used to life without her husband. But she did not turn her back on the call of her constituents. She fought against a powerful, long-seated opponent, and she won. And when she arrived in Congress, she accomplished many things that were truly admirable. [Applause]

She could have just run for re-election and that would have been much easier. She could also have said, “I’ve already accommodated all of you, maybe I can rest now.” But again, Leni did not mind the heavier sacrifice that came with it when we, along with many other Filipinos, asked her. “Leni, we need you to continue the Straight Path.” It was a difficult decision. In the end, Leni Robredo said yes. So thank you again to Leni, and her children.

My colleagues, as I said at the beginning, I am practically bidding you farewell, there are only 105 days remaining, I will be retiring. You know that I am still unmarried so sometimes when I am called 'father,' I clarify, “Father of the nation, I have no children.” But like any father, as we part ways, I want you to be in a better situation. I want you to have a good future. [Applause]

I was once told by an elder in Nueva Ecija, “Be careful. With what you are planning, you will run into many wealthy, powerful people, and perhaps many of them are easily offended.” After I step down from office, they might come after me for those who we exposed and held accountable in our courts. That is okay with me, because I can say that I was true to all of you. The Philippines I will leave behind is undeniably better than the one we inherited in 2010. [Applause] Some are advising me, “Don’t campaign anymore so everyone will be your friend.” I thought about that. It’s practical. But at the end of it, will I be true to you? If you just leave it to fate or leave it to Batman, I don’t think that’s right.

Here, when things were uncertain, you accompanied me while I was in the opposition. Now that we have learned to walk and run, and are already moving forward with great speed, is that when I will leave you behind? I think I will change my name first before I do that. [Applause]

Please excuse me for repeating myself: But in my opinion, with so many candidates running now, the one who deserves it and who can truly continue our journey on the Straight and Narrow Path and further accelerate progress is none other than the next President of the Republic of the Philippines, with your permission, Mar Roxas.