Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

in the inauguration of the PAGCOR Building of Guadalupe Elementary School

[Declared in Cebu City, Cebu, on March 3, 2016]

When the elders face the youth, your usual advice is: Study hard. So when I learned that students were among those I would face today, I said, I will show a good example. Last night, with the help of Bro. Armin, I studied hard. Here is the lesson I stayed up late for: I am very happy to be with you now, my beloved Sugbuanons. I am deeply grateful for your warm welcome to me. You are also my strength.[1] [Laughter and applause]

My father told me, his advice to me when I was in high school: Study hard. You may be famous now, but tomorrow, you will be outdated. Now you have money, maybe tomorrow, you will be poor. But if you study well, and all wisdom enters your mind, whatever happens, you are ready for any challenge in life. And we lived by that, because we have gone through so many challenges in our lives. We really focused on education, and one of the strongest promises I made to the people, the opportunity given to me by my parents to study well, we must give to all our countrymen.

We are gathered today to inaugurate your new school building here at Guadalupe Elementary School. This is just proof that on the Straight and Narrow Path, no one will be left behind. We are empowering and providing opportunities for progress to our countrymen.

An example of this: The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, which ensures that our youth are healthy and able to attend school. Yesterday, we were in Bohol, and we were informed there that 4Ps had only 531 beneficiary households when we began our term in 2010. Now, there are 59,222 households as of December 2015. [Applause] To you in Cebu: In June 2010, the number of households benefiting from 4Ps was 5,666. Now, 149,900 households are included in 4Ps. [Applause] Let us remember: The Pantawid Pamilya, especially in our administration, goes through what is called the National Household Targeting Survey or Listahanan. This means that they are not forced to receive benefits. Each family is assessed, who really has needs and should be helped? We have identified that the number of households in need across the country is about 4.6 million households. Last year, we reached 4.4 million households, and this year, we will complete the total of 4.6 million target. We are taking care of all those households.

Now, in the second Listahanan that was conducted, the survey and the initial results were heartwarming, because it seems we already have 7.7 million households that have risen above what is called the “poverty line.” They have risen above the poverty line. So for them, the next program is no longer for the “poor” but for what is called the “near poor.” What is the “near poor”? You are a little better off, you are able to get your daily needs, but if you are struck by a serious illness or there is a disaster, for example a typhoon, you might suddenly fall back to a situation where you cannot cope with life. That program aims to keep you further and further away from what are called “poor conditions.”

In education: The 66,800 classroom shortage we inherited, that has been closed. In addition to this, we have already closed the backlog of 61.7 million textbooks, 2.5 million chairs, and a shortage of—there were only a few missing teachers—145,827. That has also been filled. Perhaps it was filled because private schools are complaining that public school teachers have high salaries. They say that private schools should be subsidized. [Applause] Because few people applauded, the public school teachers probably don't agree with this. Aren't you included in Salary Standardization Level 4? [Applause] You are included, I am a government employee too, I am not included there. [Laughter] The next ones will benefit from it.

I just want to emphasize: Let's create a vertical structure here. There are places in the country that are truly called highly urbanized. There is no more land, land is very expensive. And it was mentioned earlier, if before it was one floor, maybe five or four classrooms, we need twenty to fill the shortage. How can we do that if there is no land to build on? The old building was demolished so that we now have a vertical structure in the same place, 20 classrooms instead of the previous four or five.

Now, we have collaborated with all LGUs. Bro. Armin explained to us that local governments buy the land in areas where there is a shortage, and the national government builds the school buildings. And to maximize the land, like here with you, we are building not just single-storey, but multi-storey buildings. The goal of all these initiatives: Before we step down from office, we will have 185,149 classrooms built and we are already funding them. That is the Straight Path. [Applause]

Let's just take a look back: One of the problems I had when I started, the budget of the Philippines could only support about eight thousand classrooms per year. The shortage that was surveyed was 66,000. Six years as president, times 8,000 per year, 48,000. Is my math correct? 48,000, but we need 66,000, I still have a shortfall. But here with Bro. Armin's initiative, the help of PAGCOR, together with the DPWH, Local Government Units, we not only filled the 66, the need of K-12, it is also ready. The old 30 to 40 year-old [classrooms] that are, in terms of clothing, already threadbare, we will replace them too. That's why we will reach 185,000 classrooms. Perhaps the one who will replace me, when education is mentioned, will just say “Thank you” to me, instead of “What did you leave me?” And I, we did this—Noynoy Aquino did not do this. We all did this, because you gave me the mandate. So thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

Now, we thank your local government, and the government agencies that joined hands to make this initiative a reality. To Chairman Bong Naguiat and PAGCOR who have reportedly given P12 billion for education, P9 billion to DPWH, P3 billion to DepEd. Before, DepEd would point, but they were also the ones tasked to construct; but they are not experts in construction. So in the early stages, the funds were with DepEd, then directly to DPWH who is really the one constructing. To Bro. Armin Luistro and DepEd, who helped assess and identify where it should be allocated. Who has the need? And who has the greatest need so that is the first to be addressed? To Secretary Babes Singson and DPWH, who built this building.

Certainly, the difference between now and the past is very significant. I even have a friend. And at the start of my term, he told me, “Noy, what I can’t forgive your predecessor for is the almost ten years that were lost to us.” Look at this very building we constructed, it could have been built a long time ago, couldn’t it? But what did they do?

The former head of PAGCOR spent a tremendous amount of public funds. One example is this: P1 billion—just to provide coffee for their agency. I said: Can these people even sleep with a billion pesos worth of coffee? For this project of ours, we spent P40 million. I know you’re good at math, and it’s not too difficult. P1 billion divided by 40 million for each classroom? The calculator says: 25. That means 25 school buildings like this could have been used by our youth if the money had been put here instead of on coffee that we don’t even know anyone drank. Is that right? That is the Straight Path. You judge for yourselves what is more important: school buildings or coffee? [Laughter]

It is very clear where the Straight Path is leading us. If this path we are taking is correct, I ask: Why would we stop it, or divert it in another direction? The good thing is, your fate and that of the entire country are in your hands. Not with those who clearly abuse their position. Not with those who aspire to high office, but lack experience. Not with those who act like tyrants and make endless promises, but whose style is all about “me.” You hold the power to vote for our next leaders. And in my opinion, there is no one else with integrity, ability, concrete plans, and a guarantee to continue the Straight Path, except our colleagues Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo.

In the end, I am only your servant. You are my Boss, and you will shape the future of our nation, the Philippines.[2]

Good afternoon. Thank you very much to all of you.