Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the groundbreaking ceremony of the Metro Rail Transit 7 Project

[Declared at the Quezon Memorial Circle, Quezon City, on April 20, 2016]

Today, we gather for the groundbreaking of the Metro Rail Transit 7 or MRT7 project. This is the first mass transport system that will bring benefits to our countrymen in Northeast NCR up to the part of Bulacan. Those who live near here at the Quezon Memorial Circle, along Commonwealth Avenue and Fairview, up to those from San Jose del Monte, Bulacan, will have a faster and more efficient way to get to their jobs, as well as other commercial centers in Manila.

With a cost of P69.3 billion, we will build not only the 23-kilometer Metro Rail Transit System line, but also an Intermodal Transport Terminal (ITT) in San Jose Del Monte. Here, when passengers get off the train, they can ride their private vehicles or public transportation to anywhere in Bulacan and neighboring towns. Likewise, those coming from the ITT will have an easier time getting to Manila.

Furthermore, this project includes the construction of a 22-kilometer highway, from the Bocaue interchange of NLEX, to ITT in San Jose del Monte. With this new six-lane highway, private and public vehicles going to ITT and NLEX will no longer have to jostle for space on the roads of San Jose Del Monte.

Once this project is completed, the travel of 350,000 passengers per day will surely be eased. If the system upgrades continue, our trains may be able to accommodate up to 800,000 passengers per day. The trip from San Jose del Monte to Makati, which currently takes three and a half hours, will be just one hour. And isn't that a great relief?

The NEDA Board approved this project in 2013. In truth, it was conceptualized during the term of our predecessor. As I said, these kinds of projects are not like candy that you can just buy at a convenience store. Thorough study is needed here; all kinks in the current system must be ironed out, so it does not cause problems in the future. It is also the duty of your government to ensure, in every negotiation, that the benefits it brings to our Bosses are maximized. Now that we have a clear understanding of the cooperation of our partners in the project to promote the welfare of our countrymen, it can begin, so that by 2020 we can benefit from it.

We are grateful for the cooperation of the private sector in our programs and projects. This is just proof of their confidence in a government that will not take advantage of them, and is focused only on the welfare of the majority. Currently, we have [50] solicited Public Private Partnership projects. 11 of these solicited projects have been awarded to our private sector partners; this is more than the 6 projects awarded in the past three administrations. 14 of our PPP projects are in various stages of procurement, while the remaining ones are in the pipeline.

What I can assure you: Any agreement entered into by your government is forged according to our basic principles: What is right and reasonable, that is what we will do; where there is the greatest benefit to our Bosses, that is where we will be. As always, anyone is free to examine all the details of the contract.

During my last SONA, we emphasized, “It doesn’t matter if I’m not the one to do the groundbreaking or ribbon-cutting. What is important: Make the projects polished and in accordance with the law, so that once it is approved, the implementation will be straightforward; no matter who examines it, the quality of what we are building will pass.”

Now, there are only 71 days left in our term. On June 30th, a new President will be yours. In 2020, someone else will inaugurate the MRT 7 that we started today.

During those times, I will probably be enjoying a quiet life in Tarlac. Perhaps, as a private citizen, I myself will drive: Travel along NLEX and detour at the Bocaue Interchange to pass through the new 22-kilometer highway going to San Jose del Monte. There, I will probably park at the new Intermodal Transport Terminal, and walk a little to ride the new train system. Along this journey, I will reflect on how far our country has come. I will revisit this day, in the chapter of the Straight Path that we worked together to record. And perhaps, on that day, I will utter once more the thought I share with you today: Truly, nothing is impossible for a decent, honest, and truly united Filipino.

Thank you very much. Good day to all of you.