Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In his meeting with local leaders and communities of Iloilo

[Delivered at the Plazoleta Gay, Iloilo City, on May 3, 2016]

You know, as long as there is someone beloved, I can do it. Beloved, darling, right, I understand that. And especially when there is no “h.” We Kapampangans, we add an “h” and also remove an “h.”

Comrades, perhaps how should I begin this speech? You know, Iloilo is really special to me. Even in my love life, maybe I’ll tell you about my love life. But it doesn’t have a happy ending, okay? [Laughter] My father had a friend who was from Iloilo, and honestly, it was as if when God scattered beauty, he really showered it on his whole family. So, one of the first crushes I ever had in my life were siblings. I said, “Okay, any of these siblings.” [Laughter]

Unfortunately, Martial Law came, we lost contact, and then came the time when I worked with someone, also here in Iloilo, named Carmela Borres. Maybe you know Carmela, I told her my story. So Carmela said to me, “You know, she’s my friend. They’re my friends and one of them is back in Iloilo.” Well, maybe this is it. It’s destiny. We’ll meet again! I said, “What do we do, Carmela?” She said, “Write a letter and I’ll deliver it.” So of course, we wrote a letter, a very beautifully written letter. It was quite long, actually, because I think all the things I wanted to say had accumulated over about 15 years. [Laughter]

That’s true, it really happened. I gave it to Carmela. Carmela went home, delivered it, and returned because we both worked in the same place back then, in Binondo. When Carmela arrived, of course, we were excited. “Carmela, what’s the news?” Her answer to me was, “I delivered the letter.” And now? “She’s getting married.” [Laughter] We wrote the letter exactly before she got married. Two weeks before the wedding. That’s the story of our love life in Iloilo. [Laughter] I don’t know what the lesson is there: Maybe don’t rely on Carmela. I don’t know. [Laughter] But let’s not talk about my life. Let’s talk about your lives.

What did we gain from the Straight Path? Because really, during my senatorial run, Manong Art helped us, Jerry helped us, even though they had a hard time helping us because I was in the opposition then, but they were there to help. What exactly did we gain? I know Manong Frank already mentioned a lot, right? He already mentioned our river that used to be not so beautiful, now it’s a tourist spot.

I think he also mentioned, if not here, then at another time, you know the model that Iloilo City made, especially with our informal settlers? How do we fix the problem of informal settlers? We talked to them, treated them like people, gave them a beautiful relocation center, helped them with their livelihood, the system is good, the former homeless are happy, they now have decent housing, they have support there. We were able to fix the development of Iloilo City. They mentioned—someone told me, Cory and Ninoy met in Iloilo. I said, my parents didn’t tell me that they met here in Iloilo. It turns out, the road named after them, the two met here in Iloilo. [Applause]

I mentioned this to you before, right? My problem is, whenever I go around the Philippines, there isn't a place in the Philippines where I can't return with my head held high because I shouldn't be ashamed. We haven't neglected anything. I won, I lost in 2010, I addressed their needs. But I said, “You know Frank, with what you, Manong Art, Jerry, and the others did, how many lanes does your road have here? Four and four, there's even two extra, there's also a bike lane, there's a “tsk.” Yes, you really know. Now I said, when I returned to Tarlac, they were asking me for four and four lanes and also a bike lane.” [Laughter] Isn't it like a lot happened here in Iloilo that they're asking us for, of course, in other places? “When will it be our turn?” I said, “Just a moment, they have a plan, that's what they want, that's the need, I just helped. You, what's your plan?” Then I will help you too and that's why until my last 58 days, we will continue to help as much as we can in everything. [Applause]

If it's okay with you, I have notes here. And I said, “Can you just choose the most important thing we did for Iloilo and if possible, just one page.” You can see that I was accommodated, just one page. The problem is, it's all stuck together and the letters are very small. Maybe they said it's better that way, so you'll have a hard time so we can report everything. But just as a sample, for infrastructure in Iloilo, the budget from 2005 to 2010, before we took office, was P10.05 billion; 2011 to 2016, when we were already running things, it reached P28.05 billion. It almost tripled. [Applause]

One of Manong Frank's favorites, of course, is the Jalaur River Multipurpose Project. And so I wouldn't forget what he said when we first thought of it, “1960, that's the year you were born, maybe now that you're alive, you can finally finish this.” So we are now at Jalaur, we are here, the groundbreaking for Stage 2 is finished, it's probably already in the bidding out of contracts.

Farm-to-market roads: We have delivered P1.16 billion here. [Applause] Production post-harvest machineries equipment: P228.75 billion.

Conditional Cash Transfer: In 2010, there were 5,085 households. Now, it has increased to 91,992 beneficiary households. [Applause] Of course, throughout the Philippines, from 780,000, it is now 4.6 million.

PhilHealth, in Iloilo alone: 1.8 million members, included in the 93 million assisted by PhilHealth. [Applause] In the Health Facilities Enhancement program, you know the story with us, the barangay health station might have a nurse, might have a midwife. When you get there, there’s a table, a chair, you’re seated, but there are no apparatus. No stethoscope, no blood pressure meter, nothing, no thermometer. So when you get there, you consult with the barangay health worker, and all you do is chat. That’s why the Health Facilities Enhancement Program, delivered by your fellow countryman Janette: P682.54 million for Iloilo again. [Applause]

Regarding electricity: Under the leadership of Icot Petilla, Secretary of Energy, our Sitio Electrification Program has reached 32,688 sitios throughout the Philippines. Here in Iloilo, 1,964 sitios have been lit up. One hundred percent, according to our 2011 survey. [Applause]

But, perhaps, it’s overwhelming, billions, hundreds of billions. What does this really mean? Let’s give an example: There’s a famous batchoy here, which I think Jed Mabilog will take me to sometime in the future, its name is Netong’s Batchoy. [Laughter] Is that right, Netong’s or Nitong’s? Netong. I was told, there was a testimony, it was videotaped, that he used to have one stall. In that stall at the bus stop, he earned P70,000 per month. Now, he says his two branches earn P1.7 million per month. [Applause] And what was the key? These roads where my parents met, that seems to have helped. Perhaps I want to emphasize this further. I will put this aside now because someone is signaling me that Mar Roxas will speak. [Laughter]

But, there's also this. Look, I recently came from Negros Occidental. So, of course, you land at the Silay airport. From Silay, I went to Bacolod City, passing through Talisay. So the next day, we were going back to the airport, I had another place to go. Talisay is a typical place, isn't it? It has a town hall, etc. I was surprised to see two large areas being reclaimed. One is a property being developed by Megaworld, the other is being developed by Ayala.

So what happened? The road from Silay airport to Bacolod was improved, straight through. It's really comparable to here in Iloilo. So, Negros Occidental has that kind of road, Iloilo has it too, Tarlac is still working on it. [Laughter] If I'm not accepted there, I hope you'll accept me here. [Applause]

Anyway, because Ayala became interested, Megaworld became interested, they said this place looks good to develop, the value of the land increased. The taxes collected increased now. The taxes weren't raised, the collection increased because of the existing taxes. Where did the taxes go? Talisay, the Local Government Unit, has a Special Education Fund. With the added income of their municipality, they were able to fund, they have a bus, their own classrooms, they have IT equipment, computers, they have an additional allowance for their teachers who travel far to teach. There's also a feeding program for kindergarten to grade 3 because that's where the most dropouts come from due to malnutrition, they can't continue their studies. They were also able to support the students' supplies.

Again, what the government did was build a road, they saw this place could be developed, and they started developing. But that's not finished yet, of course, only fences have been built. When that's developed, there will be factories, offices, malls, all of that is work for our fellow Filipinos, isn't it? But even without those buildings yet, the state of Talisay here in Negros Occidental has already improved.

Perhaps Netong's story is also beautiful. Let me add, there was an OFW, an accounting graduate, who was offered a job in the Middle East. Upon arriving there, she was told she would be a cashier. Upon arriving there, she was made a domestic helper and even maltreated. She escaped, was helped by our embassy to return home. Upon returning, she was reportedly very confused. And we can understand that, right, because this person likely borrowed money to go there. She didn't finish her contract, she wasn't paid. She'll return here, burdened with debt and with no way out, right? How will she pay off this debt?

So, upon her arrival here, she was given a fare back to Pangasinan. After that, she was told, “You know, there are programs for our OFWs if you want to train. TESDA and others have programs.” She joined. She entered TESDA, she took wellness, I think wellness and massage therapy. She got into a spa, became a good employee, became an operations manager. Really good. After that, she put up her own spa. She now has four branches of her spa. Then she also has a franchise. She is franchising three spas, in Tarlac. So, from a time when she really had nothing—she said she was even thinking of taking her own life because of the weight of her problems—now, this compatriot of ours is a strong entrepreneur. That is the result of the Straight Path. [Applause]

I really apologize, I just really feel the time limit. But perhaps, as Frank said earlier, “Where were we in 2010? Where are we now?” Who among us would be angry that previously, 780,000 households across the Philippines were being helped, now it's 4.6 million households? [Applause] Who would be angry that now our economy has an average GDP growth of 6.2 percent per year? The biggest. Only the 1970s was comparable, and even then, that number was somewhat manipulated. Who is angry that we now have the lowest unemployment rate? Who is angry that we are now Asia’s Rising Tiger, when we used to be the Sick Man of Asia? [Applause] Who is angry that 93 million Filipinos are now members of PhilHealth?

Previously, it depended on the election, right? During elections, it might be 47, maybe 51 percent. Now, whether there's an election or not, we continue to increase it and increase it. [Applause] Who would be angry that the Sin Tax pushed by Frank Drilon, it took 20 years to make that law, it couldn't pass, Frank Drilon was the one who passed it. That tax amounted to P141 billion last year. [Applause] Where will that go? 85 percent of that tax will go to health programs. So, if we get sick because of those sin products, they will also provide the solution to the problem they created.

Now, this is perhaps the most important thing I want to share with you today. I think, I won't talk about why Mar Roxas is good, I think you know why Mar Roxas is good. [Applause] Earlier, during your acceptance of Leni Robredo, I really felt you understood why Leni Robredo is the only one who should be Vice President. [Applause] So if that's the case, what's left for us to talk about? This is good, I need it again because I will quote it.

On April 29, 2016, it seems Senator Trillanes was asked, “If Mayor Duterte wins, what will you do?” Trillanes reportedly replied, “I will impeach him.” So, Manong Digong Duterte was asked, what was his reaction? Here's a direct quote, “If I get impeached, Trillanes said, then I'll shut down Congress, then no one can impeach me.” [Laughter] He was reportedly asked again, “Would he violate any law should”—this was an interview—“Would he violate any law should he choose to abolish Congress once he wins?” He reportedly answered, “What do you mean by law? All”—then he became quiet. “All law erase there if you win. If you lose, you're dead. Every revolution that succeeds, that's how it is. He now becomes the authority. And he”—then he became quiet again—“then look at Marcos. But his was Martial Law. That's different.” He said, whether his plan to abolish Congress is a form of dictatorship? He answered, “No, no. I am Congress. I am the President.” You are truly a dictator. A congressman said, “Why would you shut us down?” Then he said something I can't mention now because my mother taught me good manners. [Laughter] “Impeach, impeach you there”—and something I can't say again—“believe in that”—this might be okay—“fool.”

Let's just analyze what he's saying, because isn't it that everyone standing before you, how will you know if they're lying or not? If a person isn't lying, they will say, “This is where we're going and this is how we'll get there.” It's that simple. But if he doesn't say where we're going, of course we voters will ask, “Where are you taking us?” Our leader can't just say “I'll figure it out,” right?

So, let's add to that. You know, I'm not a lawyer, he is a lawyer. But I studied our Constitution and I challenge all of you here, everyone listening to us, look for it in the Constitution: Where is the President's power to abolish Congress? To abolish the Supreme Court as well? That might be next, who knows. But look for it, there is no such right.

It is stated in the Constitution that [the branches are] co-equal. What does that mean? If the President abuses [their power], Congress is there through impeachment to hold them accountable. If Congress and the President abuse [their power], the Supreme Court is there, they can review your actions, it’s called grave abuse of discretion. In short, our system has checks and balances so that no one abuses [their power] because we come from a place where abuse happened, right? He had two terms as President. When his term was about to end, Martial Law happened, there was a plus 13 [years]. So eight years he might have won, he added 13 years after his term ended. Imagine how long that was, 21 years we were under Martial Law.

When you say, “no laws,” and then mention revolution, is that a revolutionary government? What will it look like when you’re there? Are all the things being said correct? It seems like there have been other times he spoke with that same message: “I am the one who should be followed. I am right. I am the best.” Even to his supporters, I will just ask. We expect this person to always make perfect decisions, right? That’s why we support [him] because we don’t know what the plan is. We don’t know the methodology. So if you support him, maybe what he’s saying is too much, it’s not like that.

So I hope he doesn’t take his words literally now. My question is: What if he really means what he’s saying now? What if the Constitution is discarded? What if he might say tomorrow, “Your mother did that too.” I say, we just amended the 1973 [Constitution] and immediately, in 1986. EDSA, 1987, faced the Constitution approved by more than 90 percent of Filipinos. My mother didn’t leave the sole power to herself. They wanted to return to democracy as soon as possible, but there was still a process, the Constitution was drafted.

So, let’s think about it: You speak, you win, there are no more laws, throw that away, I am the one who is tough. That’s what he said, right? I’m not adding to what he said. “I am the one who should be followed.” Now, let’s go back. Can a person’s decision be perfect every time? People were created, they are not perfect. An imperfect person always making perfect decisions, that’s unlikely.

So, let me return to this. Why is it that he seems to be doing well in the surveys? I've thought about this many times, and I'll admit to you, my phone, this phone right here, honestly, so many people are texting me, worried especially as the election nears, what if it comes true? What if he actually sits in that position and everything he says is true? And what pains me is that this is the 30th anniversary of our EDSA revolution. At the time when we gained freedom, now it seems like those who act like dictators are gaining ground. Something must be wrong here, what happened?

So, I'll go back to that, that's why I asked you earlier, is it wrong to help those under the 4Ps program? Is it wrong to have a 300 percent increase in the DOH budget? Is it wrong to have built 185,000 classrooms so children can study, and when they graduate or while they are in high school, TESDA helps them so they can have a job six months after graduation? Is everything we've done wrong, that we should reverse it and try the experiment of Martial Law again?

They might say, I won't implement Martial Law. Okay, maybe the name will be different. But once we throw away the laws we agreed upon, the Constitution, which the people approved in 1987. If you replace it, of course the question is: What will you replace it with? “I will take care of it.” Who will implement that? “I will take care of it too.” Who will be followed? “Well, me.” Where will we complain, “To me.” What if you're wrong? “Just endure it.” Isn't it that simple?

So, let me repeat, so many people are texting me, members of the media, religious people, and others are ordinary citizens. And they always say, “You are the key to preventing this from happening.” I said, “Me, I only have 58 days left. I'm just an ordinary citizen.” Most likely, if the horror that others are thinking comes true, and someone truly acts like a dictator, do you think I'll still have any influence? Maybe we'll be number one on the order of battle.

But as for me, if that happens to me, I'm okay with it. Why? When my father was killed, I said I couldn't bear it if nothing changed. And all they could do to us during Martial Law was to imprison you? Kill you? So I already made a choice then. I cannot accept that nothing came of my father's death and that of our other countrymen, thousands of them. I need to pour out everything I can do. If my life is the price, that's all I have, then my life shouldn't be that important because I won't be able to fight for what my father fought for. It wouldn't have any meaning.

So, 1983 was when we came home. [Applause] In 1987, we were defending democracy, I visited my mother in Malacañang when a coup happened. I was ambushed there, three of my four companions died. Until now, I still have a bullet in my neck. Just a bonus, from 1987 until now. So if that's my fate, then so be it. God will probably take care of me if what I did was right. But what's important to me is that we are clear as we go to our polling centers.

On Monday, we will vote. It needs to be clear: What are we choosing? Let's not be swayed by “Hey, he's different.” Like, his way of speaking is different. Is that okay? Will that kind of speaking put a kilo of rice on anyone's table? When we look for allies and greet them boisterously, how many allies will we have? But our opponent in the South China Sea is strong. To be honest, we even offended two of our allies, and I was the one who apologized. I wasn't the one who offended them, but I was the one who apologized. But that's my role.

Comrades, maybe it's my destiny, Jerry's destiny, many of us here, we grew up during Martial Law. During that time, if you thought about the future, making it to the next Christmas was a big deal. Now it's different. You really need to persevere. Families who can't afford to send their children to school, the government will support them. When your child graduates, they will have the ability, they will have a job to go to, they will have a way to improve their situation in life. If you get sick, Batman won't save you, the state is trying to pour out everything it can to help you if you get seriously ill.

We have good relations with almost the whole world. Businessmen have trust. You are probably the witnesses, I'm staying tonight at, uh, Richmonde. Richmonde used to be, right, it was just an airport. Oh, Richmonde is now next to the Convention Center, there's a building there, McDonalds, that's it. Oh now, three buildings that I passed are being constructed. More work, more opportunities.

So, that's where it comes from. Let's say in the past, we were down, the Sick Man of Asia. We have risen, we are respected by the world again now, they say Asia’s Next Tiger. [Applause] Oh, now, PhilHealth, we still have 7 percent that are not yet covered by PhilHealth. With Pantawid Pamilya, it started in grade school, 2014, high school was also helped. Our first batch of high school students, 2015, more than 300,000 were helped when they graduated. From that number, 13,000 to 14,000 were honor students.

Let's continue what we are doing. Those who entered, those who spoke for them, entered UP. They took the UP test in Diliman, the course they entered, Engineering. Engineering is a quota course, it's difficult to get in there. The two who were helped by Pantawid Pamilya, their speakers, were both accepted in the UP College of Engineering. Let's continue what's happening, let's utilize their talents. [Applause]

So, when we write on the ballot, I hope that with every dot we make, we think: Will this help ensure that the next generation, the next generation, will not go through the problems I went through? Will this help ensure that the future really goes up and up and is not uncertain, not backwards, not a U-turn? That is the value of every vote. You who are here, especially those fanning themselves so hard, you must be very hot, I assume, you wouldn't endure it if we weren't together. But our problem is, how about those who didn't hear tonight? How about those who are lost? How about those who are tricked? Maybe we still have time, we can talk to them.

Perhaps here in Iloilo, it’s difficult to find, but in other places we might look there. We have friends, maybe we have textmates, maybe we have Facebook friends. Whoever they are, because let me repeat, in our system, the majority decides for everyone.

So let me just go back to my question: Why is it that on the anniversary of EDSA, these people who act like puppets are the ones rising up? And you know, it’s very simple. It’s like those who dislike democracy and those who are misguided have come together. I’m not saying that everyone there has bad intentions. No. There are those with bad intentions, and there are those who were simply carried away. But if you look at the numbers, if you add up those who are against them, our lead is significant. It’s just important that we unite.

And that’s all, it really went on for a long time. What I just want to say to you is, I believe the one who will unite us, who will continue the Straight Path, and who will further elevate what we can achieve, is no other than Mar Roxas.