Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In a meeting with local leaders and communities of Urdaneta, Pangasinan

[Declared in Urdaneta, Pangasinan, on March 14, 2016]

Back then, it was boasted that Pangasinan was the start of the Solid North. It wasn't scheduled, but the very last campaign rally I attended during the snap election ended here in Pangasinan. And I was the last speaker. Now, the speech, the people were really enthusiastic, it felt like they were sensing that our mother would win, that the Philippines would be freed. The reception for us was really very warm even though it was past midnight when I was brought to the stage. I really felt the love that our countrymen there were showing us.

Now, I was encouraged, and the speech became a bit longer. We reached a point where we connected so much that it just kept getting longer and longer. It reached a point where I was running out of things to say because the speech lasted an hour and a half—the longest I had given at that time. And I was thinking: How can we end this speech so that we leave them wanting more? Because in just a few days, it's the snap election. So I reached a point where I said, “It seems we are getting late. Maybe I should say goodbye to you.” They said, “No. We are still ready to listen to you. Just continue.” A little while later, I thought of another way to say goodbye. They said, “No. We can still stay here. Continue.” Then came a time when it suddenly drizzled. I said, “Hey, it's drizzling. Maybe we should end this.” The response to us was, “We are ready to get wet. Continue.” I just replied, “If you get wet, you might catch a cold, get the flu, and not be able to vote. If you can't vote, we'll lose the election by default.” That's when they agreed to end it. That's why, even then, I felt a great personal debt of gratitude, especially to Pangasinan. So thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

We are here again to be with our beloved Pangasinense people. My Bosses, our pledge on the Straight Path was: In progress, no one will be left behind. And Pangasinan is one proof that we kept our word. With your permission, let us enumerate some of the evidence.

On the Straight Path, we accelerated the infrastructure of Pangasinan. From 2005 to 2010, the amount allocated by our predecessor to your infrastructure—and he said he was Pangasinense—totaled P9.77 billion. I did not claim to be from here, but from 2011 to 2016, five years were discussed, we doubled his P9 billion. The amount we allocated for infrastructure alone was P20.13 billion for Pangasinan. [Applause] Using this fund, we built roads, bridges, airports, ports, health facilities, flood control projects, and others here in your province.

Many of our countrymen are now benefiting from the completed Section 1 of the Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway or TPLEX. With its help, the trip from Tarlac City to Rosales Pangasinan, which used to take at least 2 hours, is now only 30 minutes. We have also completed Section 2 of the TPLEX, from Rosales to Urdaneta City. Once the entire section of the TPLEX is completed, the trip from us in Tarlac City to Rosario, La Union, from three and a half hours, they say will be only one hour. More tourists will flock, for the benefit of all. [Applause]

Given the great benefit it brings, even the plan to extend the TPLEX, and what the proponent tells us, they want it to reach Ilocos Norte. And currently, they are studying how the actual route to Ilocos Norte of this TPLEX will be.

While this is being studied, we continue to improve the Manila North Road, or the MacArthur Highway, up to Ilocos Sur and Ilocos Norte to make travel easier for our countrymen heading North. Aside from the TPLEX, we are also constructing the Bobonot-Tambobong Road, the Pangasinan-Tarlac Road, and the Pangasinan-Zambales Road, which truly bring great convenience for tourism and commerce.

Let's also include the Pangasinan-Nueva Vizcaya Road, which Marlyn mentioned again earlier. She told me that as early as the 1970s, even before I was a teenager, it was already being planned, but we are the ones who will concretize it. And that is because you gave us the authority. Again: Thank you very much.

From the mandate you have given us, during our term, we are also investing in the fisheries and agriculture sectors as your primary industries. To support these industries, we are constructing three fish ports in the municipalities of Anda, Bolinao, and Santiago. In total, we have allocated more than P9.96 billion for the construction of farm-to-market roads and irrigation systems here in Pangasinan alone. Part of this is the Agno River Irrigation System Extension or ARISEP project worth P2.6 billion. With its help, you will be able to increase your production, sell harvests faster and fresher in the market, and maximize the income of farmers. That is the benefit brought by the Straight Path.

When your representatives approach us, there is no need for lengthy explanations. Your problem in Pangasinan is not different from our problem in Tarlac. As you know, in Tarlac, during the dry season, there is no flowing water; during the rainy season, it rushes. If we can only control that water, the excess from the rainy season, we can use it during the dry season. It will truly benefit all of us. And we are already undertaking projects towards that end and completing other plans so that we can fully utilize the irrigation system.

We also have what we call 49 Shared Service Facilities or SSF here in your province that help grow the livelihood and businesses of Pangasinense people. These facilities support things like bangus (milkfish) and bagoong (fermented shrimp paste) processing. One of the beneficiaries of this is the Binmaley Rural Improvement Club. Before, they earned P211,000 monthly. This has increased to P723,000 per month after being helped by the Shared Service Facilities. Another one that was mentioned to me earlier: Because of the SSF, those who make pastilyas (rice cakes), polvoron (powdered milk candies), and other similar products, who previously earned over 100,000, now earn around 600,000 per month.

It is clear: On the Straight Path, we are not only focusing on individual sectors, but we are striving to address various needs simultaneously. We are not content to say “it’s good enough” or “let fate decide” or “we’ve done something anyway.” The comfort brought about by our services should be widespread. Earlier, we turned over newly constructed classrooms here in Urdaneta 1 Central School. This was funded by PAGCOR under the leadership of Chairman Bong Naguiat. Look at the big change: Before, PAGCOR wasted billions of pesos on coffee; now, it is helping to uplift the level of education in the country. Chairman told me that this is not only in Urdaneta, but also in Dagupan and many other places, especially with Marlyn in the third district.

Isn't it true that in the past, there was often the idea: No matter how hard a Filipino works, it often seems to lead nowhere. On the Straight Path, we are proving: If there is perseverance, a reward is guaranteed.

Proof of this: Graduates of the Training for Work Scholarship Program of TESDA, in Pangasinan, we already have 31,656 TWSP graduates from 2010 to 2015. This is under the leadership of Joel Villanueva. This is only one program of TESDA because it is only part of the nine million graduates of various TESDA courses nationwide. What’s even better is that we found out that supporting TESDA scholars, will this continue? I think it will. Because in the first year alone, if a graduate from the TESDA program works in the IT-BPO industry, they will pay taxes exceeding what we spent to educate them. And if you think about it, let’s say they entered at 20 years old, they might pay taxes for thirty years. This means that one person helped can potentially help thirty others after being helped. That is the Straight Path. [Applause]

When it comes to caring for our countrymen, the services of the Straight Path continue in Pangasinan. Currently, 2.6 million of our countrymen in your province are covered by PhilHealth, which is part of the total 93 million beneficiaries of PhilHealth nationwide.

In the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, the former 14,292 beneficiary households in your province, under the Straight Path, has increased to 124,851 households. This is the positive change brought about by the Straight Path in Pantawid Pamilya. You know, in Cebu, they say it's their stronghold, when we took office, there were only 5,600 beneficiaries. In Bohol, only 531 households. The most I've seen recently is Cavite, not a single household, Pantawid did not help anyone during their time.

Throughout the country, from almost zero or slightly, if not reaching 800,000 beneficiaries when we arrived, this year, the remaining 200,000 families, we will complete our target of 4.6 million beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya. And that is because we were given trust. [Applause]

Some critics say, “That’s just dole out. Teach them how to fish instead of giving them fish.” In our view, this is not dole out; we are truly investing. The main condition of Pantawid Pamilya: Make sure your child continues to study. And when they graduate, their earnings will be much better, right?

And so, it is truly wonderful, the initial results of this program are very good. There are now reportedly 7.7 million individuals who have crossed or risen above what is called the “poverty line” due to the help and blessings given by the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. [Applause] When we say that we will expand this, it means we are increasing the benefits it provides. What we want is to avoid a situation where they rise quickly, are no longer the poorest, but are those in the base called “near poor” or close to poverty. Because they might fall back below the poverty line, back into poverty, if hit by a serious illness or disaster, and we don’t want that to happen to our countrymen. That's why we continue our efforts to move them further away from the base of poverty so that they can truly stand on their own two feet.

According to a survey recently, 4 out of 5 Filipinos surveyed said they would vote for a candidate who would continue Pantawid Pamilya. That's why many are now complaining and jumping on our success. That one candidate, right? You are witnesses, he said he would expand Pantawid Pamilya, but his son wants to investigate it. With the number of corruption allegations he faces, he will likely abuse the Pantawid Pamilya.

Clearly, we are making a reality of what was once thought impossible. This transformation we are enjoying, did anyone think this could be done in just almost six years? We are grateful for the cooperation of the Pangasinense people in our reform agenda. Special mention to the shared burden of your leaders like Mayor Bobong Perez, who has become thin from hardship to help you. And again, to Manang Baby Arenas, Manay Gina de Venecia, and Marilyn [Agabo]. Of course, Chairman Amadito Perez, this is my last tour of the country, there are only over 100 days left in our term. During my father’s time, since I ran for Senate, especially when I ran for president, Chairman Amadito Perez gave us solid support. [Applause] So, thank you very much for your shared burden, for being with us through all the tension, hardship, and really, the fatigue. And I think, when Amadito Perez Jr. is mentioned again, it will be remembered that he was a bridge for us to be together and reach our current situation. Again: Thank you very much.

The good wife of Chairman Bong Naguiat, the sister of Mayor Perez, Tet. Let me repeat: I consider her a true sister. Honestly, she is one of those who sympathize and really push me to develop, not only the country, but also personal things, including my love life. Thank you, of course, to Mareng Tet Naguiat for how she cares for her children, cares for a friend like me, but most importantly, cares for our Chairman who is very healthy. We really see how people are cared for here in Urdaneta. [Applause]

Bosses, as you can see, we have companions from the National People’s Coalition. I believe their presence here indicates whether or not there is a party stand. Perhaps a party stand will lean towards us, and we will thank them for that. But we are all partners here, pushing for the continuation and expansion of the Straight Path. Truly, with your support, and that of our other Bosses in various parts of the country, nothing can stop us.

As I said, this is just the beginning of our progress. It is in our hands whether we make this permanent or just temporary. On May 9th, we will once again face a crossroads. We will choose leaders who will steer the nation in the direction we take. The question is: Do we go back to the crooked practices, with no principles to uphold? Do we go to the dictatorial attitude, where one believes they are the only one who is intelligent and right? Do we go to a newcomer who lacks the ability to lead our country?

If you ask me, we should go with someone who truly has “K”: capable, conscientious, truthful in word and deed, compassionate, and of course, with an added Korina. That is Mar Roxas. [Applause]

Mar is truly far ahead compared to other candidates. Mar is full of proof of accomplishments. Whatever task you give him, Mar never falls short. He has already created more than a million jobs in the IT-BPO sector, reduced crime in Metro Manila and many other regions; and helped many of our countrymen during disasters. If I had Mar as my Vice President from the beginning, I am sure we would have achieved even greater success. That is Mar Roxas: no drama, no embellishment, just pure work.

Just now, we heard from Aika Robredo, the eldest daughter of the leading candidate for Vice President on the Straight Path, Leni Robredo. And many will surely ask, who is Leni Robredo, and why should we support her? You know, I am truly impressed by Leni's resilience in the face of great trials. Upon the passing of her good husband, Jesse Robredo, instead of showing us sadness, instead of me offering help for her and her children to overcome the trial, Leni seemed to be the one who helped and inspired all of us.

Everyone who knows Leni says the same thing: When it comes to service, the couple, and now Leni continues, is true, serious, and principled. She doesn't base service on the beauty or abundance of decorations, but on good intentions and her pure heart. When she was called upon to continue the reforms in Camarines Sur in 2013, she would face powerful families, but she did not back down. She could have refused; she could have said that their family had already contributed a lot, and she would just take care of her children, who were only two in school at that time. But Leni prioritized the desire to help those on the margins. Now, she could seek re-election, which would probably be easier, she would surely win again. She could also say, “Maybe our contribution is enough. Maybe we can rest now.” But again, she accepted the challenge, and an even bigger challenge to serve. That is why, I strongly appeal to all of you, let us not think of anyone else for Vice President but Leni Robredo. [Applause]

As they say, those who do not look back at where they came from will not reach their destination. Before, we were mired in endless allegations of lies, fraud, and theft. On the Straight Path, we rose and learned to walk. Now, we are running, moving forward continuously. The question is: Will we change our decision?

I remember what an older woman told me when I was campaigning in Nueva Ecija in 2010, “Noy, be careful. You will encounter many obstacles.” It was as if she was telling me that she expected me to be true to my words. That those who need to be confronted, those who are corrupt and oppress our people, must be held accountable. It is true, in our reforms, we have faced many—those who have made a living exploiting Filipinos. There is a former President now under hospital arrest or house arrest; there is a former Chief Justice who was removed; there are also Senators who are now detained and being held accountable for their actions. That is why I am not surprised that others are threatening our lives. They say that when I step down from office, they will file case after case against me. They will make my life a Calvary. I will tell them: Do not make my life a Calvary. My life has been a Calvary for a long time. Just fall in line.

For me, what matters is this: As long as I am true to you, as long as I have been an instrument for you to change your lives, whatever I face in the future, I am already happy. I can now face my parents because I did not fall short with you or with them. Again, thank you very much. [Applause]

Comrades, truthfully, there are days, I can't help it, as you all know, my love life is open, I don't have a family yet, I don't have children yet, but you already call me “Father of the Nation.” As father of the nation, and with only over 100 days left in our service, I can now say, “I have accomplished something. That might be enough.” But in my honest opinion, it is important that before we part ways, you are in good hands. And how do we ensure that? You know, during the campaign period, many will court you, many of their promises are beautiful to hear. But how many of them will truly be true to us? If everyone promises to improve your lives, but I guarantee you, some will lead us to a left turn, some will lead us to a right turn, but we can go straight ahead so that the progress we are making now will become a run. The most painful thing is, when we make a big mistake, it will not just be a left turn, a right turn, maybe a U-turn. A U-turn, we might go back to where we came from. And I believe none of us want to go back to where we came from.

Therefore, for me, let us continue with what we have already started, ensure that we expand and accelerate our journey on the Straight Path. And in my opinion: Whoever will lead and continue the Straight Path, the next President of the Philippines is none other than Mar Roxas.