Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the turnover of SSF projects in Pangasinan

[Delivered in Dagupan, Pangasinan, on March 14, 2016]

You know, Pangasinan is truly close to our hearts. I remember: in 1990, a very strong earthquake hit Luzon. My mother and I went to express our condolences and see the damage, especially here in Dagupan; and as I recall, many of your buildings, the roads really seemed to rise, the buildings seemed to sink. They called it “subsidence.” Bridges collapsed and roads were severely damaged. My mother, with the help of Congress, pushed for the allocation of P10 billion for the provinces hit by the earthquake. Of course, we were not given a break, because the following year, Mount Pinatubo struck us. That's when Dagupan's recovery began again, and if you look at Dagupan now, it seems so far removed from those times.

Now, you have not only recovered from the tragedy, but you are really moving forward. This building is a witness to the growth of your economy. Your province of Pangasinan is one of those that proves: On the Straight Path, no one will be left behind in progress. After almost six years of good governance, we have really come a long way. To our beloved Pangasinense: Thank you very much for your unity on the Straight Path. [1]

Today, we witnessed the turnover of an additional 23 Shared Service Facility or SSF Projects of the Department of Trade and Industry here in Pangasinan. With the help of these SSFs, modern equipment for creating various designs and products are shared with communities. This is part of our broad strategy to strengthen cooperatives, micro-, small-, and medium-scale enterprises or MSMEs, which in turn opens up opportunities for many of our countrymen. Most of our employees in the Philippines come from this sector.

Currently, you already have 49 SSFs here in your province that are being utilized by the Pangasinense people. This includes a facility for processing bangus products, which is one of your main industries, as well as bagoong processing, engineered bamboo production, and many others. You know, the engineered bamboo production… One thing that gives us a little joy is listening to music, and the use of bamboo enclosures in making loud speakers is very popular now. And it’s much more expensive to use bamboo than what is called medium-density fibreboard, or wood.

Using these new facilities, many individuals and businesses have improved their livelihoods, and their ability to compete in larger markets has been enhanced. One product that Pangasinan is famous for is tupig. You know, when I was a child, the person who took care of me, I don’t know how she did it, always brought me bundles of tupig, not just one or two pieces, whenever she went home. This is good. Because Sumulong, where my grandmother came from, suman is popular there. Suman needs to be added with sugar to be delicious, or mixed with mangoes. Tupig is already sweet, and it also has crispy, crunchy parts. It’s more complete, I think. Of course, we are delighted with the almost one foot length of the tupig.

Sometimes, we went to Baguio, we passed through Pangasinan, and I saw someone selling tupig. I called him and had him bring me his tupig. We bought bundles again. And before we even started driving, I opened a wrapper that was as long as I was when I was a child. When I opened the wrapper, there was a wrapper inside, there was a third wrapper, there was a fourth wrapper. [Laughter] I said, I remember, there used to be only one wrapper. When we opened all the wrappers, all that was left was gapastillas the size of tupig. [Laughter] I was surprised. I called the vendor. Brad, come here for a moment. Why is the wrapper one foot long, but the filling is like that? He said, “Sir, nothing has changed. The price is the same, but the cost of goods has increased, so the filling has become shorter.” [Laughter]

Now that the SSF is strengthening here with you, perhaps it will be possible to return the size of your tupig to what it used to be. [Laughter]

One of the areas covered by the SSF is food processing. In Sto. Tomas, there are people making pastillas, polvoron, and puto, and because of the establishment of the SSF, the monthly output is estimated to double from 300 packages to 600 packages. Their monthly income, from P63,500, is now estimated to reach P226,000. Thanks to the help of the Shared Service Facility.

Let us emphasize the change: You heard about the Binmaley Rural Improvement Club, which was really helped by our SSF initiative. Because they gained access to a facility that extends the shelf life of bangus, their production is increasing. They are no longer obliged to sell fresh, where harvests happen simultaneously and prices are low. If before, they could only release a maximum of 3,000 kilos, now, with the help of the SSF, they are reportedly reaching 8,000 to 10,000 kilos of production. Naturally, their income has also increased: From P211,000 per month, it is now reaching P723,000 per month.

In total, since we launched the program in 2013, we have 1,681 SSFs nationwide. The beneficiaries are: 16,192 MSMEs, and 72,864 entrepreneurs. The good news is: The DTI is targeting to open an additional 200 SSF Projects before we step down from office.

Besides the SSF projects, we are also focusing on improving your infrastructure, as part of our efforts to develop your other sectors. Here in Pangasinan alone, we have allocated a total of P20.13 billion from 2011 to 2016 [applause] for the construction of roads, bridges, health facilities, flood control projects, airports, and ports. This fund is more than double the P9.77 billion that was only given to you by our predecessors from 2005 to 2010. So P9 billion for them, P20 billion for us, and earlier, when you applauded, I said, it seems my Bosses are happy. When the income of those we helped in the SSF grew, it seemed no one reacted. It was as if they were offended that income was increasing.

Among our big-ticket items here is the completed construction of Section 1 and Section 2 of the Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway or TPLEX, as well as the Bobonot-Tambobong Road, Pangasinan-Zambales Road, and Pangasinan-Tarlac Road, which have truly provided great convenience to the flow of your tourism and commerce.

To further strengthen your agriculture: In total, we allocated P9.96 billion for the construction of farm-to-market roads and the improvement of the irrigation system here in your province. Because of this, you are increasing your production, ensuring that your harvest is fresh when it reaches the market, which undoubtedly increases your income. We have also invested in facilities that will help our farmers bring their products directly to consumers. In this way, they can maximize their income because there are no longer middlemen deducting from their sales and earnings. Here in Pangasinan, there is also the Pangasinan Agri-Pinoy Trading Center, where farmers can sell their products such as vegetables and meat.

We also know that one of the things affecting your lives is severe flooding. That was also a problem for us in Tarlac. When I was first a congressman in the second district of Tarlac, I remember: There was a Tagumbao Bridge in Tarlac, and we suggested during my first term… I said then, could my entire PDAF at that time be put into the Tagumbao bridge so that even in installments, it could be started. The answer to me was, if it is not complete, it cannot be started. Frankly, every year, during the summer in Tarlac, there is almost no water flowing in the river. But during the rainy season, it rushes and destroys all protection.

So I, as a congressman, went to the DPWH and asked, “Who can help us with flood control?” I was first pointed to the Pampanga River Delta Project. When I went there, I was told, “We do not cover you. You are covered by the Lower Agno River Project.” When I went to Lower Agno, I was told, “We do not cover you. You are covered by the Pampanga River Delta Project.” In other words, we were passed around like a ping pong ball. The result: No result; we were just passed from one to another. The outcome: You work hard, you look for help, but you get nothing.

On the Straight Path, things are really different now: The government truly thinks about your welfare. That is why from 2011 to 2015, we allocated P4.30 billion for your flood control projects here in Pangasinan. [Applause] This includes the construction of a dike along the Ambayaoan River, and gabion riverbank protection on the Sinucalan River. In addition, under Project NOAH, we installed 24 Automated Rain Gauges that measure the amount of rainfall, and 13 Water Level Monitoring Stations that can provide real-time flood water level updates. With the help of these modern equipment from PAGASA, our countrymen are immediately warned and evacuated from dangerous areas. A promise from us at DOST, six hours is the minimum warning.

As you can see, we are not focusing on just one sector, we are also striving to address your other needs. In our administration, we are further expanding the scope of our social services.

In education, as you know: We closed the inherited backlog in classrooms, school seats, and textbooks. We also strengthened our basic education system to provide quality education to our students. Later, we will visit Urdaneta I Central School to turn over a new 4-storey, 24 classroom building, which was funded and constructed under the Matuwid na Daan sa Silid-aralan School Building Project of PAGCOR. Here in Dagupan, I won’t be able to visit yet because it is still under construction. So much has changed: If before, PAGCOR spent billions of pesos just on coffee, now it is helping to enlighten, develop, and awaken the knowledge of our youth. [Applause]

My replacement claims to be from Pangasinan. [Here in Pangasinan,] we have expanded the coverage of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program: During his time, only 14,292 households benefited from 4Ps. Under our leadership, now, there are 124,851 beneficiary households in our 4Ps. Throughout the country, we will complete our target of 4.6 million Pantawid Pamilya beneficiaries this year. [Applause] It's as if only 200,000 are left to reach this year. In PhilHealth, 2.6 million Pangasinense are now covered by the program, which is part of the 93 million Filipinos receiving health services. Let me add: Right here in Dagupan, we inaugurated the Region 1 Medical Center, which benefits our beloved Pangasinense and even your neighboring provinces.

Of course, we cannot achieve the success of our programs and projects in your province without the cooperation of your local leaders. That is why we thank Mayor Belen Fernandez, Rep. Gina de Venecia, Rep. Pol Bataoil, and Rep. Baby Arenas, for sharing the burden of our agenda for broad development. [Applause] Excuse me for speaking too quickly, the list is long. You might think I forgot Pangasinan.

On the Straight Path, we did not leave our achievements to chance. We did what was right and reasonable; we focused our efforts on the welfare of the majority. In all of this, would anyone with sound judgment say that we neglected Pangasinan? It is clear where good governance leads us. We have begun positive change, we have changed the story of the Filipino people.

You know, Joel Villanueva, the former TESDA chief who is now running for Senator, told me a story about a fellow OFW from Pangasinan. When he returned home, he said to him, “I want to study other skills.” He entered TESDA, underwent training, and took the massage therapy course. After obtaining the massage therapy course, he established a spa. He now has four spas here in Pangasinan, and 32 or 35 employees within two years of training at TESDA. That is what we mean by maximizing opportunities for everyone, and I am truly pleased that our compatriot is part of the at least 600,000 Filipinos who were once OFWs. Now they have a good life in the Philippines, because that is the number that has been reduced from our OFW population.

Now that we have the opportunity to further accelerate our progress, let me ask, will we back down? On May 9th, we will once again face a crossroads. We will choose the next leaders of our country again. Who else can we entrust our future to, if not to those who are certain, to those with experience and ability, to those who truly care for others and stand for what is right? My Bosses, I can face you, look you in the eye, and I tell you, the only ones who will continue the Straight Path are Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

In the six years you have given me, there are only 107 days left before I step down, and in every moment of our term, I continue to be true to you. With your continued support, we can go far. As always: You are my strength, you started it, and you will continue it. [2]

In closing, you know that Manay Gina is still helping me with my love life, but we haven't succeeded yet, so I'll just stick to being the “Father of the Nation.”

As the father of the nation, naturally, 107 days are up for me as your father. And I want to make sure you are in a good situation like any father would. Let's look back: Where did we come from and where are we now? And as we say, our progress now, we are just learning to walk. Isn't it said, “Before you run, learn to walk.” Our walk is already good.

The question here is: Can we continue straight on our path of the Straight Path, or can we try to turn left, turn right, and the painful part is, we might have to make a U-turn. [Laughter] You know what a U-turn is, we’ll go back to the way things were. I just want to ask those of you who are SSF beneficiaries, would it be okay with you if we go back to a situation where we ignore each other, where no one helps each other? I ask the 4.6 million families of Pantawid, is it okay if you’re left to fend for yourselves? I ask those of you whose areas experienced reduced flooding, would it be okay with you if the structures we built are changed, and you return to your previous situation?

I will repeat: You are my strength, you made this happen, you will continue this, and my parents taught me, I rely on our countrymen, my fellow Filipinos, and there is nothing we cannot achieve.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.



[1] Thank you very much for joining the Straight Path.

[2] You are my strength, you made the change happen, you will continue it.