Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the turnover ceremony of the fire trucks and patrol jeeps

[Declared at the Quezon Memorial Circle, Quezon City, on April 4, 2016]

This morning, we gather for another testament: We will leave the Philippines better and more peaceful than we found it. Under the leadership of our Department of the Interior and Local Government, we are pleased to grant 135 fire trucks and 144 patrol jeeps to various cities and municipalities across the country.

It is not unknown to you: The situation we found at the Bureau of Fire Protection was complex. Due to the neglect of our predecessors and the deviation from the public interest, the needs of your agency seemed to have been overlooked. Not only were there a lack of fire trucks, but most of those we had were very old and dilapidated. Of course, this resulted in poor service that further exposed our Bosses, as well as our firefighters, to danger.

Therefore, when we assumed office, we immediately addressed this. Under the leadership of our late DILG Secretary Jesse Robredo, continued by the reliable and good governance of Sec. Mar Roxas, and now, Sec. Mel Sarmiento: We truly studied the problem, found it a solution and allocated sufficient funds for it, and put it through bidding and the proper process.

Now, the result is clear: From July 2010 to December 2015, we have procured a total of 561 fire trucks worth P4.25 billion. Because of this, all cities throughout the Philippines now have at least one fire truck; of the 1,489 municipalities in the country, after we deliver these new vehicles, 1,194 will have a new fire truck. This year, we aim to acquire an additional 369 fire trucks. 293 of these will be to fill the shortage in municipalities; 76 will be for cities and key municipalities of each province, where we can provide the Rosenbauer brand of firetruck, or what is considered the Mercedes Benz of fire trucks.

The question: What change do these new fire trucks bring? First, its water tank, made of stainless steel, has a capacity to carry 3,800 liters of water, which exceeds the minimum requirement of 3,785.41 liters—or as was mentioned to me earlier by Bistek—the equivalent of 1,000 gallons. The water monitor has also been improved: the water it can spray can now reach up to 12 stories of a building. And if before, some firefighters were exposed on the truck and prone to accidents, now, it has a cabin that can accommodate up to 7 firefighters, and they even managed to have it air-conditioned. Most importantly: The response time from the time a fire is reported, which used to take 12 minutes, we have now halved it to 6 minutes. Let us just remember that in the past, there were twelve moments for the vehicle to start and run. If it doesn't start, if it's pushed, of course it takes longer for our fire truck to arrive.

I also recall a story, when we were still in Congress. We were talking to the firefighters, and we ourselves witnessed them putting out the fire. We saw the very thick smoke. They said that our firefighters, when responding, to drive away the smoke [from the fire], would just spray water. We all know that people breathe air, and not smoke. So, we also focused on the necessary equipment of our firefighters. From 2011 to 2015, we have purchased and delivered personnel protective equipment to the BFP, worth P208.38 million. This includes 636 self-contained breathing apparatus, 2,861 coats and trousers, 5,106 helmets, 4,835 gloves, and 5,597 boots.

We undertook the same spirit to develop our Philippine National Police. Before, our police were considered “poor cowboys” due to the old and broken patrol jeeps, now, they have new and quality vehicles or “workhorses” to assist them in 24/7 patrolling. Its seating capacity is 12 people; it can cross rivers and floods; and it can maneuver in various road conditions. Each unit underwent rigorous inspection, and all comply with the standards required by the PNP. From May 2015 to March 2016, we have already delivered a total of 1,490 patrol jeeps; this covers all municipal police stations throughout the country, including the former municipality of General Trias, which is now a city. It is now time for us to deliver an additional 144 patrol jeeps that we turned over this morning to all cities across the country, for the first time, all police stations in every city and municipality across the country will have at least one patrol jeep.

Along the Straight Path, we also improved the “Shoot, Scoot, and Communicate” system for our police force. In 2013, we provided 74,879 units of Glock 17 9mm pistols to our police. Aside from the patrol jeeps, you also have additional equipment such as 247 4x4 personnel carriers and 69 light transport vehicles, 1,095 motorcycles, and 12,949 handheld radios.

Aside from those, we also improved your systems to combat crime more strategically. You now have a modern Integrated Ballistics Identification System, as well as an Automated Fingerprint Identification System. Here in NCR, you are implementing the Closed-Circuit Television Project, to monitor what are called crime-prone areas.

What I want to emphasize in all of this: It is clear how far we have come for the BFP and PNP here on the Straight Path. How can we expect you to do your job, if you always have to find ways to meet your needs? That time of “You’re on your own” is over. Now, the government is truly empowering you to fulfill your mandate. It’s true: Firefighters who used to risk their own lives now have the necessary equipment to save other lives; the police, their capabilities are truly improving to maintain peace and order in communities.

We would not have reached this day were it not for the cooperation of the DILG, BFP, and PNP, as well as our local governments. To all of you, in the name of every Filipino you will serve even better: Thank you very much. [Applause]

All of these initiatives under the Straight and Narrow Path are based on our broad strategy to strengthen our soldiers and public servants. With the additional vehicles you have, we expect you to be able to fulfill your mandate to protect the welfare and safety of the people even more.

Bosses, this is the Straight and Narrow Path: No shortcuts, no kickbacks, no haphazardness; our response to the problems of society: identified, studied, following the correct process and system, and above all, focused solely on the welfare of the people.

In just over five years, we have fostered within our uniformed ranks a culture where, every time you wear your uniform, every time you use your new equipment and ride in your modern vehicles, you will wholeheartedly and fully serve the nation, because you are aware that you belong to a society that is also ready to protect your welfare. We are now in a time when you can proudly tell the people: “I am a firefighter; I am a police officer; I serve my fellow Filipinos.”

Comrades, this is just the beginning. Let us continue the change we are striving for.

Before we conclude, just to clarify—and perhaps someone is wondering—why the fire trucks arrived that were older than those of me and Bistek. You know, they say the ones we followed ordered 100 units of fire trucks. The cost of a 1,000 gallon fire truck was P9.8 million each. That was in 2010. Our current 1,000 gallon fire truck costs P6 million now. [Applause]

They might explain that their old fire trucks had agricultural pumping machines. Perhaps dual purpose: for firefighting and for irrigating our agricultural lands, which is why theirs were more expensive. You be the judge.

Let me repeat: Let us request our police and the Bureau of Fire Protection, you have seen the care of the State, of the people, let us show it in our service, so that we can further provide for your additional needs.

Good day. Thank you very much to all of you.