Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

during his meeting with local leaders and communities of Pampanga

[Delivered at the provincial capitol of Pampanga on May 17, 2016]

When I think of Pampanga, I will admit to you, we become emotional. It just so happens that, facing you, it is the 30th anniversary of EDSA. When my father was assassinated, we brought his remains to Tarlac to also bid farewell to his provincemates. And when we returned to Manila and eventually buried him, of course, we passed through Pampanga. We arrived and were already in front of the [church] in Angeles and the procession was stopped. When I asked why it was stopped, it was so that our fellow provincemates here in Pampanga could see him, to pay tribute to my father. He was brought to the church, where he was blessed. They told me, “You know, this will be the last time we will see him. Please allow us to give him the proper respect and honor.”

Let us not forget that during that time, the leader of the opposition had already been assassinated, and we were still under Martial Law, but our fellow provincemates here in Pampanga came out and truly showed their love for him and lost their fear. Perhaps that was the first instance of the emergence of the People Power Revolution. That is a big thing for me and my family. Thank you all very much. [Applause]

After that, we had many rallies. We were tasked to speak often here in Pampanga. And wherever I go in Pampanga, I can say that I no longer need to convince [people] because we are already convinced that Martial Law is wrong for us in the Philippines. We saw that in your overwhelming support during the snap election for my mother.

In 2010 as well, as you know, my opponent was one of your own. We were in the opposition during those times. We were able to campaign a little here in Pampanga during those times, but when I ran in 2010, even though I had few opportunities to campaign here in Pampanga, your support, your help, did not wane, and we succeeded here throughout the Philippines. [Applause] That's why we were given the opportunity to truly serve all of you.

My dear Kapampangan, thank you very much for your love, support, and continued belief in the Straight Path. Please accept my gratitude. [Applause]

Now, what has Pampanga gained from the Straight Path? From roads, bridges, airports, flood control projects, to social services—our strategy is widespread to empower our Cabalen and bring them closer to progress. Let's mention some proof.

You know, the first speech prepared for today reached seven pages, single-spaced. In those seven pages, five were accomplishment reports. I'm sure my fellow countrymen know what we've done there. Let's not go through them one by one. I was told, “Sir, we don't need to list them one by one. These are generic topics.” I said, “Those five pages, maybe you can shorten them even more.” So I forced them—I am their boss—the speech for today is only four pages long. [Applause] But what have we accomplished together on the Straight Path?

In infrastructure, according to records: From 2005 to 2010, the funds sent to Pampanga amounted to P9.41 billion. Under our administration, from 2011 to 2016, this reached P16.94 billion. This includes the Gapan-San Fernando-Olongapo Road Project Phase 2, Lazatin Flyover, San Fernando 1st Green Road, and Aquino Bypass Road.

In September 2015, the Clark International Airport New Passenger Terminal Building Project was also approved, which will have an initial capacity of 3 million passengers per year. Once completed, its total capacity will reach 6 million passengers per year. In 2012, your tourist arrivals were 486,595; by 2014, we doubled this to 992,145. You know, especially foreign tourists, when they arrive in the Philippines, it is estimated that each foreign tourist creates one job. So doubling the number of tourists here in Pampanga is a big deal. The DOTC and Clark International Airport Corporation have also built a temporary passenger terminal building, which will serve as a pre-departure area for domestic flights. In addition to this, baggage screening equipment and passenger boarding bridges were added.

To alleviate flooding in your province—and this is very close to our hearts: From 2011 to 2016, we allocated P6 billion for flood control projects. This includes the Pinatubo Hazard Urgent Mitigation Project Phase 3; the rehabilitation of the San-Fernando-Sto. Tomas-Minalin Tail Dike; the Integrated Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation Measures; and the Pampanga River Basin Flood Control Master Plan is also in the public consultation stage.

Let me just clarify: That plan has been studied for a long time, with the DPWH, DOST, and our foreign aid agencies and consultants. The question was raised: How can we end the problem of flooding, which is a perpetual problem in Pampanga? And it was seen that the principle is very simple. When water flows, it needs a destination. Our rivers and streams are insufficient when the water rushes from the Sierra Madre and Chico River. One part of it is dredging, but the biggest part of it is that we need what is called a catchment basin, a place to store water.

Now, we need two catchment areas to alleviate the problem in Pampanga, Tarlac, Bulacan, and Nueva Ecija. One is in Nueva Ecija, and the other is here in the Candaba Swamp. For the catchment basin, we will talk to our friends in those areas, “Your land needs to be where the water is stored.” The choice is to store it in that area, or let the water spread to the lowest areas. And that changes every year. Everyone will probably agree that we need it, but many will also say, “Build that infrastructure, but don’t build it on my land. Build it on my neighbor’s land.” I hope that doesn’t happen so that we can really have this project that will alleviate flooding, especially in the fourth district.

In agriculture: We have allocated P1.5 billion for farm-to-market roads and irrigation. More than 5,600 farmers are already benefiting from the 144 completed farm-to-market road projects; more than 2,500 are also benefiting from the 69 irrigation projects we have completed.

You know, when I was running for Senator, we went to Baguio where I met Bishop Cinense—if he still remembers. He told me that his family came from Pampanga. His ancestors also came from Pampanga. They were forced to move to another province because there were no opportunities in Pampanga. And as a Kapampangan, I said, “Let’s change the story or history that is happening there.” And what has changed?

We now have a Shared Service Facility or SSF to help grow businesses. In Pampanga, 36 SSFs have been established. These facilities support meat, milk, food processing for tocino, as well as the production of organic fertilizer, bamboo processing, and water hyacinth. One of the beneficiaries of this is the Mapina Farmers Irrigators Association. In 2013, with the help of the SSF, they were helped to increase the production of their milk products, such as fresh carabao’s milk and pastillas. Their income, which was previously P20,000, has increased to P96,000 per month thanks to the SSF.

In health: From 2010 to 2014, we have allocated a total of P572.91 million for the improvement or construction of your health facilities. 2.61 million of our province mates are covered by PhilHealth in your province, which is part of the total of 93 million beneficiaries in the country.

We also improved the Jose B. Lingad Memorial Regional Hospital. In 2013, we signed RA 10355, which increased the bed capacity of the hospital, from 250 to 500 hospital beds. We have also allocated funds for the construction of two new wards of the hospital—the Obstetrics-Gynecology and Pediatric Ward which we completed this December, and the Medical Ward which we are targeting to complete this year. That is through the cooperation of the DOH, provincial government, and PhilHealth. Thank you all very much. [Applause]

Perhaps the best thing I can remind everyone of: Everything we have done on the Straight Path throughout the country, we have done without adding to the burden, except for the Sin Tax, which is focused on health.

You know, Sec. Mel, sometimes he gives speeches in their province in Samar. They say that when the PTA or Parent-Teacher Association would call a meeting, during his time as mayor, they supposedly had nowhere to run. The mayor would be besieged by his constituents, the mayor had nowhere to run, always without funds. When it came to the PTA, the father and son would talk. “Dad, the PTA called a meeting. Oh no, another contribution.” The point is, all these contributions help us with our fellowmen, like the testimonial we just had.

Let me give you another example from the testimonial, we went to Pangasinan—Urdaneta, where I saw her the other day. Her name is Christina Reyes. She is a bachelor of science graduate—commerce, major in accounting—and went to the Middle East. She had a contract substitution and became a domestic helper. She was allegedly mistreated by her employer. Luckily, our embassy helped her. She was sent back to the Philippines, and her contract was not completed. Of course, let's just think about how much she spent to get there, she didn't earn anything there, she came back here, how will she pay off her debt. She really felt very bad and her mind was confused.

When she arrived in the Philippines, she was given fare to return to Pangasinan and was advised that we have scholarships available for our countrymen returning from being OFWs. There, she enrolled in TESDA in two programs—think about her story and it's not just her. She was trained in hilot, wellness, and massage therapy. After that, she got a job as an operations manager of a spa. After that, she put up her own spa. Within a year, it became two. And in 2014, it reached four. Her four spas now employ 32 people since the time when she didn't know what would happen to her future. I was surprised when she told me all this, because the new stage of her business, she is now franchising her spa. She already has two franchisees and she is the franchiser. From having nothing, that's the Straight Path, giving everyone an opportunity. [Applause] Of course, Joel is proud that most of their graduates, given a short period of time, double their salary.

The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, we have greatly expanded it. Here with you, from 1,200 households in 2010, now—as Governor mentioned earlier—we are helping 51,371 households. According to initial studies on Pantawid Pamilya, the effect is this: 7.7 million Filipinos have been lifted above the poverty line. We continue our efforts to distance them from poverty and further away from poverty. Because we call them “near poor” now, we really want them far away from being “near poor.”

A survey came out recently, a well-known survey firm. They said: 4 out of 5 Filipinos will vote for a candidate who will continue Pantawid Pamilya. You know, when I saw that the next day, I laughed because I read so much in the newspapers: That those who used to oppose it, now want to be champions of Pantawid Pamilya. It seems that four out of five of our opponents are riding on the success of the program. They always promise, but have no proof of what they can do. One of them said he will expand the 4Ps and make it 5Ps. [Laughter] And if he makes it 5Ps, he will also reduce the taxes of those who pay for the 4Ps. My question: You're amazing. If you can really do that, you should be the one to replace me. But you, when your husband says, “Here, I'm giving you this, I'll reduce it. But you increase what you buy with the reduced expenses.” Which wife would agree to that? Or which wife would say “You can do it?” Furthermore, this person's own son said the other day that he would investigate [the 4Ps]. With so many allegations of corruption they face, the benefits of Pantawid Pamilya will likely be thinned, if not disappear, under his leadership. But as mentioned in a commercial we made, elections, campaigns, courtship period, maybe you know, especially my province mates, [the truth and the fake will appear]. [Applause]

I really feel good to say that I was able to help. Think about it, all those helped by the 4Ps, that's 4.6 million families now. All those helped by TESDA, they are counting 9 million course graduates. [Applause] All those helped by PhilHealth. It's like all the help we give to our fellowmen, we are not members of the PTA contributing again, we just give the right taxes. We have convinced some to pay the right taxes finally. But when we are approached by those we help, they tell us, “Why do you want to stop the help you are giving us when it's not difficult for you? Maybe you can continue the help you are giving us.” Earlier, someone testified: Three of her children have jobs, four more are hoping we will take care of them. Why shouldn't we help? It's not difficult for us, right?

Clearly: We reached this point because of cooperation and lifting up our fellowmen. I thank my province mates for joining the Straight Path. You know, before, I wasn't that close to Governor Baby, but you saw, he really cooperates with us, he didn't burden us. Including our Vice Governor Dennis Pineda. Yeng Guiao, even during my father's and his late father's time, we were already together. [Applause] We are very close, my hairstyle and Yeng's are no longer different. Probably, even our combs are the same brand. Manong Oca, he left me in the hairstyle, but in other things, even during Martial Law, Kuya Oca was really very strong. And of course, our good Mayor Edwin Santiago. [Applause]

On May 9th, the nation will once again face a crossroads. The question is: Will we continue the Straight Path, where there is a government that once again prioritizes the people over self? Or will we deviate, return to the old ways of abuse and disregard for the welfare of the Filipino?

If other candidates are burdened with controversies, Mar carries only experience and a track record of good governance. [Applause] Even with the sun high, you see, our eyes don't blink. It's easy when you tell the truth. He was dubbed the “Father of BPO,” due to initiating and expanding this sector as Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry. They started with around 2,500 employees. Now, over a million people have been given jobs because of the sector or industry started by Mar Roxas when he was Secretary. [Applause] You say, just a million. The BPO, the call center, underneath it is a convenience store. There are those who drive taxis to get to the call center, and many more. So the indirect employees in this sector, there's one million direct, about 3 to 4 million indirect employees. And this year, the BPO sector is expected to have 1.3 million direct employees, contributing $25 billion to our economy.

In the field of crime, he lowered crime rates in NCR and other regions. He used the law and not violence. He used scientific analysis to identify the most serious problems and identify who was causing them. With all the services he has rendered, we see him as very humble, instead of constantly boasting. That's how a President should be: He won't deceive you, he won't abandon you, and most of all, he won't steal from you. That is Mar Roxas. [Applause]

With us now is the standard-bearer of the Straight Path for Vice President, none other than Leni Robredo. [Applause] Who wouldn't admire her resilience in the face of so many trials? When her husband Jesse passed away, instead of losing heart, she became a beacon for her children, for me, and for all of us. In 2013, her constituents called on her to run as their representative. She faced that challenge, which was a very large and long-standing force against her. And she succeeded. Now, to avoid hardship again, she can run for re-election, or, if you like, she can rest and she can tell us all, “Have we not yet contributed enough to the country?” But as you can see, she stood up again when we called on her for a higher position for which she was not prepared. In all of this, she could have refused and said, “We have already contributed a lot to the country. Can we take care of ourselves first?” But again, here she is, fighting for what she knows is right and just. That is Leni Robredo. [Applause]

In truth: We Kapampangans serve as an example to our fellow Kapampangans. Every time, on the flag of the Philippines, one of the eight rays of the sun symbolizes Pampanga, one of the provinces that ignited the revolution. Even during the time of the dictator and during my father's time, until his death, until my mother's candidacy, we were not lacking. Even when I ran, from senator to president, you were there. In every change in the Philippines, we say that Pampanga did not lag behind.

I strongly believe, do not doubt the Kapampangans, no matter how difficult the situation. We will never be lacking. [Applause] I am retiring, and I just want to leave you in a good situation. Respect Mar and Leni as well. If you think about what will happen tomorrow, please tell us today, respect ourselves and our fellow Kapampangans, in building a better future. Support the Straight Path. Vote for them and campaign for them. Let us show how wonderful the Kapampangans are. [Applause]

Almost every day, the words I speak change. To be honest, [I was born at home] when we were in France. Their president, the spelling of the name is H-O-L-L-A-N-D-E. The pronunciation is “ow-lan.” They don't have an “h” either. That's where we came from, France. [Laughter]

Let me repeat: Truly, in the darkest times our family has gone through, we look to our fellow Kapampangans, and you are always there, fully supportive. I really have nothing to say about your help.

Here, there are only 104 days left. The mandate you gave me is over. It is very important to me, as a father of the nation, to leave you in a better situation as I promised you. But even more important than that, let's make sure that what we have achieved now continues and really moves forward. And I will repeat, sorry if I'm being repetitive: There is no doubt, the ones who will truly support us to further accelerate the change happening on the Straight Path are none other than Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo.