Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the inauguration of the Lipa-Alaminos Road

[Delivered at Lumbang National High School, Lipa, Batangas, on April 21, 2016]

70 days from now, we will be retiring. Of course, we are also looking back on where we started, what we have achieved. So, my entry here is truly historic. This behind me is my t-shirt when I ran for congressman, 1998. But I am impressed that you kept it, still in good condition. Then earlier, someone greeted me, saying, “I didn’t have dinner, I skipped breakfast, just to see you in person.” [Applause] Kris, currently lives with us. I will tell her, “Kris, you might not have friends like that. They skipped breakfast and dinner just to see me.” [Applause] So, I think I have nothing more to say here. Just “Thank you” is enough. Just a little bit.

We inaugurated the Lipa-Alaminos Road. But before I talk about that, during the snap election, I was assigned to campaign here in Batangas. During that 45-day period, I was here for about 11 days. And I said even then, the Kapampangans and Batangueños seem to be alike. And earlier, I saw another proof of this. In our Central Luzon, there is a tall mountain there, called Arayat. Here, you also have a mountain named Malarayat. Maybe we are really relatives, just separated recently.

We have opened this road, and it is estimated to bring great convenience to everyone who needs to travel on it. I was told that in the past, because it was broken, people avoided it. I was surprised by my briefer, who said that if you want to travel there, you should ride a horse or walk. I said, “Ride a horse? It’s the 21st century, and people still ride horses to move from place to place.” It was to lower products to pickup points like coconuts. Now, it has been repaired, 17 kilometers, and we spent a considerable amount on it. But truthfully, this 17 kilometers is just a part of over 18,500 kilometers of roads paved throughout the Philippines. And often, we even save on estimates thanks to the brilliance of Babes Singson, along with his colleagues at the DPWH. [Applause] Officials like Gov. Vi also helped to reduce issues like right of way, which really speeds things up.

Let me repeat: When I was a congressman, to get assistance for roads in my district, 159 barangays in Tarlac, we would receive help for around 10 to 14 kilometers of roads. You do the math, divide 14 kilometers by 159 barangays, how much road would each barangay get? But the situation is different now.

Perhaps, to make it very clear what I want to leave with you, and to also show what “treading the Straight Path” really means: On Monday, I went to Bacolod, you land at the airport in Silay, that’s a different town. From Silay, you pass through Talisay, until you reach Bacolod. We arrived in the evening, and the first thing I noticed was the beautiful road from Silay to Bacolod. It was like a highway, completely cemented, even the light posts, you’d think it was an expressway.

Now, as we traveled this route, I’ve gone back and forth to Bacolod several times, and I was surprised because I didn’t recognize anyone along the way. Until we finally arrived in Bacolod City—a typical place in the province, their city hall is tall, all commercial activities are around the city hall, then you go a little beyond the town, and not much happens.

I just want to report to you, we were driving along the side of their city hall, this was on a Monday, you would think there weren't many people strolling around, relaxing, cooling off, but it was full of people. They have something like the Baywalk equivalent in Manila. But I was even more surprised when we passed that, we were taken to a place called Marketplace, there were a lot of people eating there. In Manila on a Monday, entertainment areas are usually closed, people are tired, they are working. There, on Monday, all the tables in that very large area in the Marketplace were full. You could count the empty tables. There were so many people enjoying themselves there.

The only thing that wasn't full was the restaurant we ate at, called Enting’s. When I arrived, I wondered why we were brought here? It didn't look good, there was no one around. But we ate there, and it was delicious. And I was told now, it turns out Enting’s is closed on Mondays. But because they couldn't refuse Gov. Marañon, it was opened so we could try it.

All the roads leading there. There's a place there—if I'm not mistaken—Villa Angela. It's Bacolod East, they say. It's like you went to Bonifacio Global City, like here in Lipa, in Batangas City, where there are malls on the left and right that are really bustling with commerce. What's important to me there: number 1, the economy in Bacolod is good, the people have confidence that life is good, that life will get even better, they have the ability to go to restaurants outside the house, they are not worried about their future.

This is what I want to emphasize: We drove along Silay, Talisay. Talisay, the Mayor reported to us, what did the government do there? Basically, the road from the airport to Bacolod City. Because this park, which used to be a farm, was opened, two large developing companies saw its potential: Ayala and Megaworld. Currently, what the two have built is just the fence of the land they bought. But because they showed interest, the price of land there has gone up. Because the price of land went up, the so-called real property tax went up—that tax is the income of the town.

Because their funds increased, what did the Talisay government accomplish? They have a Special Education Fund. From their Special Education Fund, first of all, they provided additional travel allowance for their teachers who go to remote barangays. They were able to buy their own bus. They bought IT equipment. They were able to build their own building. They augmented the school supplies of their youth. There is also a feeding program from kindergarten to grade 3. Why a feeding program? Because most of those who fail, who return to kindergarten to grade 3, are the most vulnerable due to poor nutrition.

Let me repeat: It's that simple what needs to be done to really change the face of a place. One road from the government, we treated the businessmen fairly, we supported them to the areas, the areas are being developed. And even now, they have only built the fence, there is already a positive impact for the town of Talisay.

Let me add: Of course, when the buildings, malls, and factories are built in the areas they are developing, it provides additional jobs, additional income to their government which our countrymen there will benefit from. That is the Straight Path. That is what we are trying to happen in all parts of the Philippines.

Let me include another example: The governor of Lanao del Sur has two towns that he traverses. One town is named Wao, the other is Bumbaran. The problem is, they are on opposite ends of his province. Of course, as a governor, you need to visit all your constituents. Every time he visits, the trip takes eight hours within one province. Because there is no road that goes directly to these two towns, he first goes from the capitol, then to Cagayan de Oro, Iligan, Bukidnon to return to his province. An eight-hour trip. We have now opened the road there, the former eight-hour trip has become one and a half hours now. Once the paving is finished, it will only take one hour. [Applause]

What is the benefit to the town? The benefit is, they have a governor… Imagine before, the governor would travel for eight hours, travel back for eight hours, that’s sixteen hours already. If the governor sleeps normally, that’s another eight hours. In other words, 24 hours are gone, the whole day is used up. He might as well stay there if he needs to visit. Now, there’s no reason for him not to visit more often, because the travel time is only one hour. The services they need, they can find out what the needs are, and they can be sent more quickly because finally, they have a road to connect these two towns that were so far apart.

Everything I’m mentioning to you—I don’t want to sound like a broken record. You know here in Batangas, what we found in 2010, the 4Ps, you had no members. There were no housing beneficiaries in Batangas in 2010. Now, we are helping 89,000 households. [Applause] If I remember correctly, in PhilHealth, about 96 percent of Batangueños are enrolled in PhilHealth, and many others.

Now, because I saw the t-shirt, it says “Ninoy before, Noynoy now,” I remembered what my mother and father said, “Don’t boast.” If we’ve done something, you are the witnesses if there has been a change or not. If we haven’t done anything, on May 9th of next month, that’s a referendum, you will dismiss us and our allies. If we’ve done something good and significant, of course, it’s up to you if we continue everything that’s happening. [Applause]

I apologize to my speechwriters for the beautiful speech they wrote that I didn’t read today. [Laughter] I’ll just read it again later.

Let me reiterate, and I will emphasize this further in the places I will go to: The elections in 2010 are over, we have won, but we have not yet been proclaimed. As you know, the danger is said to increase until you are proclaimed. They detained me in Tarlac. I was there first. Congress is ready to proclaim us.

While there, of course, we reflected, I only have one ambition: What I will leave behind must be far better than what I inherited. And I was thinking at the beginning, how will we do all of this? How will we change things? And if possible, not one thing at a time. For example, in six years, we were able to build… I see this classroom again. I did not build any classrooms here. But throughout the Philippines, we built 185,000 classrooms in six years. [Applause]

In the old days, you would lobby in Congress to get schools for our district. If you get eight, that’s good. If you get ten, you’re doing pretty well. If you manage to get a dozen schools built and—let me repeat this to you, a dozen schools, divided by 150 barangays, it seems like each barangay gets one chair. Let me repeat: We worked together. The budget could only allow for about 8,000 classrooms per year. On the Straight Path, in Batangas alone, we were able to build almost 5,000 classrooms. [Applause]

And let's repeat: All of this can be done. How is that proof? Because we have already done it! It could be done in the old days, as long as we don't misappropriate public funds, we can accomplish so much, we can help so many people.

You know, when I look at you, what does the future hold? Secretary Singson explained earlier, there are new roads to be opened, which will ease traffic in Batangas City. The Batangas port will now have direct access to Star, without having to pass through the interior of Batangas City. But what’s really exciting is this coastal road in Lobo-Malabrigo-San Juan. With that, access will be easier. Many resorts are being built here, you will have many tourists. As they say, for every foreign tourist who comes to the Philippines, one job is created. When we say we need to pursue more jobs, let’s create projects that will provide employment. This, in effect, is like a tourism road, bringing tourists, and benefiting those who will have livelihoods there.

Let me try to encapsulate everything we are trying to do, especially since we are in a school. Everyone is hearing: We will add jobs. A candidate said he will create millions of jobs every year. I said, “If you can do that, I will be the first to praise you.” What needs to be done?

First of all, it is important to us that the jobs created are not just for the survey period. How many employees are there? We will suddenly hire street sweepers. When the statistics are released, “Hey, there are a lot of people employed!” After the survey period, they are unemployed again, back to being jobless. What we are doing should create permanent jobs.

Let’s make sure, what steps have we taken there? Education. Why did we enter the 4Ps program? Elementary and high school were free even during my mother’s time. But our out-of-school youth reached 2.9 million in 2008. In 2013, the number of out-of-school youth was down to 1.2 million. The point? When you go to school, the main condition of the 4Ps is: Keep the child in school. We also helped with health, that’s why there’s a feeding program, and health checkups are included as a condition to receive government assistance.

We are increasing the Pantawid Pamilya program up to high school. We have already graduated over 300,000 from the first batch in 2015. In that first batch, there were roughly 14,000 honor students. The students who spoke for them were both accepted into UP College of Engineering, which we know is a quota course. They could have ended up with nothing, but because you all helped, the government helped, they were able to finish high school. Now, they are entering college, and there are already several thousand who have been helped by other programs through college.

We provided education, and then we spoke with industries, “What kind of workers do you need so that our students, when they graduate, will have jobs?” We guided [guide] them. What problem did we find? Many entered what is called the Occupational and Physical Therapy course, they said there were many jobs. A four-year course, they took the board exam, they passed. But when they passed and were licensed, the jobs were gone. They switched to Nursing. Families spent no less than half a million pesos to educate them. Another four years, another board exam, they were licensed again, and still no jobs.

What did we do? We just spoke with the industry again, asked, “What do you need two years from now? Four years from now? Six years from now?” Result: Look at those who graduated from TESDA. Their general average when we came in, 28.5 percent were able to find jobs six months after graduating from the course. Now, it's at 72 percent. In some sectors, 93 to 96 percent of graduates are employed after completing the TESDA course. 9 million course graduates have completed TESDA. That’s it, they have jobs that aren’t just temporary street cleaning, but a livelihood.

There’s more good news: Those who were trained in the BPO sector, the call centers, their first salary, in the first year of earning, the taxes they pay, the government’s expense to educate them is already paid for. Even more than they will pay in taxes. That means, those we gave an opportunity to, throughout their working life, will give the same opportunity to many others. We can continue the program.

Comrades, at this point, allow me to take this opportunity, I believe I will not be able to return here before the end of our term, to first thank you for giving me the chance to lead a great race that we can truly rely on in all things. [Applause] By any measure, I believe we have come a long way in traversing the Straight Path.

Perhaps, at the very end, this is my earnest request to you: I always say, we used to be down and out. We were called the “Sick Man of Asia.” Now, “Asia’s Rising Tiger.” We have stood up again, we have learned to walk. Notice the changes happening in places like Talisay. It doesn’t yet have the full benefits because there are no buildings yet, they are still to be built. There are no factories yet, there are no jobs yet. The point of this is: When all of that arrives—before, if you cultivated a piece of land, maybe one person’s life would be comfortable. That one hectare of farmland, if you turn it into a factory, five hundred people can benefit from it. That is what is happening in Talisay and in many other places.

Here in Sta. Rosa, Laguna, you saw it. Here in Batangas, the first Philippine Holdings in Sto. Tomas. When I first saw it, there were many vacant lots. It kept expanding and expanding, more and more factories were being built there, more and more jobs. During my last visit to them, I asked, “Is there still a way to expand this?” They said there was, and what they pointed out to me were all hills. I said, “You’re going to build on that, it’s almost mountainous.” That’s how far it has reached, and they say there is still a lot of demand.

They are coming in. Many businessmen have trust, both locally and internationally, in the ability of Filipinos and the soundness of the government. They have the courage to take risks and invest their businesses here.

We are training our countrymen so that no one is left behind, with the ability to join in the progress of the entire country. Our needs—I won't say we've finished all of them, but we've addressed quite a few already. It used to be, everyone was on their own. Now, the state's help is clear.

On May 9th, for me, it's a referendum: Did we do right by you, or wrong? If wrong, there are many others who want to take our place. Seat them in office. But if we did right, if you believe this is the direction we should really move forward in, I earnestly ask you: Help those who will continue our journey on the Straight Path, like Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

I was going to ask Gov. Vi for a favor, but I know, I can't help Gov. Vi because I'm already sure about Gov. Vi. [Applause] Those who won't help Gov. Vi, things seem a little unclear. That's why they say, they might be overwhelmed.

My countrymen, I'm about to finish now, I'll just repeat: All politicians, perhaps they all say, “Thank you for the opportunity to serve you.” But truthfully, when I look back at the challenges we faced, and what we accomplished as a nation, I truly feel that I couldn't have done what I did if I wasn't sure and at peace knowing that you all had my back, that you would support me in everything we needed to do and in all the trials we went through. So it is truly an honor to have been the leader of a great race that is truly capable of facing any challenge. And perhaps, what we can achieve, the only limit is our ambition.

Good afternoon to all of you. Thank you very much.