Speech

of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

during his meeting with local leaders and communities of Caloocan

Declared in the City of Caloocan on March 30, 2016

Earlier, we went to Grace Park Elementary School to inaugurate the opening of their two new buildings so that our students there would no longer have to do double shifts. It will now be a single shift, and can also accommodate the senior high school with a doubled population. It was truly a good place I visited earlier, and the joy of the parents, teachers, administrators, most importantly, of the students in their new buildings, truly filled my heart.

You know, going there, going here, I felt only one thing: your very warm welcome, and all the roads made it seem like I was a candidate. [Applause] Someone even said, “We’re still with Pnoy!” But what could I say? “Thank you very much, but don’t vote for me. I’m not running.” Our votes might be wasted.

This is likely the last time I will visit Caloocan as President, so perhaps we can report to our Bosses on what we have accomplished here in the City of Caloocan.

Over the almost six years that we have walked the Straight and Narrow Path, many things have truly changed in our situation now compared to what we found. And here in Caloocan, let me state the proofs.

From 2005 to 2010, only P1.54 billion was allocated for infrastructure of the DPWH by our predecessors for Caloocan. From 2011 to 2016, during our term, we doubled this to P3.16 billion, not including many PPP Projects. [Applause]

Some of our projects include the NLEX-SLEX Connector Road, NLEX Harbor Link-Segment 10, and the North-South Railway Project North Line. The C-3 Road, which Egay mentioned earlier, finally has LED street lights.

To solve the flooding problem, there is the Kalookan-Malabon-Navotas Area Project Phase 1. [Applause] It seems Egay was right earlier, that for the past 30 years, the Monument of Gat Andres Bonifacio was always flooded. [Applause] Perhaps a philosopher might say his pants were raised because of the flood. But now, it only floods rarely when the rain is really heavy, and the water also recedes quickly. With your applause, it seems what Egay Erice is reporting to us is true. [Applause]

In the Health Facilities Enhancement Program, more than P84 million has been allocated to repair your barangay health stations, urban health centers, and hospitals, including the Caloocan City Medical Center. Currently, 1.24 million of our countrymen are covered by PhilHealth in your city. Nationwide, there are 93 million beneficiaries of our PhilHealth program. [Applause]

In the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, from the previous 2,141 beneficiary households, we now have 31,510 households for Caloocan alone. They are part of our 4.6 million families being helped by the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. Even now, according to initial studies, 7.7 million individuals have already risen above what is called the “poverty line” with the help of Pantawid Pamilya, which you created and provide aid for so we can continue it. Recently, there was a survey. It said: 4 out of 5 Filipinos will vote for a candidate who will continue Pantawid Pamilya.

We are now achieving what were once thought impossible. We have even fulfilled promises we didn’t even make. We were able to do this without adding to the burden of our Bosses, except for the Sin Tax, which aims to improve our health services.

Earlier, when we were in the schools, I remembered the speech of Mel Sarmiento. He said that in Samar, when they call a meeting—Parent-Teacher Association—the child goes home and says there’s a PTA meeting. “Dad, we’re in trouble. It’s contribution time again.” Let me repeat: Whenever we help, whether it’s a donation to the church, giving to a beggar on the street, and other ways we are asked for help, if the barangay has a project, we always reach into our pockets.

I will repeat: Everything we accomplished under the Straight Path did not burden you with additional taxes that you needed to pay for something to happen. What we did was correct governance—what is called “good governance”—we grew the economy, collected the right taxes, it’s all there in our laws, and all our achievements. This is it, we are able to help others without burdening our fellow citizens.

We can proudly say under the Straight Path that we never engaged in corruption, unlike others. When we speak, it’s always “we,” not just “I, I, I” which is what we often hear from others. We were the ones who initiated change and we will continue to pursue that change.

Here in Caloocan, Mayor Oca Malapitan and Egay Erice are truly our partners. [Applause] Let’s not forget, according to his wife, Egay Erice is far more handsome than me. So I invite Egay to visit my siblings so they can find out the truth.

On a more serious note, what is Egay Erice’s position? He is a Representative. What does “Representative” mean? He should be your voice, especially on national issues. Now, when he asks questions or seeks clarification, he seeks the truth. We have an opponent who considers Egay Erice public enemy no. 1. My only question is, when did it become a crime to ask for the truth from one another? [Applause] So if it were me, Egay, Oca, and their colleagues have proof that will resonate with you. It would be a great loss if Egay does not continue his service to you.

Let me be clear: All the benefits being received here in Caloocan and throughout the country are at risk of being lost. This progress we are making is not guaranteed to continue. It is in your hands whether we return to the old ways, where everything we have started will be wasted.

Let me clarify what I just said: You know that I always say, where did we come from? What was the situation before 2010, what is the situation now? To all those who have benefited from the Straight Path, let us not forget that once, our country almost went 10 years without being led properly. What should have reached you, what we have achieved in these six years, could have happened a long time ago, those 10 years before the 2010 elections, but it didn't happen. The hardships experienced by our countrymen that could have been eased a long time ago, waited for the Straight Path to begin. Because this happened in the past, we can say that it could happen again if we become complacent.

Let me further clarify. We came from Pampanga. One of the beneficiaries of the Straight Path was a mother. In her account, she said that her husband left her. He left in her hands the responsibility of raising her seven children. She herself had no stable job, she said she just sold things here and there. Of course, when you say selling things here and there, it means sometimes there are goods to sell, sometimes there aren't. Sometimes there is income, sometimes there isn't. Mel Sarmiento, when reproductive health was being discussed, told a story about a family in their area, where the parents abandoned their children, and the oldest left behind was only 14 years old. She was forced to take care of her siblings. The only livelihood she had at that time was making charcoal. There were days she could sell, and days she couldn't. On the days she couldn't sell charcoal, she and her siblings, who were 14 years old, tried to eat the charcoal because of their hunger.

Let's go back to the mother: This mother said that because of the 4Ps, the Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Program, three of her seven children have already graduated and have permanent jobs. [Applause] She still has four children to support, and she hopes that we can continue to help her without adding to our burden, so that they themselves can stand on their own feet. And we are not just saying we will teach them how to fish, we are really making a way for them to rise through their own efforts.

Previously, there was already 4Ps, we encountered that, around 780,000 families were being helped more or less. Now, we have 4.6 million. We are helping them to ensure their children stay in school. When their children graduate, they will undoubtedly have a good job to go to. For those who don't have the ability to earn a living, what job can we offer them? Just sweeping the streets. How long can you sweep the streets? It can't always be done. But if they graduate from high school, they might be able to enter a program like Joel did at Tesda.

Let me also tell you this story: We have an OFW compatriot who spoke to us in Pangasinan. He went to the Middle East, and when he arrived there, he was victimized. He was told he would be a cashier. But when he arrived, he was made a domestic helper and even maltreated. He escaped, was helped by our embassy, and returned to the Philippines. He said he really didn't know what to do. He said, I didn't finish my contract. He probably went to the Middle East in debt for his fare and all other expenses. He didn't finish the contract, so he has no way to pay off all his debts. He couldn't see a way to solve his situation. Upon his return, he was given fare to return to Pangasinan. He was told that we have programs for returning OFWs.

He went to the Tesda course, took massage therapy, and the hilot wellness program. The result: First, he got a job, became the operations manager of a spa. Now, he owns four spas in the province of Pangasinan and even franchised three more spas here in Tarlac. From really having no light to see, he was even thinking of ending his life. Now, he is a very successful entrepreneur because this government has truly shown compassion. This government, for every Filipino, we fulfill our promise that no Filipino will be left behind. [Applause]

So, as I said earlier, there is a danger. And perhaps, let's look at it. The first danger is that in the past, the government was established by people, someone who sat there for nine and a half years. There were so many opportunities to change our situation. But the goal was to maintain themselves in power, not to address the problems of our countrymen. It was as if they treated us all as if we approached them with a problem, and they answered us, “Let Batman take care of you.” Luckily, Batman is showing again now, maybe we can go to him, but we no longer need to rely on Batman, because we will take care of ourselves.

My fellow citizens, I only have a few months left in the mandate you have given me. No one probably thought that the job of being President of the Republic would be easy. There are many problems that need to be addressed.

Let me give you another example. One of the hot issues is our problem in the West Philippine Sea or the South China Sea. We have an adversary, a gigantic country. Its economy is much, far larger than ours. It is undoubtedly a superpower in the field of military affairs. We are just trying to modernize our Armed Forces a little. As President, when we had problems, it seemed like our rights under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea were disappearing. It cannot be “He is so big, I cannot confront him.” It is my obligation as President that our territory, what we should pass on to the next generation, is there and we hold it. And we must fight for our rights even if we are at a great disadvantage in this fight.

We did what was right: We went to ASEAN to remind them that this issue has been around for a long time, and that the creation of a Code of Conduct should move forward. We brought the issue to the law, to what is called International Law. We sought arbitration to resolve this problem. We repeatedly say: We are not asking for more than what is rightfully ours. But I hope they respect our rights like everyone else.

You know how we discussed this so as not to increase the danger to our citizens. I received criticism from all sides then and continue to receive it now. Sometimes, they even make it seem like I was the one who created this problem. In truth, we inherited it.

Now, the election is approaching. Many are already courting you to convince you. As Father of the Nation, I believe it is my duty to give some advice on the direction we should take. In my opinion, we need to examine what those presenting themselves as leaders of the country are saying.

According to one candidate, a rival of Mar Roxas: the plan is to appoint a former military official as crime czar. I will not go into detail as to why this plan is a bit unclear, except to reiterate that the job of the military and the police are vastly different. The police, when there is a criminal, arrest. If “deadly force” is used, it is a last resort. The military, anywhere in the world, when deployed, because there is an enemy soldier, has the obligation to eliminate the enemy and stop them from being a threat to our society. They do not arrest, they do not make them surrender, they eliminate them.

I will just answer: This candidate recently made a statement that seems questionable. He says that our adversaries no longer underestimate us in the discussions regarding the West Philippine Sea. If we already have surface to air missiles. You know, that is a serious study. We want to have these missiles for our defense. The question is, when will we buy them?

First of all, we have never had this kind of equipment. You must study it first. What platform will carry this missile: ship, vehicle? Is it permanently assigned to one location? Is it mobile?

We also need to study: If we acquire that, where will we put it? If we place it in the Kalayaan Island Group, will our adversary in this discussion even acknowledge us? Won't they think that our forces are in danger, and consider preempting us with a so-called “preemptive strike”? It's easy to say: We should have that.

And frankly, we can buy it, but we are still far from knowing what to buy, and having answers to all the questions. But when this candidate speaks, it seems like they've already studied all aspects of this issue. All I can say is, it was criticized. Why was it given to force protection equipment for the soldiers? Why to the equipment, why for themselves? Hopefully, we will have a missile like this.

You know, I just want to emphasize: It's foolish to join the so-called arms race with this giant country. If we join, all our capabilities will be exhausted. Let's forget about the 4Ps, let's forget about school, let's forget about infrastructure because having these kinds of equipment is very expensive. And when we have it, we want to hope that we don't have to use these tools because that means there is a war.

But the equipment of our soldiers fighting the Abu Sayyaf, fighting the NPA, is needed now. Now, we need to address reducing the potential harm to them while protecting all of us. We chose some. One might be needed someday. The other can be spent, we need it now. I will add to that and address what the other rivals of Mar are saying.

There are those who say: He will fix the problem of criminality within three to six months. If he doesn't solve it, I read that he said, he will resign. I just thought: If there's a candidate, he'll go to you and make promises, the people will expect, if we believe in your promise, fulfill your promise. If you enter the job as President—and you weren't forced into it, you campaigned, you asked for help—you can't just say, “I don't want to” when things get difficult. Is that right? Shouldn't you stand by what you started once you've begun it? It might not be trendy anymore, but when someone gets married, the parents always advise, “It's not like hot rice that you swallow and then spit out.” If you're going to start something, think it through carefully, measure your capabilities, and if you're sincere with the people. Stand by it no matter how difficult things get.

There's another candidate. He boasts that he will make the whole Philippines like what he did in his city. Does that mean that aid for all of us, or help for all of us, we will have a free birthday cake? Birthdays in our area happen once a year. I suppose in his area it's also once a year. I just want to ask: After the birthday, what about the remaining 364 days? He also promised: He will expand Pantawid Pamilya, making it 5Ps. At the same time, he will also reduce taxes. Of course, the question is: How again? To the housewives here, if your husband approaches you and says, “Next month, I will reduce your budget, but increase what you buy.” How many wives will say here, “I can do that”? That's what is being promised to us now.

I would say that all those running to be President, we haven't shared bad bread with any of them. I want to believe that, if not friends now, I hope they still are, but there was a time when I was friends with all of them. But if you ask me, more than friendship, I have an obligation to you. There is a candidate who has been with us from the beginning; with us in shaping the details of walking the Straight Path.

The BPO sector, he was the one who started it. Now, it has created more than a million direct jobs, which we expect to rise to 1.3 million direct employees this year, and will bring in $25 billion into the economy of our country. This isn't a promise. He did it and now, our countrymen are benefiting from it.

I may not be able to say that he always followed me on every occasion because, in truth, he led the way when I needed it, such as during the Zamboanga crisis, the earthquakes in Cebu and Bohol, even when Yolanda struck, and many others. He confronted what needed to be confronted because it was necessary for the welfare of our countrymen. He did what was right, not just now that he is part of our administration, but even when we were both in the opposition. That is none other than Mar Roxas. Not just all talk, he believes in consensus-building, he doesn't complain, he doesn't show off, he doesn't promote himself at every opportunity, he just works tirelessly. [Applause]

With us also is the champion of the Straight Path for Vice President, Leni Robredo. [Applause] Her husband Jesse would not have achieved all his successes without her support. Jesse, for us: He has fought the good fight and he has kept the faith. Throughout his service, he did not advance his own interests. He fought against the powerful for the benefit of the many.

That is also true of his good wife. I am impressed by Leni's resilience in the face of great trials. Upon Jesse's passing, instead of showing us sadness, Leni steadfastly overcame the trial and served as an inspiration to us all. [Applause] You know, she told me earlier, when we recovered Jesse's body, those who recovered the body told us that decomposition had already begun. I asked Leni, “Leni, wouldn't it be better to remember your memories of Jesse than to see his body in that condition?” You can see what he went through. And Leni said to me, “I need to see it.” We accompanied her to the morgue, and honestly, we could feel the sadness. They had just celebrated their silver anniversary, and now, her good husband is gone. But Leni didn't lose herself. She knew that the sadness she would feel would add to the sadness and disappointment of other people who loved her good husband.

And it didn't stop there: When she was called to be the representative of Camarines Sur in 2013, she could have declined; she could have said that her family had already contributed enough, and she would just take care of her three children. But when earnestly asked, she bravely accepted it, even facing a powerful family. Now, she could seek re-election, which would be much easier. But again, she accepted the challenge to run as Vice President of our beloved republic. [Applause]

To Mar and Leni, in our assessment, I am sure that I can guarantee to all of you that they will continue everything we have done in the past six years. I am sure that we have the same perspective. I am sure that they are looking at the welfare of others, and not of themselves. I am sure that they will further improve what we have already accomplished.

Bosses, there are only 92 days left before I step down from office. On the afternoon of June 30th, I will just be an ordinary citizen. I will no longer be in a position to assist you at any time. But what is important is that I am comforted by the fact that there will be leaders who can serve you and further strengthen the services we have started for the Filipino people. That I can defend even in Plaza Miranda. That we have two reliable people. That the origin is the same; what they do is the same; where they are going is the same. That will further accelerate the change and improvement of our society that we are enjoying. And in my opinion, there is no one else but the next President of the Republic of the Philippines with your permission, Mar Roxas, together with Leni Robredo. [Applause]

Thank you very much and good evening to all of you.