Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In his meeting with local leaders and communities of Cagayan

[Delivered at Cagayan National High School, Tuguegarao City, on May 2, 2016]

Good day to all of you? Let us sit down, please sit down first. Earlier, I heard that it was mentioned that I had arrived. They said, the speaker said, “Our President is here, Benigno S. Aquino Jr.” I said, “Just a moment, there’s someone over there.” The ‘junior’ in our family is my father. [Laughter] Then in Pamplona, the children greeted me, “Ninoy, how are you?” [Laughter] I said, “Thank you as well.” I wanted to say, my father has thicker hair than me. He might get angry. [Applause] But that’s okay. We are very used to that.

In the past, they would say, “Son of Ninoy, son of Cory, brother of Kris. Now, uncle of Bimby, cousin of Mikee.” All those names are fine with me as long as we don’t forget Benigno Aquino III, friend of Manny Mambang, the next Governor of Cagayan. [Applause]

Let me just greet Secretary Babes Singson and Secretary Mel Sarmiento who are doing all the programs. Usually, I am the one who gives orders, after being ordered, I order them, we will inaugurate the Pamplona bridge, Secretary Babes Singson found [a way] and made it happen at the right time and the right cost. [Applause]

You know, let me just go back to Manny. I’ve long admired Manny—we were together in 2001, right? Was I ahead of you in your—no, just one term, that’s right, I was ahead of you by one term. And almost on my first day, I met Manny, and he said, “You should run for senator, and after that, run for President.” I said, “You’re asking me to do so much.” So, truthfully, I am happy we were invited here today in Tuguegarao because when I was testing myself, if I could endure traveling all over the Philippines, with no sleep, no meals, whatever happens. He, Manny Mamba, was one of the first, if not the first, to believe in us. [Applause]

Another thing, there were two of them at the very beginning, Jesse Robredo, Aika’s father. Then, we had a testing trip to Bicol, you know, Manny was just mentioning earlier all the things we did together on Daang Matuwid, is that right? He said, “So many roads were built.” That’s what I heard. But Manny Mamba is really good because the road we took, I think that was a provincial project, there was a long stretch with no road on the route we took. [Applause] No, I don’t mean anything by that, I just mean, it seems like Manny’s idea, instead of taking me on the good road, he brought me here on this dirt road to whisper to Mar Roxas in the coming days to finish it. [Applause] That’s what you call “planning.” Manny Mamba is really good at planning. They even told us, a different “kind.” [Laughter]

Anyway, I just want to greet—sorry, let's just pay tribute to everyone. Of course: Paolo and Aika; our colleagues; our Vice Gubernatorial Candidate, Bobot Taruc; our congressional candidate in the 1st district, Mon Nolasco; in the 2nd district, Win Sacramed; [applause] in the 3rd district, Toto Guzman; [applause] Mayor, our returning Mayor again in Tuao, Kiko Mamba; [applause] and other local officials present; fellow workers in government; my beloved Ilocanos: Good evening to all of you, Apo. [Applause]

You might not know this, but in Tarlac, when I was a congressman, my district had three Ilokano towns and one Kapampangan town. And the problem was, when I was studying Ilokano in our area, each of our three towns had their own version: some very rigid, some moderate, and some rather soft Ilokano. So when I moved to another town, we couldn't understand each other. So next time, after June 30, I will just ask Manny Mamba to teach me straight Ilokano. [Applause]

This paper I'm carrying, the things we worked on together for the Straight Path, almost all of it – and Manny already mentioned some – but I'll just add a little bit, okay?

In infrastructure from 2005 to 2010, the allocated funds for Cagayan province were P3.79 billion. People will say, “That’s already quite a lot.” But we, through our collective efforts: P17.04 billion, from 2011 to 2016. [Applause] That’s more than four times the increase in the budget.

Earlier, Manny mentioned the bridges, we came from the Pamplona Bridge. Manny is mentioning the three large bridges we built. I said, in Tarlac when I ran for President in 2010, of course that was my province, I was number one there. We had one new bridge there. Here in Cagayan where I was number 2, adding 1 and 2, three bridges were new in addition to those that were repaired. [Applause]

The length of this, you might fall asleep if I say everything. In the Shared Service Facilities, you have 75 Shared Service Facilities. I'm worried I won't be able to vote on Monday, because in Tarlac, we didn't even reach 35. Here with you, 75.

For our irrigation and farm-to-market roads, we brought over P3.5 billion to Cagayan. There are also post-harvest machineries worth P128.89 million.

There is also Pantawid Pamilya. In 2010, for you in Batangas, Cavite, and Basilan. There were so many included in Pantawid Pamilya when we took office, when we sat down we found for Cagayan: none. Zero members of 4Ps in 2010. Now, Manny mentioned: 32,205 families are being helped. [Applause]

For your classrooms, back then when Manny and I were congressmen, to get eight classrooms in a district, in the district, that was already a big deal. If you got ten, you were good. If you got 12, you were really great because the allocation for the entire Philippines was: 8,000 classrooms. In Cagayan alone, the classrooms that have been built and are currently being built, we already have 2,000 classrooms built here in Cagayan. [Applause]

The DOH, on the other hand, has the Health Facilities Enhancement Program: P377.25 million has been delivered to Cagayan. [Applause]

Your PhilHealth membership: reportedly 1.03 million, including 93 million PhilHealth members here on the Straight Path. [Applause]

325 sitios without electricity were listed in 2011. 100 percent of these 325 now have electricity. [Applause] Nationwide, this is included in the 32,688 sitios that we have provided with electricity.

Comrades, perhaps I will take this opportunity to say goodbye. You trusted me, you gave me sufficient votes so that we would have the opportunity to lead a great race like the Filipino people. [Applause]

You heard the testimony earlier about the bridge in Pamplona. You heard the testimony of a 4Ps member. She didn't finish her studies, how can she change the fate of her children, right? That's a common story throughout the Philippines.

Perhaps someone is getting heated, so this might also help us, you know.

You know, perhaps what philosophy surrounds—Manny, I think this is already “The sails that will bring you to the capitol.” [Applause] Nothing, just noisy. Okay, the next governor is guaranteed not to sweat anymore.

Perhaps and I don't want—you know, my mother reminded me, she said, “When you speak,” especially if you are not a candidate, many things people need to hear, of course, we need to give priority to the candidate. If you are not a candidate, shorten what you say.”

I will go to the 4Ps. All politicians, perhaps since the time of Mahoma, say the same thing: “Help me, and I will improve your lives.” Isn't that right? Perhaps what we should ask is: How will you improve lives? It would be good, perhaps, to use the 4Ps as an example.

Even during my mother's time, grade school and high school were supposed to be free. But we know there are so many out-of-school youth who cannot afford the fare. Even if they manage to enroll, they lack proper nutrition, get sick, and drop out. Now, what did we do with the 4Ps? We expanded it. We found that there were 780,000 households nationwide. Now, 4.6 million families are being helped. [Applause]

The term in English is: Conditional Cash Transfer. What is the condition? Keep your child in school, and you will receive support from the government. In 2014, we expanded it to include high school, and I believe that if we put Mar Roxas in office, we will maximize the assistance up to college. [Applause]

What is the difference? The difference in earnings between a high school graduate and a grade school graduate is 40 percent, which is significant. Simply put: Let's invite businessmen, local and foreign, to set up your businesses here, and there will be jobs. Our countrymen have no capacity. How can he participate in the economic upliftment? He cannot, right? So let's complete the assistance. Let's help them study, monitor their health, and support them to finish their children's education.

Result: One of the things we heard, she's a mother from Pampanga. She says she has seven children. Her husband left her. Because of 4Ps, she was able to graduate three of her children from high school, and they now have permanent jobs. [Applause] They graduated, they acquired skills through education, they can participate in the growth of our economy, is that right? [Applause] That's what she's hoping for, not to have a road built for her, you see, me helping you. No! Let's complete everything. So how do we help our countrymen to have or maximize opportunities? Let's complete it, let's help them study, let's help them take courses that really lead to specific jobs.

Let me mention TESDA. When we started TESDA, the employment rate six months after graduation was 28.5 percent. Now, it's 72 percent. [Applause] What's the result of that? Let me tell you a story again, the easiest way for us to understand, because it's hard to think when we talk about “billions,” “hundreds of millions,” let's make it a story about a person.

There's someone from Pangasinan, who worked in the Middle East, and finished Accountancy. They were told, “Now, go to the Middle East, you have a job: cashier.” When they arrived there, it was contract substitution. They became a domestic helper, and were even maltreated. They really had a hard time there. They escaped, were helped by our embassy, and returned to the Philippines. Upon their return, they were given fare to return to Pangasinan, and were told about training programs for our OFWs, amongst others. So they said they were confused when they returned. We can imagine why they were confused. They probably went into debt to work abroad. They didn't finish their contract abroad, how will they pay off their debt? If they can't pay off their debt, what else could happen to the good future they were hoping for because of the hardship of working in the Middle East? It all disappeared.

She entered the training at TESDA, they called it massage therapy and also hilot wellness, I think that was the name of the course. Because she studied there, she was accepted into a spa. In the spa, she was a good employee, and she rose to the position of operations manager. Because this person is really good, from being an operations manager of the spa, she now has four spas in Pangasinan within two years. And currently, in addition to the four spas, she has three more franchises in Tarlac. This woman, who was once thinking of taking her own life, now owns seven spas. [Applause] That's the real way to maximize the opportunities for every Filipino citizen.

Manny mentioned earlier, he said, that since my first time stepping into Malacañang, I’ve been counting the days. That’s not true. But I know I only have 59 days left in Malacañang. [Laughter] I don’t know the hour and the second.

And truthfully, you know, Martial Law, I was 12 years old then. I’m 56 now, we’ve been involved in this for 44 years. And when I look at my siblings and my nephews and nieces, I think that maybe, after June 30, we will finally experience a normal and peaceful life. But we can do that, I can think about that if I’m sure about your situation, that your situation is good, right? That’s important to us. [Applause]

I promised you, when I step down from office, what I will leave behind will be far better than what we inherited. [Applause] I don’t want my mother to visit me and tell me I’m bragging because of raising my own bank. If you don’t feel all the hardships we went through these past six years, then I have failed. But if it’s true that our situation is far better now than what we inherited in 2010, then you are the proof of that, and you will take care of us on May 9. [Applause]

It’s important, let’s go—before we go to the future, we need to look at the past. There’s no better example here than Mel Sarmiento, our Secretary of DILG. He said that when he was a mayor, he almost couldn’t get any help anywhere. He said, for example, once a fellow townsperson approached him. He said, “Mayor, I have a problem.” Mel said, “What’s the problem?” “We had a death in the family, we don’t have a coffin.” The carpenter from Mel’s city hall approached him. The carpenter said, “Sir, we have some leftover wood here. I’ll make a coffin.” The coffin was made and given to his townsperson.

The compatriot returned and met with Mel, saying, “Sir, the coffin has arrived. Thank you.” Mel said, “Is it okay?” “It would have been okay, but it doesn’t have glass, so we can’t see our deceased.” Mel said again, “Where will I get that again?” Their carpenter arrived, “Sir, we have leftover jalousie, I’ll take care of it.” So he installed it, I don’t know if it was done this way or that way, and everyone who came to pay their respects and offer condolences would peek at the deceased, because only jalousie was there.

Let me add: Mel was invited to the International Conference of Mayors. He told me that the representative from Japan arrived, and the immigration officer in that country said, “From Japan! Please welcome. Enter our country.” When the one from Singapore arrived, they said, “From Singapore! Welcome to our country. Please proceed.” When Mel arrived, they said, “From the Philippines!” They looked at Mel from head to toe, went back and forth looking at him, looking and looking. They didn’t say to Mel, “Please enter our country.” They said to Mel, “Purpose of visit? Length of stay? Proof?” Mel said, “I was invited to this conference,” he replied. “Proof of invitation?” [Laughter]

When he arrived at the conference, he brought 100 calling cards with him, because it’s important there to talk to your fellow mayors, maybe you can help them, maybe they can help you. Right, it’s an international conference. Mel said that he went with 100 calling cards, and when he returned, he had 101, someone probably returned one.

They say that when they hear you’re from the Philippines, the other mayors would distance themselves because they think the one from the Philippines is looking for ambulances, police vehicles, firetrucks, and others. That was then. Now that Mel is a secretary, he’s the one giving away police vehicles and firetrucks. [Applause]

Earlier, Manny said that there are only three municipalities left without a police station. Of course, I immediately asked Mel, “Mel, why are there no police stations?” He said, “The land for those three municipalities is still unavailable, but the funds are there, the personnel are there. We can build them, but we need land to build on.” [Applause]

So if Manny Mamba wins, he will force the merging of those three towns. [Applause] Isn't it pitiful for our police, we expect them to suppress crime, yet they don't even have an office. That's unfair. But I assure you that will be continued, especially if Manny becomes our Governor. [Applause]

When Mel was telling this story, I felt the same way. I was going to the ASEAN meeting—all heads of government in ASEAN are obligated to attend—a fellow head of government arrived, you talk to them, there are ten countries in total. When I first faced them, it felt… my feeling was simply, I hoped it wouldn’t be like this. But when they found out I was from the Philippines, it was like, “Ah, so you’re from the Philippines. Okay, welcome.” That’s how it was. It felt very forced, like they were only obligated to talk to me.

Well now, the situation is different. When our economy had almost 7 percent GDP growth, theirs, the countries I am referring to, were at around 1.4 percent. [Applause] So there was a conference, and my counterpart said, “President Aquino, the Philippines is doing this much. We are only doing this much. What is the secret of the Philippines?” [Applause] Isn’t that so? Of course, I just smiled because, as one friend said, “Before, they used to watch us.” “Watch us how?” “They were observing us closely.” [Laughter] Now, they are asking us for advice. So I just smiled, but I said to myself, “Just a moment, we are still catching up to you, you’ll be asking for our secrets soon.” But I just said, “We are copying your example.” And that ended the conversation there.

But the point is, you are all witnesses: “Sick Man of Asia,” “Asia’s Rising Tiger,” “Asia’s Rising Star.” Praise is coming from all sides. For a time, we were the second fastest growing economy, second only to China in Asia. It was like, when we came in 2010, the Filipino was already down and out. The Filipino, it seemed, had no ambition other than how to leave the Philippines? Is that right? [Applause] Now, earlier in the newspaper, on the front page of a broadsheet, there are many Filipinos who, instead of looking for work abroad, are prioritizing looking for work here in the Philippines. [Applause] So I think I can say, we were down before, now we are standing, now we have learned to walk, now we are investing in our countrymen.

For example, TESDA. The training we provide in TESDA for BPO, the call centers established by Mar Roxas, the government's expense, the expense to train each of our countrymen. In the first year that a TESDA graduate is working, they pay taxes, the tax they pay in the first year, that already covers the cost of their training in TESDA, and they don't just work for one year. They pay taxes every year, meaning every year, there is an opportunity for them to improve their standard of living. [Applause] That is the Straight Path.

Now, what is our future? Here in Cagayan, it is truly called, especially Cagayan Valley, the “rice basket.” But I know, the distance from Manila to Cagayan is really far, really try it. Our farmers harvest simultaneously. They usually rely on the price offered by traders. Is that right? What's more painful is that the Dalton Pass, Babes Singson always tells me, whenever a typhoon is about to hit here, the DPWH prepares equipment like graders because the Dalton Pass will likely be closed. Sometimes, even without rain or just a little rain, there are landslides. So the person who harvested, wants to sell, is hindered from selling because no one can pass through. Those who can pass through dictate the price, the income our farmers can earn is reduced by the difficulty of getting here.

What help have we given there? Do you know what is being done now? There is a road from Tarlac City straight to Cabanatuan. It’s like an expressway. It’s called CELLEX. That is what is being done now.

Next, regarding Dalton Pass, that 70-kilometer road, we have another one that is—it’s hard to describe—but instead of crossing several mountains, it has a gentler slope. It will be less affected by landslides. Right now, we are in the detailed engineering and design phase, with assistance from Japan. In other words, when we say we will continue the Straight Path, we will continue the road that will truly ensure you won’t be isolated. [Applause] The road that will guarantee more opportunities for our farmers to sell their hard work at the right price. Now, you might ask, “Why is it almost finished but not yet finished?” It’s no joke, there’s a five-kilometer tunnel that needs to be traversed. [Applause] Now, did you know we don’t have a tunnel boring machine? We need help from foreigners, we need their help even with its financing because it’s a large project: a 90-kilometer road that must be a major highway that cannot be closed. That’s what we can expect next here. [Applause]

Regarding flood control, a lot has already been put in place here, but there’s still a lot more. I won’t list all our flood control projects one by one because we know, especially on your side, Manny, that there are frequent floods, right? Even the bridge, what’s it called, the spill? Overflow bridge. When the water rushes, the bridge is gone.

Before, they were down, now they are standing, now they are walking. What can we expect next? The studies we are currently conducting, perhaps if they hadn’t finished their education before, their job would have been a small job like sweeping the streets. How would you support a family with that? The investment we are making now in their education, they can get a higher-paying job, a better salary, and take better care of their family. That’s what we call progress. [Applause]

Let me go back to the time when many candidates promised to improve your lives. They would give you millions of jobs every year. Mar Roxas, even before running for President, established the BPO industry. [Applause] How many people directly benefit from that? This person: 1.3 million direct employees in the BPO Industry. [Applause]

In the call center, there's a need for a convenience store, additional workers; the taxi driver who will take people there, additional jobs; there's housing, the construction of housing, and also the maintenance of the area, there are additional jobs. So it is estimated that three to four jobs are created for every job created in the BPO. That's what Mar Roxas started, which we can say benefits 5 million people directly and we expect the country to earn $25 billion because of that. [Applause]

One candidate said he will suppress crime within 3 to 6 months. Mar Roxas implemented the DILG platforms such as Lambat Sibat and One Time, Big Time.

Let me tell you about One Time, Big Time. Usually, when the police tighten security, they look for wanted individuals, one by one. When they arrest one, other criminals feel the heat and scatter. With One Time, Big Time, they sweep through all at once. For example, in a province, they serve all arrest warrants at once. The result of that is over 2,400 of the most hardened criminals have been arrested. [Applause]

They are masterminds, the leaders of their groups. When the leader is gone, the lower ranks can no longer move, so crime has decreased significantly because of what Mar Roxas thought of. [Applause] Thought of and implemented by Mar Roxas, continued by Mel.

Let's talk about Leni. Leni is Jesse's wife. Jesse said many times, they were like my parents, my mother and my father, he always said at different times, that if they hadn't found their partner, they wouldn't have reached the peak of their achievements. We really saw the support, true love, and unwavering support in the relationship between Jesse and Leni.

Now, the time came when Jesse had an accident, a member of my official family, a member of my Cabinet, a friend. I didn't know Leni very well because Jesse wanted to keep his family life separate from his public life. I need to tell you the bad news that our hope of finding Jesse alive is dwindling because it's been a long time since he disappeared. The point came when his body was found and I told Leni, “Leni, the news is, because he was in the water for a long time, Jesse looks very different. Maybe it would be better if you just remember how Jesse was when he was alive and let that be your memory.” She said to me, “I am his wife. I want to see him and say goodbye even if it's just this last time.” And when we were at the morgue, Leni was with Jesse's brother, and I was with Dinky Soliman, we accompanied them there. I felt so sorry for the state of my friend Jesse, but while I felt sorry for Jesse, I was really impressed with Leni, she had a very strong heart.

You know, we can think that she would wail, ask why left and right? Really, in the shock that came, there should be a different reaction. But gently, she prayed for Jesse, she talked to Jesse, I didn't see Leni really lose hope. And she has gone through many other trials. She could have just kept quiet, she could have just run for reelection. She could have said goodbye to all of us, said, “Can I just take care of my children?” and we would understand. But she knew there was a need and she knew she could meet those needs. So really, we would be making a big mistake if we don't elect Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

Truly—as they say, maybe tomorrow we won't know, finished or not finished, pass your paper. My parents and I will meet, I think because of your trust in me, the mandate you gave me and you accompanied me in all the challenges we need to face, I can face my parents looking up, I am not ashamed that I did not tarnish their memory and legacy. [Applause]

Let us remember, next Monday, we will be voting. There are those who say, who should we vote for? And I will return to this, perhaps someone should say, “Who should we vote for?” “Oh, let's go with whoever is likely to win.” But I think the question should be, “Who deserves to win?” [Applause] Not the popular one, that’s who we should vote for. Not the one who sings well, not the one who is surprising. No. If you make a promise, in accordance with that, how will you fulfill your promise? Do you understand the job? Now, in the surveys, as we all know, we see, there is one that is surprising. But I think many of us will think. If you swear, will that bring rice to the Filipino dining table? If you challenge left and right, will you get allies, especially when we have a problem in the West Philippine Sea? If you don't want to give a complete answer when asked, what can we expect when you are seated? I think we are all asking the same thing here.

Comrades, you know I am practically married to the country. I have no wife, no children. I have nephews and nieces, my youngest nephew is Bimby, just turned 9 years old. When I look at my nephews and nieces, sometimes, you know how heavy this job is. Sometimes, when you get a little tired, I look at my nephews and nieces and it’s important to me that if our lives have meaning now, we decide the future. [Applause]

It is important that we can tell the next generation, while there is life, there are problems. But your problems should be different from the problems we faced because we have fixed those problems. [Applause] We should be able to say that the opportunities in the future are far better because we worked hard for it and we did not abandon you.

It is important, Monday, that it’s not just a few minutes that we are there. Let us think about it, I even called this a referendum, this election. Did we do right with the Straight Path, or not? [Applause] Is it true that we have lifted 7.7 million people from the poverty level? [Applause] Is it true that 93 million are PhilHealth beneficiaries? [Applause] Is it true that 4.6 million are now in Pantawid? [Applause] Is it true that we have the lowest unemployment rate? [Applause] Is it true that we have an average GDP of 6.2 percent, the biggest since the 70s? [Applause] I believe that if we vote for someone else, it means we were wrong.

I actually read in the newspaper earlier that a candidate, “Laban ni Mar,” said my labor policy was completely wrong. I said, “That’s incorrect.” What I inherited was 199 labor strikes. During my time, up until today, there have only been 17, and we’ve been at it for almost six years now. [Applause]

I already mentioned to you unemployment, I already mentioned to you a 6.2 percent growth. If we vote for others, it means we want a higher unemployment rate, we want jobs to be reduced. When you read the newspapers on Sundays, the classified ads. Didn’t we used to see what jobs were plentiful? Maid, cook, nanny, driver. Now when we read, all sorts of things are needed, all urgent. Right, urgent, immediate hiring. The “No Vacancy” signs when Manny and I were young—Manny is a little older than me—all those “No Vacancy” signs are now being replaced with “Urgent Hiring.” Is that right? [Applause]

Comrades, I truly feel that my mother is reminding me, I’ve spoken for a long time. I apologize, I am now bidding you farewell. It’s just important, I’ll repeat it, we are all here, we likely share the same view that the Straight Path is correct. But we still have countrymen who may be lost. We need to find them, we need to talk to them, we need to persuade them that the future is being made now. [Applause] Let’s not treat the upcoming elections on Monday as a joke. We can’t rely on the possibility that the opponents of Mar Roxas will succeed. They might know what they’re doing. They might be right. But why would we gamble when we have a sure thing in the names of Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo? [Applause]

You know, sometimes people still tell me, “I wish you had just run for reelection.” I said, “That’s not in the Constitution.” “I wish you had extended your term, even just for three years.” I said, “That would be difficult.” Extending the term is difficult because we all know that the one who imprisoned my father served two terms and then extended it for 13 years. He led for 21 years. He was unique. But Mar Roxas has opponents; he’s in government, his three children are in government, they might each serve 21 years, that would be about 84 years. Isn’t it, no matter how good someone is, that wouldn’t be good for us.

It is important, you know, that something is happening in the Philippines, let's continue it no matter who is sitting here. And it is really important, it hurts when we make mistakes, we might be led astray left and right. The worst thing is, we'll be brought back to where we started, a U-turn. We don't want a left turn, we don't want a right turn, and we especially don't want a U-turn. Is that right? [Applause]

On May 9th, we will vote. If we work hard now, we will have something to show for it. If we are lazy, we might just look at each other, and we will all be crying. Why do we need to cry? When the shaping of the future is in our hands? [Applause] My vote, there is only one count. Each of us, there is only one count. But our votes together, the majority will decide for everyone. We need to multiply our numbers. Until the last day of the campaign, let's not stop multiplying our numbers. [Applause] If we do that, the next generation after us, when they look at us, they will smile and say to us, “Thank you.” Rather than us being lazy now, when the next generation asks us, “Why did you neglect us?” It is up to us.

Let me repeat, what can Noynoy Aquino do alone? Noynoy Aquino, with Manny Mamba, there were two of us. With Paulo, with Aika, there were four of us. If you all join us like in 2010, saying anyone but me, they couldn't withstand the Filipino people. We can do that again to ensure the Straight Path.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.