Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In his meeting with local leaders and communities of Pampanga

[Delivered at the Fontana Convention Center, Clark, Pampanga, on April 25, 2016]

Since we are facing barangay officials, may I share a story with you all about when I first ran for office? So once, in Tarlac City, we went to a place, and we arrived at noon during a house-to-house campaign. There was almost no one in the houses we visited, except for this one house that was full of people. My guide, or my head of Barangay Affairs, told me, “Boss, let’s go in, it seems like there are many people inside, let’s enter.” I went inside. This really happened, you might think it didn’t. [Laughter]

So he told me, upon arriving, an old woman sitting there faced me. The old woman said, “Kneel down.” Why would she make me kneel? Now, the belief of the people there is that she is possessed by the Sto. Niño. So she spoke to me, and gave me a plastic bag with candies. She said, “Candies, eat these so you will be far from harm and sickness.” What could I say? So I said, “Thank you.” I was already kneeling there. Everyone there was a devoted follower of hers. “This plastic bag is just plastic. Put it in your wallet, your wallet will always be full.” What could I say, of course, “Thank you.” And then she said, “Okay, you can leave now. You’ve won.” So of course, thank you again, and I left.

When I went out, I asked those who were there. I said, “What barangay are we from?” They told me, “We are from Nueva Ecija.” I was running for Congressman of Tarlac, and it turned out everyone in front of me was from Nueva Ecija. [Applause] That’s what you call early campaigning. Because when I ran for senator later on, about 9 years later, I already had voters from Nueva Ecija. [Laughter]

Another story: I remember—I’ll go back to why I’m telling you this now—in Tarlac, the problem is the same as in other places in the Philippines. For example, water. So they asked me for a jetmatic pump. They also said, maybe you could take care of the digging. Maybe you could cement the place where it will be installed, you do it yourselves. Okay. Simply put, we completed their jetmatic pump.

During the next campaign, I went back to that Barangay. I spoke to a young man, and he said, “This is the jetmatic pump you had made.” “Oh, is that so. How is it?” “It’s broken, maybe you could have it fixed.” I said “Okay.” I thought, you know, like they’ll be digging again, maybe it will run out there, something like that. “What’s the problem?” “The slipper is broken.” [Laughter]

You’re laughing. How many people benefit from that pump? How much does a slipper cost now? Will it reach P100? None? Or even less. What can I say, “Okay, that’s fine.”

So these captains of ours, I was walking with you all then. Do you remember that? Now, why did I tell this story? I came from there earlier, from the 4Ps beneficiaries. And there are some in Cebu. In Cebu, I was with my sister Kris, and she asked me, she said, she was listening to my speech, everything I was saying, if there was anything they wanted to convey to me. This older woman asked what they wanted to convey to me. She answered, “I hope the 4Ps continues.”

Now, why am I telling you this? The 4Ps, it’s not just a handout, right? It’s not just giving you rice today, and you’re on your own tomorrow. No. This is a concept that, truthfully, is an investment in society. Let’s help each family keep their children in school. Even during my mother’s time, free grade school and high school started, so we know that many who are poor can’t even enroll—even just for grade school, they lack fare, right? They lack food, allowance.

So with the 4Ps, let’s make sure we help them keep their children in school after they finish high school. There’s a study that says a high school graduate can earn 40 percent more than a grade school graduate. That’s why, in 2014, high school was also included in the 4Ps.

So let me go back, the people we are helping, they are not looking for handouts. They are becoming our partners to ensure a good future for themselves. Let me give you an example: Here in Pampanga, there’s a mother, we heard, she said, “I have seven children. My husband even left me. I’m on my own with my children.” I asked her, “What is your livelihood?” “I do small-time selling.” For those who understand Tagalog, in Tagalog, “patinda-tinda,” right? It doesn’t mean she always sells, sometimes she sells. So you need to raise seven children and you don’t have a stable income, how will you support them?

So because of 4Ps, he said to us that three of his seven children have finished high school and are currently employed with permanent jobs. What benefit does that bring to society as a whole? Well, that person has a job, pays taxes, and contributes to what we can help others with. Secondly, their life has a direction, they are no longer tempted to get involved in drugs or crime. They have a future to look forward to.

What I want to emphasize here is: 4.6 million households across the Philippines are receiving this kind of help, experiencing this kind of situation, where they are seeing light in their lives. Of the high school students we helped, approximately between 13 to 14,000 of the 300,000 plus in the first batch, were honor students. The spokesperson for the entire group, who previously wasn't sure if they could even study, has now been accepted into the University of the Philippines, College of Engineering. The College of Engineering is not easy to get into, it’s a quota course, with limited slots. These two who had no means to study are now at UP. Let’s give them four more years, and they will be engineers benefiting our society.

Now, I need to briefly—I won’t go into all the things we’ve done in the past six years. If you haven’t felt the impact of what we’ve done, we have fallen short. But if you have seen the roads, schools, Pantawid members, expanded Philhealth, and many others, as well as our response during typhoons, earthquakes, or other disasters, if you haven’t seen this government do these things, I believe we have a significant shortcoming. But if you have seen it, then you are the primary witness to the changes that have happened in our country.

Now, truthfully, we want to help those at the very bottom of society. When I first took office, in the first six months, what budget did Ms. Arroyo leave me to spend on all the necessary expenses? It didn’t even reach seven percent of the budget. 93 percent, more or less, had already been spent. Seven percent, that was what we had to fund everything for the first six months when we began leading this country.

Now, perhaps let me share with you some of the things we’ve learned from going around. I’m taking this opportunity to also say goodbye to all of you. In the past, wherever you looked, if you saw a building, a construction site, it would say “no vacancy.” Is that right? Now, it says “immediate hiring,” “urgent hiring.” Is that right? I was told by other governors that they are now having problems, because of the sheer number of projects being done there, they used to sometimes lack cement and steel. Now, even gravel and sand are scarce, but the biggest problem is that they can no longer find carpenters, plumbers, electricians, because all of these are being built at the same time.

Let’s make it clearer, what does that mean? Let me give you an example from where I recently came from, Negros Occidental—I think I visited it last week. The airport that serves Bacolod City is located in Silay. So you land in Silay, cross over to Talisay, and reach Bacolod. Let’s not even talk about what’s happening in Bacolod, that’s the capital of Negros Occidental, you might say that’s how it will be. I’ll tell you about the experience in Talisay. After landing in Silay, we took a road that looked like an expressway. I remembered mentioning to Governor Marañon then, the road I saw, it was a bit chaotic at first if you weren’t from there. You’d get lost. This, however, is a highway, a very good highway, with beautiful lights that really look professional.

What did we see there? There is a development being built by Ayala Corporation and Megaworld. What’s currently standing is a fence. They fenced off the properties they bought. Now, because they chose to buy, showed interest—Talisay is a typical municipality in the Philippines. All the activities are around the municipality, then all of it is—this is Negros, sugarcane plantations. Now, because Ayala and Megaworld are building there, the value of land has increased. Because the value of land has increased, Real Property Tax has increased, and because Real Property Tax has increased, the government of Talisay has additional funds, which they used to build their own school buildings. They added to the school supplies of students, increased the travel allowance of teachers going to remote areas. They bought their own IT equipment. They also bought their own bus. In short, one road put in place by the government has greatly improved Talisay. And that’s even before the buildings are constructed in the developments of Ayala and Megaworld.

What else does that mean? One, businessmen have confidence that the only thing they need to address or think about is how to compete with their competitors? Not anymore worrying about, what difficulties will the local government do to us? What difficulties will the national government impose on us? To make them feel that the government is helping them, so that you can provide jobs for our countrymen.

Let me just reiterate: A one-hectare farm, one person might be comfortable. When you get married, it's no longer as comfortable. When you have children, right, it gets harder and harder. But here, a one-hectare lot that we'll turn into a factory, for example, can employ up to 500 people.

So let me just reiterate: What does taking the Straight Path mean? If the government is established to serve the people, it needs to do everything it can to give opportunities to all its constituents. So, perhaps the best example of that is the 4Ps, we're giving them increases so their children stay in school. But if health is poor, or health, times three from when we started, is the budget of the DOH. Philhealth now covers 93 million people. When we came in, it was only between 47 and 51 million. We also expanded the illnesses covered by Philhealth.

So, you know, we were down on our luck when we started, we learned to get back on our feet. We're walking now, the progress we're seeing is gradual, we're gaining momentum. Now the question is, how much the government spends per province—I can visit you, I'll show you the difference between our governance and what we replaced.

Let me give you a sample: Pampanga. Infrastructure in Pampanga was P9.41 billion, 2005 to 2010. As we continued, it's now P16.94 billion, all provinces have seen a large increase in the budget in various fields. We ask ourselves, how did we do that? I didn't raise taxes except for the Sin Tax. We didn't just print pesos, right? We didn't create money that's meaningless. Our economy grew by an average of 6.2 percent—the highest average growth in the past 40 years. We received many ratings upgrades. In short, businessmen saw us again and said, “It looks good to invest here.” They invested, they paid taxes, the government's ability to fund everything we need to fund has strengthened, from infrastructure to PhilHealth.

So colleagues, you all know my job, there’s really a lot to do all at once. I need to attend a meeting in Aguinaldo today. I need to arrive there at 12:45pm, so I think you should have a good lunch later, and while you’re eating, please remember that we are not allowed to eat and only have “memo rice.”

I think I’ll just simplify my message. I asked to speak first. We are proud here in the Straight Path, everything that is happening here, was made possible by the people. First, believe what I’m saying. Second, you gave me a mandate. Third, you did not abandon me in all the challenges I faced in these past six years. I think, none of us thought that long-term projects would be completed and the things being done now, could happen, so let’s go back to that.

On May 9th, we will have another crossroads, we will choose again. Maybe I’ll leave you with this riddle: Me, first question, maybe it’s good to make an example. Let’s pretend we thought about putting up a business and the business we will put up is a restaurant. For the restaurant to be popular, to have many clients, the food needs to be delicious. So if you need delicious food, you need a good cook. Is that right?

An applicant arrived, wanting to be a cook. Suddenly, there was a person whose training is as a mechanic but is good at making people laugh, good at dressing up, good at boating, he has many skills we didn’t even ask if he’s a good cook. We hired the mechanic because we were swayed by “Hey, this person seems okay.” The mechanic cooked, of course it was a disaster. The restaurant went bankrupt because no one ate there. Who is to blame? The mechanic we hired or us who hired the mechanic?

It's really very simple: Qualified. I, when I say that Mar Roxas is qualified to replace me, everyone promises to provide jobs. Mar Roxas built our BPO Industry. This year: 1.3 million employees of the BPO Industry. The funds entering our economy: $25 billion. I repeat, $25 billion. It was said that when you get into the BPO, it's like being an OFW in terms of salary without leaving the Philippines. Again, they promised jobs, Mar Roxas already did that, we are benefiting from it now. [Laughter]

There's someone who is supposedly good at suppressing crime, peace and order. Mar, he didn't just promise, he already did it. A simple thing like their operations in the PNP “One Time, Big Time.” What is One Time, Big Time? When there are warrants, they gather them all, they chase all those with warrants of arrest, all at once. So there's no, “Hey, they raided there, maybe we're next. Let's hide.” No warnings are given so—how many? More than 2,400 most wanted individuals have been arrested because of that, because of Lambat Bitag and other programs since the time of DILG Secretary Mar, continued by Mel.

What is the result of that? When you catch the most wanted, they are often the mastermind. When there's no helmsman, their syndicate can no longer move. So the crime rate drops significantly when we catch the most wanted. Again, someone promises, Mar Roxas already did it. [Applause]

Leni Robredo, meanwhile. [Applause] Leni Robredo, a lawyer, could go to companies with high salaries. But since she graduated, since she passed the BAR, what she did first was, the Public Attorney’s Office—helping those who cannot afford a lawyer. Two years there, then 15 years in a Non-Government Organization with the same clientele: farmers, fishermen, all those who cannot afford their own lawyer.

Leni, she is Jesse's wife, but it shouldn't just be about being Jesse's wife. You know, it reminds me a lot of my mother and father. My mother and father said, when they talk about their partners, they wouldn't have reached what they reached if they hadn't had each other as partners. And that's Jesse and Leni, they've achieved so much and we really see the support of the two of them and the unity of their perspective on the path to take.

I think, it's a big shortcoming on our part if we don't put Mar and Leni in office and truly, [applause] there is a lot of hope. Just now, we're already standing, we're already walking, we're already running, then suddenly a new helmsman will come. He will say, I will change everything I did. What will happen to us then? Instead of moving forward, maybe a left turn, a right turn. The worst, a U-turn. You know, I was reading the newspaper earlier, and it said that Mrs. Imelda Marcos, Romualdez-Marcos, said, “My son will make this country great again.” So I thought, I've heard that before. And I had it researched, that was Ferdinand Marcos' campaign slogan when he first ran, in 1965. “I will make this country great again.” I, you might say I'm biased, I'm just thinking, their slogans are still the same. They will probably do the same things. And if I have anything to do with it, that won't happen. I don't want to repeat the problems we went through, especially from 1972 to 1986.

Manong Oca—Oca Rodriguez was imprisoned many times for defending the human rights of so many of our countrymen.

So I have nothing to be proud of except that, first of all, I was true to you, that I promised you that I would leave things far better than I found them. You are the witnesses if anything really happened or not. And if something happened, I repeat: You did this, you are the ones who can continue this, and we, we just rely on you. You are our Boss, tell us where we are going. Let's see on May 9th. [Applause]

I sincerely apologize, I have another obligation at 12:45pm. So, let me repeat: I will be stepping down from my position in just 66 days. Of course, I also have personal ambitions. How will a peaceful life be? How can we ensure that all our hard work won't be wasted because we have installed people who will continue the Straight Path and even expand it?

So when I see that happening, I can understand my personal needs. And when that happens, I can taste a little peace in this life. Our captain, Rodel, is planning to go to—where are you going? A stag party? Or a wedding? Or both?

Anyway, let me repeat: Everything we've done now could be lost. These six years could just be a vacation, or they could be permanent. That's up to you. It's up to the Filipino people. You are the Boss, you will decide where we go.

Good afternoon and thank you all very much.