Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines To celebrate Araw ng Kagitingan

[This is an English translation of the speech delivered at Mt. Samat, Bataan, on April 9, 2016 ]

This is the sixth and final time I will lead the celebration of the Day of Valor as your President. Each year, I made it a point to participate in this commemoration, so that I may personally thank and recognize our veterans for their sacrifice.

And since we are speaking of recognizing your sacrifice, I am certain that the fruits of the Straight Path are clear to all of you. One of the first reforms we pursued was the Pensioner’s Validation Program, through which we cleaned up the list of those receiving benefits. It is not right, of course, that the funds set aside for you are divided among, or even taken by, those who are unqualified.

Now that we have cleaned up the list, we are certain: You will receive your benefits directly. For your health—and the health of your dependents—we also have the Veterans Hospitalization Program. Over the nearly six years that have passed, 10,600 veterans or relatives of veterans have received free healthcare—not just in Veterans Memorial Medical Center, but also in 183 accredited public and private hospitals across the nation. Through this program, around 91 million pesos has been allotted—our nation’s attempt to repay your sacrifice.

Your daily hospitalization subsidy has also increased. What was once 1,200 pesos is now 1,500 pesos. Apart from this, we have also vastly improved the VMMC. It now has an eye center, and we have also renovated its Operating Room Complex, Medical Intensive Care Unit, and Outpatient Department Complex, and expanded its Renal Dialysis Unit, Medical Intensive Therapy Unit, and Post-Anesthesia Care unit.

As we care for your health, we are also securing the future. In terms of education: Direct descendants of veterans can receive up to 36,000 pesos every year for collegiate financial aid. Over the course of my term, we have allocated 370 million pesos for this endeavor.

Apart from reporting about the benefits that we are offering our veterans, I lead this commemoration every year because, as a student of history, I see it as an opportunity to help deepen our understanding of the past.

Some of us might remember: Before the Second World War began, we were not an entirely independent nation. But despite our limited capacities at the time, we—as Filipinos—still sought to do what was right and just for the sake of our fellowmen. Back then, under the leadership of President Manuel L. Quezon, the Philippines opened its doors to Jewish refugees from Europe, because of the abuses against them.

Perhaps our compassion could have gone even further if we had not been involved in the Second World War. Even if we were not making our own decisions then, we were not exempt from the suffering borne about by the decisions of others.

The Second World War brought about much devastation, which took place not even a generation after the First World War. Through the livelihood and infrastructure destroyed; through the lives that were lost, it truly brought affected countries to their knees.

This led me to think: What was the most important lesson we learned from World War II? It is clear: During times of chaos and disorder, any free country—even those who aren’t part of either side engaged in conflict—cannot stand idly by or remain quiet. If we do not address the root of the problem, then we will certainly reach a point where the problem will worsen, until we reach the point where no country can avoid it.

Let us look at the situation today in Europe, which has been affected by the chaos in Syria. Foremost among what they must deal with is the refugee crisis, and the rise in terrorism that destroys the lives of many. It can even be said that, together with the loss of stability in Syria, comes the possible spread of illness because health services have stopped. At the end of all this, if we do nothing and allow this situation to deteriorate, there may be an outbreak, which will affect us all.

Indeed: All nations live in, and share, one world, which is why the problems of one become the problems of all. If there are challenges in other parts of the world, however far away, we must still participate and contribute to the solution. If we allow these challenges to grow, then, in the end, we will only be affected by their negative effects. Perhaps, if this happens, it is only then that we will think: we should have done something when the situation was more manageable. Here, we see the importance of advocating that our leaders make the right and reasonable decisions on how to deal with conflict and chaos at the soonest possible time.

It is also true: In wars, once the fighting has ended, the leaders and combatants see clearly which side can be considered to have won, and which has lost. But there is also another truth. Wherever war may strike, when it comes to the civilians—when it comes to the common people, all are victims, all have lost.

In the case of the war that all of you, as veterans, together with affected civilians, survived: how many of those who died would have become celebrated teachers, lawyers, or leaders? How many could have invented new forms of technology, or discovered cures for cancer and other serious illnesses? How many of them could have contributed to realizing the full potential of humanity?

We may no longer be able to answer these questions. All that we can do now is to turn our sights to the future, and, in realizing our dreams, ensure that we do not forget the bitter lessons of the past. All of you know that, with the coming elections, our country is facing another, crucial fork in the path. Let me ask you: Will we choose a leader who puts his own interests first, and in so doing, guarantees the suffering of those below him? Will we choose a leader who wants to take shortcuts to achieve results, without a care for those who might be endangered in his path? Will we choose the lofty promises made by someone who does not seem to have a proper understanding of the processes that are necessary to achieve these?

You know my position in these matters: I stand with what is right, with who has been true to our people, with who has significant experience in governance. We stand with those who will continue the straight path. You know of whom I speak and I am confident, that our dreams for succeeding generations are aligned.

The Philippines has gone through so much. You veterans who have endured much chaos and conflict—you who have witnessed, over and over again, the times our nation has been brought to its knees and has recovered—it is you who will likely be able to give the best testimony of how far we have come in almost six years. You, more than anyone else, will be able to relate the depth of the positive transformation we are experiencing today. I am confident that you will be among those who will advocate what we are fighting for: Let us continue the change; let us continue realizing our dreams; let us continue the straight path.

Before I end: As I entered our venue today, there was a woman who greeted me, and told me, “Thank you for the past six years.” What I wanted to tell her, and what I tell all of you in response: Thank you for this unique opportunity to serve all of you, and to lead such an honorable people like the Filipino. I can think of no other that will come close to matching this opportunity, and the honor that was given me.

This is our final gathering, and I take my leave of all those here in Bataan. Good day, thank you very much.