Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In the launch of the Expanded Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Community-based Vaccination Program nationwide

[Declared at Sarabia Manor Hotel, Iloilo City, on May 3, 2016]

Our pledge: To leave the Philippines better than we found it. As my term nears its end, we continue to fulfill the mandate you have given us. With the help of my beloved Ilonggos, thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

Under our good governance, we have restored the government's mandate to its true mandate: to empower the people. An important part of this is focusing on health.

As proof of this, we are launching today the Expanded Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Community-based Vaccination Program for the entire country. As we always say: “Prevention is always better than the cure.” I just want to emphasize that, “Prevention is always better than the cure.” When we were just starting, I often debated with the DOH back then, when Janet wasn't there yet, there were so many projects for hospitals. I said, “Shouldn't we ensure that our countrymen don't get hospitalized rather than improve the hospitals?” Now that Janet is there, we are really on the same wavelength and the DOH has really accomplished a lot under the leadership of your fellow [person], Janet. So thank you very much, Janet. [Applause]

No one would object that if a disease can be avoided and prevented, it should be done immediately so it doesn't worsen or spread further. This HPV vaccine is a large-scale effort to prevent cervical cancer, which is the second leading cause of death among women in the country. According to records, twelve Filipinas die every day from cervical cancer. That's why we expanded this program; from its implementation in schools only, we are now implementing it throughout the community starting last year. In total, the target number of women to be vaccinated in Phase 1 and Phase 2 of the program: 690,000, from 9 to 10 years old—for cervical cancer.

You know, when I talk to the DOH, I learn a lot, but sometimes, I also get worried. [Laughter] Especially when we were discussing the MERS Corona Virus, Ebola, Zika. I told them, “You know, I'm happy to see you, if only it wasn't so often.” [Laughter]

Another thing we are promoting is the vaccine against dengue. Before, we only relied on fogging machines to respond to this, which only temporarily drives away the mosquitoes. This April, we launched the dengue vaccine immunization in public schools in Region 3, 4-A, and NCR. These are the areas we first focused on because they have the most incidents of dengue. They told us that vaccination doesn't prevent getting the disease 100 percent. But with its help, we expect a 93 percent reduction in the severity or serious effects of dengue, and an 81 percent decrease in hospitalization of those who contracted dengue.

The big change is this: Before, vaccines were limited to private hospitals, so when you went to a public hospital, they would say, “Sorry.” Just now, this chart was shown to us where—look at the one for rabies full dose: “1986, available to those who can afford it.” What about those who cannot afford it? Think about it: Even if the knowledge, science, and technology have been there for a long time, it won’t help treat the illness if it’s not affordable for our countrymen.

On the Straight and Narrow Path, we expanded our national immunization program so that our citizens, especially those on the margins of society, would also have access. Now, the vaccines available in the private sector are also being given free of charge in the public sector. [Applause]

According to Secretary Janet Garin, the pentavalent vaccine against hepatitis B, meningitis, and pneumonia, which was being sold in the private sector as early as 2003, has been given free of charge to the public since 2012. The pneumonia vaccine for children, which was also available in the private sector since 2006—10 years ago—has also been given free of charge to the public since 2013. [Applause] I would also like to add: The booster dose for measles, mumps, and rubella has been available in the private sector since 1985. This year, 2015, we also started school-based immunization against these, as well as tetanus and diphtheria. No one has complained yet, it seems my pronunciation of all these diseases is correct. [Laughter]

As I said to you, of course when that is mentioned, I am not the type to just nod along. “What does that mean? What does it do? What is the illness?” So after that, I think my blood pressure goes up a little because of the number of diseases we are monitoring.

We are indeed thinking: If these vaccines had been given for free a long time ago, how many of our countrymen would have been helped to cure their illnesses? It is clear: On the Straight Path, we were not content with “bahala na” (come what may), or “puwede na” (it’s enough). We did everything we could to care for our Bosses, the Filipino people. During our term, the budget of the Department of Health has increased by more than 300 percent since we began. [Applause]

Using these funds, we improved the health facilities in our country. Under our Health Facilities Enhancement Program, we have allocated P682.54 million to improve 94 barangay health stations, 46 rural health units and urban health centers, and 12 hospitals—all here in Iloilo. [Applause] From 2010 to 2015, we deployed 12 doctors, 1,456 nurses, 263 midwives, 2 dentists, 4 nutritionists, and 20 public health associates to your remote communities.

In PhilHealth, 1.8 million Ilonggos are now covered by the program, which is part of the 93 million members nationwide. You know, we have countrymen who are referred to as being “near poor.” This means they have already risen above the poverty line. But in an instant, when struck by a serious illness or a major disaster, their savings can be wiped out and all their hard work can vanish. With the expanded benefits of PhilHealth and the improvement of hospitals, we are helping them to move further away from the poverty line, and those “near poor” are truly moving away from that poverty line we have identified. We don't want to be stuck in a cycle of fleeting progress and setbacks in the lives of Filipinos. What we want is: Continuous progress.

You can see: Our programs and projects are interconnected to truly uplift the lives of our countrymen. Instead of focusing on only one sector, we are striving to address the needs of different and all sectors. On the Straight Path, we are improving the education system and taking care of the health of our students. The good news is: In 2008, our out-of-school children reached approximately 2.9 million; in 2013, there were only 1.2 million out-of-school children, and we are striving to get these remaining out-of-school children back in school. In addition, we are also ensuring that they have sufficient skills to find employment after graduation. This happened because we talked to employers to find out what skills are needed.

That is exactly the large-scale transformation happening in our country. And these achievements, we were able to accomplish them without adding to the burden of the people, except for the Sin Tax, which also aims to improve our health services. In 2015, we collected P141 billion from the Sin Tax. [Applause] 85 percent of that is going to our health programs. [Applause] The one who fought in the Senate to make the Sin Tax a reality, who struggled for a long time, was none other than The Big Man of the Senate, Frank Drilon. [Applause]

I remember when the voting on that bill came, Frank really showed his skill because the vote, truthfully, was 10-9. That law almost lost, so Frank Drilon is really good. [Applause] We should really bring back an Ilonggo to the Senate, Frank Drilon is his name.

There is so much proof: In the development of the economy, infrastructure, livelihood, education, health, and social services, we have really come so far.

Earlier, Jed said, as I understood it, he was thanking me. I should probably be thanking you, Jed, Jerry, Manong Art, and all of you. With everything we have accomplished, could this have happened if you hadn't joined me in walking the Straight Path? [Applause]

On Monday, the election is here. Some think that whoever replaces me will be able to continue all that we have started well. For me, let us think about who among those presenting themselves to be leaders truly deserves to win. Some say: “Let’s support whoever is likely to win.” I believe, it should be: “Let’s support whoever deserves to win.” [Applause] I am confident that you will see that the most qualified to continue what we have started is none other than your beloved compatriot and true son of Panay Island, Mar Roxas. [Applause]

You know, what his opponents are just promising, Mar has already done a long time ago. From the very beginning, Mar was with us in shaping every detail of the Straight Path, to deliver benefits not only to Panay Island, but to the entire country. That is why there is no reason for Iloilo and Panay Island not to be 100 percent for Mar Roxas. [Applause]

Mar is one of us, of course it’s different to have a Vice President who supports you. Let us also give full support to Leni Robredo, [applause] our bet for Vice President. Like Mar, Leni is a capable and steadfast leader. Above all, she will also prioritize the country before herself, for the complete upliftment of those on the margins.

You know our origins. Before, instead of doing what is right, they focused on how to stay in power. Just imagine, if we had taken the Straight Path a long time ago, wouldn’t we have reached greater heights?

Just 58 days from now, I will be stepping down from office. In the latest survey, there are still far more people who support me than when I ran in 2010. This is a rare occurrence for a President nearing the end of their term. Perhaps this reflects your appreciation for the positive reforms that we worked on together. To my Ilonggo Bosses: We have achieved victory. [Laughter] So, let us continue this for the continued progress of our beloved country, the Philippines. [Applause] As long as there’s “palangga,” “pinalangga,” “pangga,” I can handle it. [Laughter]

Truly: It is a great honor to be President of a people who continue to unite to achieve a future that is far better than the one we inherited.

In closing, we had two children with us earlier. There are days, I admit to you, when the problems are really heavy. I noticed a photo of me during my inauguration, my hair was considerably thicker then. I thought it was like that all along. [Laughter] But you get tired when the problems you face are overwhelming. You really feel like you’ve finished praying. You really wonder, where will you draw strength? You look around. I am lucky to have nieces and nephews and other children. And I always ask myself, “If the next generation, what we call the successors, inherits the exact problems we went through, then we have failed.” And I believe that in the past almost six years, we have somewhat changed the story of the Philippines. So, I ask all of you, on Monday, we will vote. When we vote, it is important to look at the children and tell them, “We truly protected your future.”

Good day. Thank you all very much.