Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

During his meeting with local leaders and communities of Dasmariñas, Cavite

[Declared in Dasmariñas, Cavite, on March 10, 2016]

When we arrived here earlier, I said, 'I've been here before.' This place, for me, is very lucky. It seems this is my third time here and we always win. [Applause] Let me repeat: I am not the one winning; we are winning. You are still here so it's likely we will win again. So thank you very much again.

Let me tell a story, even just a short one, because I know you've been here for a while. Some of you are really fanning yourselves hard. Joel asked if you had eaten. You said, no. Joel said it will pass. [Laughter]

But what I want to tell you is this: Once, I went home to our place in Tarlac. I was told that we have a retired compatriot who has a water buffalo as a pet. That water buffalo, which he didn't use for farming, he treated like a dog. Every time he went for a walk, the water buffalo would always follow him, from childhood until it grew up. Then came a time when he retired. He needed to go to Manila because he had papers to complete and submit for his pension and benefits. He went to our bus terminal, to ride the bus. The conductor said, “Wait a moment. This bus is for people only, water buffaloes are not allowed.” Our compatriot said, “Oh, just let him be. He knows what to do.”

It’s really different, our water buffalo in Tarlac. The bus left the terminal, and the water buffalo followed. The conductor said again, “Sir, your water buffalo is following. It might cause an accident or get into one.” “Just let him be. He’s been trained. He knows what to do.” So the driver sped up to try to leave the water buffalo behind. Maybe it would just go home. He drove for forty kilometers. It was still keeping up with the bus. The driver sped up even more, driving at seventy kilometers per hour. As he drove that fast, he looked in the rearview mirror and saw the water buffalo with its tongue hanging out. [Laughter] He said to the owner, “Sir, your water buffalo has its tongue hanging out. It looks tired.” “Oh really? Which way is its tongue pointing?” The driver looked again, “To the left, sir.” “Oh, be careful. It might overtake us.” [Laughter and applause]

Why did I bring up that story? What is the connection? During our campaign in 2010, like almost all of our candidates, especially Leni, she ran with limited funds, we didn’t plan to run, we really had to work like a water buffalo. We would go through it by visiting all of you instead of… Isn’t a lot of money spent on TV now? On all sorts of paraphernalia, but we really didn’t have the money for that. We were still the opposition. Then came a day when we had twenty-one engagements or events. There are twenty-four hours in a day. At that time, you would travel from town to town, one hour per town. Our last meeting there, I think, ended at 2:30 in the morning. There were still people we could talk to there. [Laughter] As we were going home—I don’t think Leni would be angry because she knows this happened—I was with Jesse on the bus. Then I just mentioned to my companion to tell our colleague that the water buffalo also knows how to cry. [Laughter]

What was the point of that? It’s good for us to look at this campaign. Let’s study all those who want to run. Campaigning is difficult, it’s like you’ll eat some time in the future, sleep in the car for ten minutes, really tired, you’re lucky if you get three hours of sleep a night, before you sleep, all the problems of the campaign will be poured on you. When you wake up in the morning, the problems that weren’t poured on you the night before will be poured on you in the morning. When you face the media, they’ll look for a question you can’t answer to show that you’re weak. Even if you’re dizzy, hungry, tired, and sunburnt, you need to be perfect. That’s just practice for when you become president, right?

When you become president, you think it's easy. Who here says that the life of a president is easy? Because yesterday, a reporter said, “Sir, are the problems we have here in North Korea and the problem in the West Philippine Sea the only problems you will address in the remaining days?” I said, if that happens, I will thank you. Because even the Zika virus, we're talking about that, the conflict in the Middle East, we have workers there, that's included in our discussion. Choose any problem in the world, there's likely a Filipino there, we're involved in that. So if I only focus on two things, that's a big deal. Luckily, our symbol should really be “hardworking like a carabao.” And now, it's not because you are here, there are fewer carabaos that cry.

My Bosses, our vow on the Straight Path is: To leave behind a Philippines that is undeniably better than the one we inherited. How do we truly fulfill this vow, especially for our beloved Caviteños?

Just in 2015, we inaugurated the Muntinlupa-Cavite Expressway or MCX, the very first Public-Private Partnership project that we approved, and we also opened it to the public. What's special about this PPP is that not a single centavo was spent by the government. [Applause] In fact, the State even earned because our partner in the private sector submitted a premium of P925 million to obtain the privilege of building the infrastructure we need. That is the Straight Path. The premium is then used for other government programs. The necessary infrastructure is built; we earn money to supplement the government's funding needs. This is also the good news regarding the ongoing 44.63-kilometer Cavite-Laguna Expressway or CALAX, [applause] which is another of our PPP projects. Like the MCX, we also received a premium here. You remember, there was a bidding. One was going to be disqualified, and he said, “Wait a minute, I want to pay the government P20 billion.” The winner bid P11 billion. The reason we made in this issue, we rebid it. When we rebid it, someone else won. The amount paid to us was P27.30 billion. [Applause]

We also know that many who work in Metro Manila, return home here to you. That's why we are also focused on our mass transport system. There's the laying of the LRT Line 1 South Extension Project, from Baclaran to Bacoor, [applause] and the LRT Line 6 Project, which will originate from Bacoor, and extend to here in Dasmariñas. [Applause] And when that's finished, it won't be me cutting the ribbon, it will be someone else. That's okay as long as it arrives. They will take all the credit. As long as we have served you truthfully, your humble servant is content. [Applause] The Southwest Integrated Transport System Project will also begin soon; right now, we have the Southwest Interim Provincial Terminal. Once these large projects are completed, imagine the long-term benefits that Caviteños will enjoy. [Applause]

Under our term, we also focused on projects long awaited by Filipinos. For example, your Ternate-Nasugbu Road. Imagine: only six kilometers in length, but it took almost two decades to complete. They made the promise, we delivered. Twenty years in the making yung six kilometers. [Applause]

Let's compare this to the Straight Path (Daang Matuwid). If for them, it took almost 20 years to build just 6 kilometers of road, we were the ones who completed it. Under us, in just almost six years, we have built 6,200 kilometers of national roads, [applause] and completed 1,500 kilometers of tourism roads. In addition to this, we built permanent bridges with a total length of 12,585 lineal meters.

On the Straight Path, we didn't focus on just one sector. Our programs and projects are interconnected, to help other sectors in need. With the development of infrastructure, not only the movement of tourists is accelerated, but also the delivery to the market of products that Caviteños are proud of, like your famous coffee. Your vegetables and fruits can be sold fresher. To further strengthen your agriculture, we built 49 farm-to-market roads and 59 irrigation projects here in your province. [Applause] We also provided 22 Shared Service Facilities—there is an allocation there for the processing of the aforementioned coffee and other products. [Applause]

In total, if you sum up all the funds we allocated to the DPWH for the construction of roads, bridges, and other infrastructure in Cavite, from 2011 to 2016, it will amount to P20.53 billion. [Applause] You probably don't know, this is more than 4 times the P4.80 billion allocated to your province by our predecessor from 2005 to 2010.

Yesterday, we came from Lipa, Batangas to attend an event of the Philippine Air Force. There, we can proudly say that we bought not just one airplane for our Air Force, but “many” modern airplanes. [Applause] We also have “many” new naval vessels, and many other new equipment for the Armed Forces. This is proof of how far the transformation of our Armed Forces and our country has gone. Here, even those who pretend not to see and not to hear the changes brought about by the Straight Path will not be spared. Because when our modern FA-50s pass by, they will feel the roar of its flight in our airspace. [Applause] Now, if they say and insist that nothing has changed, all I can say is, treatment is free at the National Center for Mental Health. [Applause]

In social services, we are not content with: Just being able to say that we have done something. The comfort it brings must be continuous and widespread.

In education: The backlog in classrooms we inherited: 66,800 classrooms short. We were told that we could only build 8,000 classrooms per year when we started. You gave me a six-year term, 8,000 per year. The sum of that, of course, is that we can only build 48,000 classrooms. [Applause] But that is not enough. I said to you, I will leave a better legacy than what I inherited, will I leave with a debt? That is not possible. We looked for a way to fill that gap. We have already addressed the 66,800 classroom backlog, as early as 2013. [Applause] Currently, we have also addressed the needs for the implementation of K to 12, replacing 30 to 40-year old buildings, repairing or replacing those damaged by typhoons. And before we step down from office, because you gave us permission, 185,000 classrooms have been funded and we can now build them. [Applause]

In Cavite alone, 2.76 million Caviteños are covered by Philhealth. They are part of the 93 million Filipinos supported by this program in the country. [Applause] Before, no matter how hard one tries, no matter how much hardship a Filipino endures, it seemed to lead nowhere. On the Straight Path, we have proven: If you persevere, you will surely succeed. Proof of this are the graduates of the Training for Work Scholarship Program of TESDA. Here in Cavite, we already have almost 30,000 TWSP graduates from 2010 to 2015. [Applause] That is just a part of the 9 million graduates of TESDA in various courses across the country. That's why TESDA Man is so popular. [Applause] The good thing about the support we give to TESDA scholars is that, in their first year of employment, the taxes they pay already cover the cost, and the State even earns additional income to provide opportunities for others. [Applause]

Have you noticed that when the SWS Survey came out saying “80% of the Filipino people want Pantawid to continue?” everyone claimed ownership of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program? This only proves that when a program is successful, everyone wants to claim to be its father or mother. But when it fails, everyone says, “We had nothing to do with that.”

Let's talk about the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. The number of beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya nationwide in 2010 was less than 800,000—more than 780,000, to be exact. If we divide this for easy calculation, instead of 81 provinces, let's say 80 provinces, the result is 800,000—let's round it up to that. Divided by 10,000, that's 80,000. Is that correct? [800,000 divided by 10,000 provinces, the average should be 80,000 members.] I thought the number of beneficiaries in Cebu was already low, just over 5,600. I thought the worst was in Bohol because there were only 531 households. I was surprised today when I was shown how many beneficiaries there were in the province of Cavite. I was surprised when I was told there were none: not ten thousand, not one thousand, not ten, but no members of Pantawid Pamilya in Cavite in 2010. I said, does that mean Cavite is very prosperous and doesn't need help? Are there no more poor people in Cavite? Then I was told, when you were at zero, my predecessor said: GMA Cares. GMA has compassion.

Now, on the Straight Path: In Cavite, from nothing, from zero, more than 50,800 households are now being helped by Pantawid Pamilya. [Applause] Nationwide, in 2016, when the survey was conducted in 2009, it was said: 4.6 million households needed assistance and help. Last year, we reached 4.4 million, and we will complete the remaining 200,000 this year, so 4.6 million households are now being helped by Pantawid Pamilya. [Applause] According to initial studies on CCT, because many politicians, especially in 2013, said, “Pantawid Pamilya should be investigated. Pantawid Pamilya should be stopped.” Now, we have 7.7 million Filipinos who have crossed the poverty line or have risen, as it is called. [Applause] The remaining work, aside from the 200,000, we will continue our efforts to further distance those called “near poor” from poverty. That means they have risen above the poverty line, but became seriously ill and fell back below it. That's why PhilHealth is there to help. We need to ensure that just one storm doesn't destroy everything they've built, and they fall back into poverty. That's what we're looking for now: to distance them further and further; one serious illness, one disaster, and they're back in poverty.

Now, a survey has come out: 4 out of every 5 Filipinos will vote for someone who will continue Pantawid Pamilya. [Applause] So, you see, even those who criticize Pantawid Pamilya are jumping on the bandwagon. You are the ones to judge whether we should listen to them. [Applause]

You know, the beauty of the internet is that you search, and it appears. Because there is one, a rival of our good colleague Mar Roxas, whose son himself called for an investigation. And now, he will even expand the Pantawid Pamilya program. I have a nephew, I think, if Bimby were better at Tagalog, he would say when he sees the two of them, “Yesterday he didn’t want it, now he wants it. What does he really want?” I’m just asking, it’s not possible for both sides to be right. They’re different. One is right, one is wrong. Can both be right at the same time? I don’t think that can happen. And I think, here in Cavite, no one is being fooled.

Truly, Cavite has come a long way in almost six years of walking the Straight Path. Of course, we were able to do this with the cooperation of you Caviteños, and your leaders who are partners in change. Let me just mention: There’s someone like Pidi Barzaga. [Applause] I served with him in Congress, but he’s not from my party. It’s not because I’m trying to get him to share his expertise. But honestly, even if he’s not from my party, when he stands with us during crises and problems we face, sometimes he’s more like a comrade than a party member, we consider him like a brother. [Applause] Some say that even our hairstyles aren’t that different; [applause and laughter] even down to the comb, we use the same brand of comb. [Applause] But our bond doesn’t come from that.

If you will remember: Pidi served as a key prosecutor during the trial of the ousted Chief Justice Renato Corona. He was also a member of the Justice Committee that created the report and articles of impeachment against Ombudsman Merceditas Gutierrez.

You know, campaigning for local positions is still prohibited now. But as my mother said: Don’t recommend someone if you can’t guarantee them. That’s why I’m facing you now, and with full confidence I will tell you: [applause] When the right time comes, I will return here to Cavite to guarantee Pidi Barzaga to you. [Applause] Of course, along with ten of our other colleagues.

In May, the nation will once again face a crossroads. Our call: Continue what we have started well. As for me, there is only one who is truly loyal to you and who truly has the “K” to continue the Straight Path. Someone who truly has a conscience, truly has the ability, truly has compassion for others, and is now even more empowered with Korina. It is none other than Mar Roxas. [Applause]

Mar Roxas, was one of the faces of the government in responding to those in need. I find myself wondering: How far would we have gone if, back in 2010, Mar had been my running mate in governance? I really can't shake from my mind, I have a former colleague, who constantly failed on the Straight Path, now calling it a failure. This is where I see the value of voting for a tandem: If something happens to the President, the Vice President will take over the position. Just imagine if they don't share the same beliefs and platform. Everything that has been started could be delayed or lost.

With us is the champion of the Straight Path for the Vice Presidency, or for the position of Vice President, none other than Leni Robredo. [Applause] I need to tell you: I am truly impressed by Leni’s resilience. Even when faced with a severe crisis in her life, we truly have nothing to say. Upon the passing of her husband Jesse Robredo, instead of showing us sadness, which was her right, instead of me offering help to overcome the trial, if we really look at it, Leni even helped us, not just me but many of us, to accept the loss of Jesse. She is truly strong; she remained strong for her children and served as an inspiration to all.

Leni, has truly accomplished a lot and is a woman of her word; she has done a lot as a lawyer, representative of Camarines Sur, and as Jesse’s partner in caring for those on the margins.

Bosses, when I accepted the challenge to serve, it was clear to me that I wouldn't be riding a merry-go-round for six years. The mandate given to me was change—and that is what I am striving to do and currently still doing. In fulfilling my duty, we encountered many obstacles; I remember what an older woman in the province of Nueva Ecija told me. After a rally there, she said to me, “Noy, be careful.” Look at those we brought to justice. She said then, the ones you will confront are heavyweights: the president I replaced, a former Chief Justice, senators, and many others, we are holding accountable in our courts. We have affected many, or those who felt affected in what they believe is their rightful livelihood, like in the BIR and Customs. While abusing their power, they cause suffering to the people. So it's not surprising: they say that when I step down from office, some will file cases against me, no matter how they have to invent them. Some are threatening to harm me physically. But you know what, I am at peace: We did and are doing what is right, we follow the law. We overcame every challenge because you were my strength. You made the change; You will continue it. If I became a bridge, I am content. [Applause] I don't know what remains in my life that God will grant me. It is clear to me: With the opportunity you gave me, I will truly be able to face my parents and say that I did not tarnish the name you gave me. I also did not tarnish the memory of your faithful service to our beloved countrymen.

Only 112 days remain before we step down from office. It has been a long time being involved in the fatigue, the stress, the intimidation, the fear, and various others, that stemmed from our service to our beloved brothers and sisters, my personal siblings, my nephews and nieces, those who care for me. The sacrifice has truly been long.

You know, I remember once, in 1978, my father told me while imprisoned in Fort Bonifacio, “Let me run in the interim Batasang Pambansa. My purpose here is not to win. No opposition will win in Martial Law. But here, we have the opportunity to talk to our countrymen who have been deprived of the truth for a long time.” You remember this, elders, more than three years of meetings, which was called an illegal assembly. He said to us then, “This is my last run.” A few years passed, he promised, especially to my sisters and my mother, that when Mr. Marcos left, we would all go abroad first, to forget the horrors of Martial Law. You know the history, we didn't get the two years for our family to live, to rest a little, to think of something else. My mother replaced Mr. Marcos.

Some are advising me now: Not to interfere in this election. Just be content and stay quiet, lest my big adversaries forget me. But I am the Father of the Nation; it is my duty to guide the people. I cannot bear to remain silent and let what we have worked for fall into the hands of leaders who “might” fulfill their promises, [applause] leaders who “might” mislead us, or “might” pull us back into corrupt practices.

Let us remember: We come from a long period of falling. And now, we are learning to stand and walk. Now we are running and starting to move forward, will we retreat and change the direction we are taking? Let us stick to what is certain and has not even a trace of doubt in continuing the Straight Path and all the good things we have started.

That is in your hands. Now, we have a passing of responsibility, one that is more zealous and more prepared. With your permission, Bosses, I present to you: The one who will lead the fight to continue the Straight Path, the next President of the Republic of the Philippines, none other than Mar Roxas.