of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

during his meeting with local leaders and communities of Davao del Sur

[Declared at the Davao del Sur Coliseum, Digos City, on May 4, 2016]

Well, you are surprised, the Kapampangan, knows a little Visayan. As long as there is someone beloved, beloved, that's it, I understood everything.

Perhaps we are nearing the end of our term, just over 50 days left of the six years you gave me. And I think it's time we report to you. What have we achieved in traversing the Straight Path? You know, oops! They seem to have given us the wrong thing. My colleagues are getting dizzy, their printing is making mistakes, but Claude, is this right? In 2005 and 2010, for infrastructure, what was the budget here with you? The data given to us: P1.45 billion. On the Straight Path, from 2011 to 2016, we did not raise taxes but what we delivered here reached P4.76 billion, triple the previous infrastructure allocation to you. [Applause]

Someone said, I forgot Mindanao, but we looked at the data again. 2005 to 2010, for infrastructure: P67.32 billion, we weren't even in the picture then. [Applause] From 2011 to 2016, our time, the previous P67.32 billion we brought to Mindanao: P302.15 billion. [Applause] It increased more than four times. That's why I don't know why some people say I forgot Mindanao.

For Farm-to-Market Roads, irrigation: ₱989 million for your Davao del Sur.

Social Services, Pantawid Pamilya: The number of households we were helping in Davao del Sur when we started: 4,744. Now, 62,857 families are being helped. [Applause] In 2010, it was only 780,000. Now: 4.6 million households across the Philippines are being helped.

I think, Claude remembers when we were a Congressman. When we get a budget for building a classroom, Claude, right, eight? Ten? But Claude is good, I remember, he could get twelve. Why? Across the Philippines, 8,000 classrooms would be divided. So especially if you are a congressman in your district, to have eight classrooms, you worked hard. Ten, you really toiled. Twelve, you are great. Now, our time, Davao del Sur alone, 4,000. Oh, sorry! 4,983 classrooms have been built and are currently being built for Davao del Sur. [Applause]

In the past, the entire Philippines shared: 8,000 classrooms per year. The problem was, when we came into the picture, we asked Brother Armin of DepEd, how many classrooms are lacking in the Philippines? He said, 66,800. The budget that can support: 8,000 per year. Six years you gave me, we can only build 48,000, right? And with that 48,000, I will leave with a debt. But we didn't allow that, we all worked together, I repeat, all of us. So instead of 8,000 per year, what we produced, the total is 48,000. To be honest, we have built, are currently building and will be completed by the 1st quarter of next year: 185,000 classrooms have been built across the Philippines. [Applause]

Let's go to PhilHealth. In Davao del Sur alone, approximately 2.38 million are members of PhilHealth here with you. In Mindanao, PhilHealth has 24.85 million members. Nationwide: 93 million Filipinos are being helped by PhilHealth.

In the Health Facilities Enhancement Program: P186.31 million has already been delivered by the DOH.

Regarding electricity, Sitio Electrification: 100 percent of 712 sitios here in Davao del Sur have reportedly been provided with electricity or connected to the power grid. [Applause] And that, of course, is thanks to our excellent governor. He/She is really not behind in these numbers. Diligent, easy to talk to, easy to work with, and quickly produces results when we work with someone like that.

Comrades, perhaps it's difficult for us to understand when we're just talking about numbers, especially when it comes to hundreds of millions, billions, right? Let's give some substance to what we're talking about here.

Election: All the politicians you hear throughout your lives, they don't say anything other than, “Help me, I will improve your lives.” Is that right? Okay. So our question is, on the Straight Path, how do we force improvement in lives?

Let's talk about the 4Ps. Even during my mother’s time, grade school and high school should have been free. Is that right? The problem is, families are short on funds to cover allowances and fares. The result was, in 2008, 2.8 million of our youth were out-of-school. Now, 1.2 million in 2013. I believe the number is even lower now. That 2.8 in 2008—million young people not in school, became just 1.2 million in 2013 and should be less than 1 million now.

Now, what is the 4Ps? Conditional Cash Transfer. We have an agreement, we will help families in need, as long as you keep your child in school. In 2014, the aid previously for grade school was increased, to high school—we are helping until high school. What is the goal there? There is a study by the Philippine Institute for Development Studies. It says that if one completes grade school, this is likely the salary. If one completes high school, there is a premium, a 40 percent increase in what a high school graduate can earn.

So when we say, let's educate them, let's keep them in school, let's monitor their health. When they finish high school in programs like those of TESDA, they have a job. We spoke to the businessmen, we didn't invite the businessmen, we also asked the businessmen. After two years, what kind of skills are needed by the workers you are looking for? Four years? Six years? The result, when we came to TESDA: 28 percent—28.5 to be precise—were able to find a job within six months of graduating. During our time, under the leadership of Joel Villanueva, the placement rate is now at 72 percent. That’s a huge leap, meaning, if you graduate from TESDA in their programs, within six months, before the sixth month arrives, you have a job: 72 percent. In other industries we helped, in semi-conductors, it reaches 93 to 96 percent. You are educated, your health is taken care of, and you are also helped to find a job.

What are the results of this? In the Pantawid Pamilya program, the initial studies show that we have 7.7 million countrymen who have risen above the poverty line. Those who were truly impoverished, we have lifted them up. And I repeat, thank you very much to all of you, you gave me the opportunity to bring about real change in the lives of our countrymen. If you hadn't given me the opportunity, we wouldn't have lifted them up. [Applause]

Please excuse my coughing, I am not a candidate, I have so many speeches to make these days, after I deliver a speech, of course I also have to run the country, we still have many problems to address. But let me give you something, something to reflect what change we are pursuing, because I promised you that I will leave things far better than I found them.

Let me tell you a story about a woman from Pangasinan. She finished college, majoring in Accounting, and was offered a job in the Middle East as a cashier. Upon arriving in the Middle East, her contract was changed, instead of being a cashier, she was made a domestic helper. She was also treated badly. She escaped and was helped by our embassy to return home. Upon returning home, she was given fare to return to Pangasinan.

She was told, “You know, we have programs for our OFWs, maybe you want to study, maybe you want to train, there are programs for that.” She told us, her story to us, that upon her return, she was really troubled. As we all know, when she went to the Middle East, she probably borrowed money for her fare, for all her expenses. She didn't finish her contract when she got there. She couldn't recover her investment. She didn't know how she would pay off her debt. She said her mind was confused. She even told us she was thinking of taking her own life. She entered TESDA, trained in massage and traditional healing wellness. She was hired at a spa, became a good employee, and became the operations manager of the spa.

Today, as of now, she has finished being an operations manager and established her own spa from just teaching massage therapy. She has four branches in Pangasinan. She is currently franchising with us in Tarlac, with three franchises there. From not knowing what would happen in her life, she is now a very successful businesswoman. The key to that was the help of TESDA, which gave her the capability.

Let me give you another example. We recently came from Negros Occidental. There, the airport is in Silay, and we were going to Bacolod. On our way back to the airport the next day—we arrived at night, the next day, on the new road that was built—so the government helped with the airport, it was fixed, but the road, it’s a more direct route to Bacolod. I saw there, two large properties or lands that were fenced. One is being developed by Ayala, the other, by Megaworld.

Because they showed interest, they chose land, and the value of the land there increased. The result was that the municipality of Talisay earned more, and where did that go? They said that with the large increase in the municipality’s income, they were able to fund the construction of their own school building, buy a school bus, buy computers. The teachers have an additional increase and go to remote areas. They have a feeding program for their students, from kindergarten to grade 3. So, I think that’s what I would say: when we arrived in 2010, we were down. Now we see light, we are standing, we are walking.

Let me repeat: what Ayala and Megaworld are developing are still just fenced. But even just the fence, the capability of the local government unit of Talisay has improved. What’s the next step? Of course, they will buy the land, they will develop it, they will build factories, they will build malls, they will build offices. All of that will need workers and those created jobs will also generate other jobs. That’s what we mean: we are already running.

Of course, once that development is completed and functioning, more taxes will come into the government. A well-functioning government has a greater capacity to help every citizen improve their lives, right? More opportunities will be added.

So as they said before, we were the “Sick Man of Asia.” Now, we are called “Asia’s Rising Tiger.” Perhaps to make that very clear, let me tell you the story of Mel. Mel, a mayor from Samar, was invited several times to represent the Philippines to speak at conferences of mayors. He told us that when he arrived at the airport in another country, the delegation from Japan went ahead of him. They saw the passport, “Ah, from Japan. Welcome to our country. Please proceed.” Next came someone from Singapore. “Oh, from Singapore. You are very welcome in our country. Please proceed.” Mel arrived, presented his passport, it was looked at, “Uy, from the Philippines.”

During that time, Mel was looked at from head to toe, looked at again, the photo was checked, and when it was his turn, Mel of course waited, “Oh from the Philippines. Welcome to our country.” What was said to him was, “Oh, from the Philippines. Purpose of visit?” What is the reason for your visit to us? Then they asked for an ID, they even asked for an invitation. In other words, he was made to struggle before being allowed to enter.

So when he got there, he was carrying calling cards, of course, in those conferences, you would connect with other mayors, maybe they could help us with something extra. The problem, Mel said, I brought 100 calling cards with me on the way there. When I returned, there were 101. There were more calling cards on the way back than when I went. As soon as they found out he was a mayor from the Philippines, the others would suddenly distance themselves. Other mayors said, “Oh, he’s from the Philippines. He’ll ask for a firetruck. He’ll ask for an ambulance. He’ll ask for a police vehicle.” He’ll ask for all sorts of things. That was Mel’s story. That was then. On the Straight Path, Mel is now the one giving firetrucks and police vehicles to our cities and municipalities. [Applause]

I have many more things to tell you, but I remembered what my mother told me, “You know, you’re not the candidate, so if possible, don’t speak longer than the candidate.” So I want to follow that, I think I’ll just focus on what I want to share with you.

I think, if ever God calls me tomorrow, I can face my mother and father and say that I fulfilled our agreement and that I will leave things far better than how we found them. I think you were right when you said I was your favorite son, because, according to you, I didn’t shame you. I really preserved our family name.

Now, I’m being asked, it’s like I was told, “Do you really need to get involved in this election? Can’t you just be quiet, stop making enemies, and start living a peaceful life?” You know, during Martial Law, it was declared in 1972: I was 12 years old then. Because my parents and I were involved in the struggle for a long time, my mother’s service, I was her great assistant. I am 56 years old now, we have been involved in this for 44 years. A much bigger part of my life has been mixed with this than my personal life. Of course, on June 30th at noon, we will return to being ordinary citizens, I hope my life will be peaceful. And I think that’s what’s important and that’s my goal.

You know, let me read something I saw on the internet, but it also appeared on GMA. They interviewed, please don’t be offended, a fellow Mindanaoan. They interviewed Mayor Duterte, according to Senator Trillanes. This came out on TV on April 29th. Senator Trillanes reportedly said, “What if Mayor Duterte takes office?” Trillanes reportedly replied, “I will impeach him.” So Mayor Duterte was asked, “What do you have to say about that?” The question was, “On Trillanes saying he will move to impeach him,” meaning Mayor Duterte, let me quote this: “If I get impeached, Trillanes said, I’ll just close Congress, so no one can impeach me.” Okay. I think you saw that, poor Lorna, just entering Congress, and Congress will be closed.

But I challenge you, because me, I'm not a lawyer but I had to study the Constitution. Since we were in Congress and of course in the college we studied in. Look for a provision, any section in the Constitution that gives the President the right to close Congress. You won't find any like that. I'll add, in the same interview, “On whether he would violate any law should he choose to abolish congress once he wins.” His answer, “What do you mean by law? All of”—then he didn't finish what he was saying, he stopped, “All law”, he said all laws, erase them if you win. If you lose, you're finished. Every revolution that succeeds, he's the one who wins, he's stubborn. He now becomes the authority, he's the one who stops everything. Look at Marcos, but his was Martial Law, that was different.

So adding to that, here's just one more. “On whether his plan to abolish Congress is a form of dictatorship”. He answered, “No, no, I am Congress. I am the President.” You are truly a dictator, the congressman said, “Why would you close us?” Then he swore a little, I can't repeat it. “Impeach-impeach you,” he swore again, “Believe that fool.”

Colleagues, the Constitution, that's the agreement we have on how we will relate to each other. It was decided because we came from Martial Law where we had a dictator, right? The power is in the Executive, in the Legislative, in the Supreme Court. If one branch abuses its power, the other two co-equal branches have the right to monitor the abuser, right? If you think like this, isn't it like saying there are no more laws? I will throw out all the laws. What I say is the law.

Shouldn't we think about that? Or he says, “Oh, Martial Law, no, that was Marcos, that's different.” Because if you look at the Constitution, Martial Law has many controls. For instance, if I impose Martial Law now, within two days I need to face Congress, explain why. Congress can say, “Stop, I need to follow them.” If Congress is no longer there, who will stop him? Is that right?

So now, let's think about it, when those helping him say, “He's a good person, what he says is just an exaggeration. He wouldn't really do all that.” But what if he does? What if he really does close Congress? What if he closes the Supreme Court? Where will we run to?

Now, let's add to that. Because some people believe, “He's so great, like this?” Let's say he really is good. But people were created, right? What his supporters are saying, like, “That person always makes perfect decisions.” Can an imperfect person make perfect decisions? Is there anyone created who can claim, “I am perfect?” No.

When the time comes, he makes all his promises come true, like the fish will get fat and all sorts of things. We might start to think. Why did you get into this? This year is the 30th year of EDSA. 30 years ago, we risked our lives to restore our democracy. Come May 9, we might go back to a situation where there's a round 2. Who among us wants a round 2 of Martial Law? Who among us wants to risk a round 2 of Martial Law? Now, if he does it when the time comes, he wins, he does it, what will he say to us? “Oh, I didn't lie to you. I said I would abolish Congress, fatten the fish,” and all sorts of things he said.

So now, I remember what my father taught me. There was a pastor in Germany during World War II, imprisoned by Hitler, he was a pastor. He said, first, they started arresting the Jews, but I'm not Jewish, so I kept quiet. After that, they arrested the socialists, but I'm not a socialist, so I didn't object either. Then group after group. In the end, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the pastor in Germany, said that the time came when they arrested me, and when they arrested me, no one spoke up for me because everyone else had already been arrested.

It is up to you where we will go. Our message on the Straight Path is simple. You should be the witness, but let me give you just one example. Here I saw, so many coconut trees. When harvesting coconuts, I was told that per hectare, you can earn P20,000 per year, okay. On the Straight Path, one of the things being done now and being proven is that there’s Doctor Arboleda, from Bicol State University, he invented coco coir, he also invented coco peat, he said why our university always studies: corn and rice or palay. But that’s not what’s planted here in Bicol, what we plant here is coconut. So he looked for products, beyond copra, copra what. He invented coco coir. While making coco coir, coco peat, let’s add coco sugar, coco water, and so many other products. A factory was built, assisted by the government where all products, except the copra from the coconut, will be produced.

Okay, in his study, the fund of more or less P30 million, the government can give, the government recovers after three years. That P30 million fund now, we will transfer to the next farmer’s cooperative, they have their own factory. The water, just coconut water, right? When harvesting coconuts, you need copra, open the coconut, throw away the water.

Now, that which is being thrown away, the last number I saw, about two and a half years ago, 16 million liters of coconut water, we are exporting to America alone, not yet Europe. The value of the last export, one liter, USD 1. That which is being thrown away, each liter again, one dollar or about P47 is the value of that. If we take—what is coco coir? The husk, the fiber will be extracted, made into fabric, geotextile material. We are lacking that geotextile material, imported from China, from Japan, from Germany, even Las Vegas, they have it there. Oh, we have so many coconut trees. There’s also a Coconut Levy Fund that Lorna will pass for the use, when she enters Congress, so we have funds to uplift the lives of our coconut farmers.

But we will go back to that if we continue the Straight Path, all of this will happen. If we turn left, u-turn, go back to the old ways, we might have Martial Law again. Do you think something will happen? That’s on Monday, we will find out.

As I always say, I sometimes ask myself, “Why am I still so enthusiastic?” You all know, I am married to the country, I have no children, but I have nephews and nieces. My youngest nephew is just nine years old. He’s very young, Kris’s son, Bimby. When I look at him, I always think that if Bimby grows up and faces the same problems we went through, then we have all failed. But if Bimby grows up and has fewer problems because of the hard work we’re doing now, then we have succeeded. I want a time to come when he truly understands, looks at me, and says, “Thank you to your generation.” Not curse us, “Your generation was extraordinary, you abandoned us.” Isn’t that right? Perhaps this is just one part, and everything is finally coming together now.

When my father was assassinated in 1983, you know how chaotic our country was. We know that in Davao City, the NPA were using it as an urban laboratory. My father said upon his return, “Maybe it will make Marcos think about why I came home.” Maybe he would grant me an hour to talk to him, to tell him what was happening in the country. As you know, that didn’t happen; he wasn’t allowed to disembark from the plane, if you think about it. He didn’t set foot on our soil, he was assassinated. He was thrown into a van, treated worse than a slaughtered pig. And if we look at what Marcos held over us back then, it was, “If you fight back, I’ll imprison you, and if you fight back even more, I might kill you.”

So, I couldn’t accept that my father was assassinated and nothing changed, that it would all be in vain. So, in 1983, I crossed the line, I would pour in everything I had to make change happen so that my father’s death and the deaths of thousands of our countrymen, either assassinated or tortured, would not be meaningless. So, in a way, in 1987, there was a coup during my mother’s time, and I was ambushed then, three of my companions were killed, three out of four of my companions, were killed. In a way now, all of this is just a bonus since 1987.

My purpose remains the same: when I leave, I should be able to rest peacefully or they should have silenced me. I hope that what I leave behind is far better than what I inherited. I know I can’t do this alone. All the changes that happened on the Straight Path were not because of Noynoy Aquino; I always say, we made this happen. We came together to change the history of our Motherland. We will also ensure that the Straight Path continues, and to be sure rather than take risks, there is only one team we should put in power, no one else but Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

Comrades, we need to return to Manila now. Let me reiterate, it is with deep gratitude that I thank all of you. It is truly a great honor to lead a great race like the Filipino people, and I am truly confident in all the challenges I have faced, and you all know the challenges I have gone through in all these six years. I am sure you were with me and behind me, that's why we were able to overcome all those challenges. And we will be able to overcome the next challenges even more, as long as we are united.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.