Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the 50th anniversary of Philippine and European Union relations

[ Delivered at Egmont Institute, Brussels, Belgium, on September 16, 2014 ]

Thank you Ambassador Otte. Members of the Philippine Delegation; Representatives from the Belgian government, European Council, European Commission, and European Parliament; Excellencies from the Diplomatic Corps; Representatives from various policy think tanks; members of the academe, business community, international organizations, and civil society organizations; ladies and gentlemen—I almost said good afternoon. Good evening. In our part of the world, six o’çlock is normally dark. Now it’s seven and still daylight. Anyway—

I stand today in a country that has helped shape much of world history. Many of history’s most crucial battles were fought here, unfortunately. Of course, the battle of Waterloo, which occurred just a few kilometers, I understand, from here. Furthermore, one hundred years ago now, at the beginning of the First World War, neutral Belgium was invaded largely due to its geographic location. The people of this land, however, have always responded to such adversity by rising to the challenge. The bravery they displayed a century ago, as they fought back against the invaders, inspired the allies to resist aggression. Having experienced the scourge of conflict in two world wars, one can see why, since the end of World War II, Belgium has played a major role in some of history’s largest joint efforts to guarantee collective peace and security. In 1948, the world witnessed the signing of the Treaty of Brussels, which formed the foundation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Belgium’s support for peace and cooperation has lasted until the modern era. The proof is all around us here, in this great city of Brussels, which has become the heartland of the European Union.

In my part of the world, Southeast Asians, too, are working closely to build a community of nations that work together to achieve security, peace, and prosperity for its peoples, and I am proud to say that my country, the Philippines, is playing an increasingly prominent role in this regard, due to our country’s resurgence. Before my term in office, the Philippines was mired in a vicious cycle of corruption, deceit, and negativism. Some people had grown so apathetic that it seemed that the only ambition left for them was to leave the country to look for any opportunities.  Despite this, the previous administration had the temerity to claim credit for continued growth, which was actually fueled by Filipinos who were working abroad. Some called that period a “lost decade”—a massive opportunity squandered by a government that, instead of laying foundations for growth, focused on political self-preservation. Its impunity only deepened the fissures in our society.

Our greatest fear was that the country’s downward trend would continue with no end in sight. But, please never discount the will of the Filipino people. In May of 2010, during the Presidential elections, they made a resounding statement: The systematic pillaging of state coffers must end; and government must go back to serving its true Bosses—the Filipino people. Thus, they flocked the polling stations and voted for the simple idea that was the lifeblood of our campaign and the driving force of our administration. And it was encapsulated in a slogan which, in translation, says, “Where there is no corruption, there will be no poverty.”

From day one, we have worked overtime to fulfill this promise. Our job was to prove to our people that government is truly on their side. We began relentless reform efforts. We overhauled our budgeting system, implementing zero-based budgeting. This meant reviewing all government programs, making sure that each and every peso in the national budget goes towards bringing tangible benefits to our people, and ensuring that there is  direct causation between government’s investments and the end results. Failing this criteria, these projects were abolished. We created new channels through which people can take a greater part in public life, such as websites like Pera ng Bayan and Budget ng Bayan, which translate to “the People’s Money” and “the People’s Budget,” respectively. These sites have allowed our people to report suspicious officials to the Department of Finance, and to review how government spends taxpayer money. Through these, along with countless other efforts at greater transparency, we empowered our people to rejoin the collective task of governance.

Of course, these initiatives would be meaningless if government did not possess the political courage to go after those who have erred against the people. I am proud to say that we have stood firm in this regard. We have our anti-corruption programs, amongst them, the Revenue Integrity Protection Service, or RIPS, which is designed to ensure that revenue collectors perform their duties properly; the Run After Smugglers, or RATS, program; and the Run After Tax Evaders, or RATE, program, whose names are self-explanatory. These have led to the filing of 536 cases against individuals who allegedly committed offenses as of July 12, 2014.  Through the help of like-minded reformists in Congress, we were able to impeach an ineffective Ombudsman and replace her with a person of unquestionable moral integrity. Our Congress and Senate also succeeded in removing from position a chief justice who failed to declare 98 percent of his assets in his formal statement of assets, liabilities and net worth—which is a clear violation of our Constitution, which he was supposed to protect. My predecessor, as well, is under hospital arrest as she faces two serious unbailable charges, with another one still being reviewed by our Ombudsman. In short, we made it clear: Under our administration, one’s position, wealth, and influence do not enter into the equation; justice and the rule of law will be upheld.

Our commitment to the rule of law is evident not only in our domestic dealings. Many will find it consistent with the stance we have taken on the international level, regarding the dispute on the sea known by many names in our part of the world—or what we call the West Philippine Sea. We maintain that we must pursue a solution that adheres to the rule of law—and one that maintains peace and the freedom of navigation in the region. In fact, I would like to note that our emphasis on the rule of law has helped reinforce the principle of ASEAN Centrality: In the Chairman’s Statement of the 24th ASEAN Summit a few months ago, our region was unanimous in expressing serious concerns over ongoing developments in the South China Sea. We also reaffirmed the importance of fully implementing the 2002 Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, and emphasized the need for the expeditious conclusion of a binding Code of Conduct again, in the South China Sea. Such developments redound to the benefit not only of the Asia-Pacific region, but of the international community as well, considering that one estimate puts 40 percent of world trade as traversing this particular sea. Ensuring that the rule of law is respected in one part of the world redounds to a global order informed by fairness, equality, and a sustainable harmony that can only contribute to stability in all of our regions.

Whether externally or in the domestic realm, the effects of our commitment to justice, rule of law, and good governance have been profound. It has expanded our coffers, which allowed us to double down on our investments in our greatest resource: namely our people. One look at our budgets from 2010 to 2014 tells a compelling story. In that time frame, the budgets of our Social Welfare, Health, and Education departments have been increased in multiples. They have been empowered, both quantitatively and qualitatively, so that they, in turn, empower our people. The results of these strategic increases have been stark. The households who are beneficiaries of our conditional cash transfer program—this program  gives poor families cash grants as long as children are sent to school, vaccinated; and pregnant mothers undergo regular health checkups—have risen from less than 800,000 households to more than 4 million households. We improved our national health insurance system as well. Over the course of our administration, the program has expanded to cover almost 80 million Filipinos as of April 2014. It also covers more diseases, particularly those found to have the most catastrophic effects on Filipinos. We also ended our inherited classroom backlog, which amounted to 66,800 units, not to mention the inherited backlogs as well in textbooks and in school seats. All of these, we made possible, and sustainable, with prudent financial management.

These programs were designed with the long term in mind. They pave the way to a populace that is healthier, more educated, and more equipped to take advantages of the opportunities that are becoming increasingly available. At the same time, however, the immediate effect of our programs has also been apparent. For instance, from 2012 to 2013, they have helped 2.5 million Filipinos lift themselves above the poverty line. This has allowed government to now also focus on the sector deemed “near poor.” Once, our emphasis had been on those living under the poverty line, but now, we are capacitated to address those who have barely moved out of the poverty line. The end in sight: pushing them as far away as possible, so that a single medical catastrophe or natural disaster does not condemn them to poverty once more.

These are only a few of our accomplishments, but from these alone, it is clear: Good governance is making waves across the archipelago. These developments have infused the Philippines with a newfound vitality. It can be felt in the optimism of the common Filipino, in the hope they rediscovered in themselves and in their country, and in the confidence of the business community in our economy.

Look at our GDP growth numbers: From 2006 to 2009, our average growth was at 4.3 percent, but from 2010 to 2013, it has risen to an average of 6.3 percent. The difference is more impressive when one considers that the 4.3 percent growth average back then was largely consumer-driven. It means that it was caused mostly by Filipinos spending money—a lot of which was sent back by Overseas Filipino Workers. This meant that our economy was highly vulnerable to shocks not just in our own country, but in the host and receiving countries as well. This is why, over the course of our administration, we have worked to regain control of our economic destiny. We have made early strides in making the Philippines’ growth more investment-driven, which is more sustainable.

We have likewise steadily climbed several global measures of competitiveness. For instance, in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report, we have gone from 85th in 2010 to 52nd in 2014—making us the most improved country since 2010. In the same period, we improved our ranking in the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation’s Ease of Doing Business Report by, 36 spots. On top of all of this, in 2013, all of the world’s most renowned credit ratings agencies, despite being more conservative, were unanimous in declaring the Philippines investment grade. Ladies and gentlemen, I am proud to say to all of you: the Philippines is well and truly back in business.

Might I add: This is only the beginning. In many different sectors, we see the foundations for continued and accelerated growth moving into the future. For instance, the reforms instituted by the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines, together with the cooperation of our local carriers, helped the Philippines pass a European Union air safety audit. Now, our carriers have once again been allowed to fly directly to Europe. Without doubt, this unlocks many more potential synergies between us—whether on the cultural or economic level.

The transformation from the apathy of the past to the optimism that what we cannot achieve now, we can achieve shortly, has never been more apparent. I remember during our first few months in office, as we unearthed the details of the problems we would have to confront and solved, everyone in our Cabinet looked forward to the weekend—a period when they could at least breathe again before discovering even more problems come Monday. We have come so far from that attitude, and now, whenever confronted with a problem, somehow, we see constantly the opportunities these problems also bring.

Let me give a concrete example: Ours is a country visited by an average of 20 typhoons per year. In December of 2012, a province in the south named Davao Oriental was badly damaged by Typhoon Bopha. It brought down coconut trees, which were the principal source of income for our  farmers there. The problem was: those trees take five to seven years to grow back. From the combined efforts of government and the private sector, we introduced intercropping for these farmers. They were taught to grow chili, which grow within three months. This is really icing on the cake: a hectare planted to chili necessitates an investment of about 95,000 pesos per year in that particular area, and produces a gross of 200,000 to 250,000 pesos. This results in a net income or investments of 95,000 of over a 100,000 pesos for one hectare per growth cycle. Again, that is the net proceeds. The same land planted to coconut would have produced only 20,000 pesos per annum. So one can only imagine just how big an impact these efforts have had on those farmers. And it solves the issue of livelihood while waiting for the coconut trees to reach maturation.

Our reforms have also given us the wherewithal to prepare for and cope with natural disasters. Our country knows fully well the value of readiness. After all, the storms we have encountered in recent years have been becoming more intense and frequent. Thus, from the moment we assumed office, we took on projects to minimize the threat of the new normal of climate change. We acquired Doppler radars to improve our rainfall estimates; we launched Project NOAH, or the Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards, which involved installing hundreds of hydrometeorological  devices across the archipelago, allowing us to track changes in weather patterns in real-time; and we used LiDAR technology to produce strategic maps of our floodplains and river basins, among other initiatives.

Nevertheless, Typhoon Haiyan—recognized as one of the greatest storms and  strongest storms in recorded history to ever make landfall—proved the need to continue traversing the road to full preparedness. The strength of the storm was something we had never seen before. It swept away a good chunk of the goods we had prepositioned as relief goods. It also swept away the heavy equipment and transportation equipment needed for relief and recovery. It even affected many of our first responders, including our Secretary of Defense and our Secretary of Interior and Local Government who went to the area even before Haiyan made landfall. It ended up devastating 44 of our 81 provinces, and affecting millions of our countrymen.

Indeed, without the help of our friends in the international community such as the European Union, our path to recovery would have been far more challenging. Filipinos never forget moments of kindness, and thus, on behalf of my countrymen, I thank all of you—the Kingdom of Belgium and the members of the European Union alike—for your assistance in one of our country’s darkest hours. Your help has allowed us to undertake our mission to end the cycle of destruction and reconstruction sooner rather than later, which we are doing back by building back better communities—ones that are more resilient in the face of disaster.

I also thank you for monitoring and recognizing our recovery efforts. We remembered, during the Asia-Europe Meeting Manila Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction and Management, which was co-hosted by the EU, Japan, Switzerland, and the Philippines, the Honorable Kristalina Georgieva, EU Commissioner for International Cooperation, Humanitarian Aid, and Crisis Response, gave a heartfelt recollection of her visits to Tacloban, one of the areas most damaged by Typhoon Haiyan. She said that during her first visit, she was and I quote “terrified by the devastation,” but during her return, she was relieved to see “not ruins, but shiny roofs of houses rebuilt,” and “people who have taken their lives back in their hands.” She also went on to praise the strength and the resilience of our people.

Without doubt, my country will continue to channel the kindness we have received back to the world. We have always believed that, in this increasingly shrinking globe, no man is an island, which is why, to our own limits, within our own limits, we have been taking every opportunity to help improve the world we share: For instance, we sent medical teams to Japan in the wake of the earthquake of 2011; our personnel are also still present in the Golan Heights, and in Liberia, and in other areas. Note that these troops are needed to address challenges back home, but even then, we believe that this should not keep us from completing our own commitments. We are also adding our voice to the immediate need of addressing global climate change.

This year is the 50th anniversary of Philippines’ and the European Union’s relations, and it brings me great pleasure to see so much evidence that these bonds we have fostered run deeper than diplomacy. What we enjoy is a bond of humanity between our peoples, and I cannot help but see this as an opportunity for us to gather our strengths, compensate for each other’s weaknesses, and take greater steps forward in addressing the new normal of climate change together.

During her visit to the Philippines a few months ago, the EU High Representative Baroness Catherine Ashton said that the EU wished “to strengthen political dialogue with the Philippines, and to turn the relationship into a more strategically rounded partnership.” This is a desire we share. The foundations of a stronger and more successful partnership are there. Your region and my country share important, core values: the rule of law, democracy, inclusive growth, and the protection of human rights—including the rights of those who might not be from our respective countries, such as migrants or migratory workers.

To our friends in the European Union: With the Philippines being stronger, more unified, and more hopeful than ever before, there is no better time for us to build the strategically rounded partnership that the Baroness proposed. I say this not just in the sense of the Union as a whole, but in terms of our connections with individual partner nations within the EU.

Our cultures and our religions normally talk about caring for our fellowman. Does it not only make practical sense that, in the pursuit of growth, we also necessarily count on the growth of our partners? Hence, regardless of where we are in the stage of development, even with our limited resources, we must help one another. We must live out the phrase: “There is no letter ‘I’ in the pronoun ‘we’.” We live in a world challenged by pandemics, by cross-border terrorism, and by climate change. We cannot address this on the individual level, on the community level, or to regional level alone. We must do this on a global level. The choice is clear: Together, we can confront and overcome these challenges together, or we can succumb to them individually. I invite all like-minded people, communities, and nations to join us. Let us combine our strengths with yours; let us share lessons with one another, and together, accelerate our pursuit of the goal of improving everyone’s lives.

Thank you and good evening.