May I greet everyone a Merry Christmas, with the hope that we will all be merry this Christmas. Perhaps you will notice something different by Christmas, something like that… that’s okay.

Please excuse me, I am a little distracted by your outfits; it seems like the program is quite grand today. Tita Marixie, this is the first time I’ve seen you so casual. I wonder what the program will be a little later. I don’t know if you’ll release it to the general public afterwards but I assure you I will be the first person to get a copy.

The first time I addressed you was on your 25 th anniversary, only six months into the presidency, which, I admit, seems like a lifetime ago. That was the time in which we had reclaimed the promise of EDSA, after the lost decade under my predecessor. Fittingly, the Inquirer chose to mark its quarter-century by publishing a book to take stock of the Philippine journey as a newly reclaimed democracy—a chapter in our history they chose to identify by beginning with my father and ending with myself.

Today, with approximately 204 days remaining in my term—and of course, you know I don’t keep count—we come full circle, in celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Inquirer, and in looking forward to the 30th anniversary of People Power by next year. As you know, it would be impossible for us to take stock of one, without involving the other, because the Philippine Daily Inquirer traces its roots to the era of People Power.

After he declared Martial Law, the dictator closed down the independent media, giving him absolute control over anything published or broadcast from the time of Martial Law up to the 1978 interim Batasan elections and up to my father’s assassination. Just as when the Filipino people shocked the dictator and conducted a noise barrage in ‘78 to support my father in his campaign from jail, so too did members of the media begin to reclaim their independence. Brave men and women once again took up their pens, giving rise to the phenomenon of the mosquito press.

From this starts your own lineage, beginning with the Mr. and Ms. Special Edition, which covered my father’s assassination and the Agrava Fact-Finding Commission investigation. These were avidly collected by a public hungry to know the facts. The Philippine Inquirer continued its work, daring to ask tough questions about the whitewash Marcos tried to perpetuate. Then, in time for the 1986 snap elections, came the Philippine Daily Inquirer.

Whenever I look back on those years before we reclaimed our country, I cannot help but compare it to the way we can so easily access news today: through smartphones and tablets we carry around, or the broadsheets that can be bought on any street corner. It is a striking difference. Because then the local press was muzzled, those who pushed the boundaries did so through the mosquito press, producing true news, which, to us, was like water in the desert. Together with banned articles from foreign publications, these were reproduced in photocopies, passed on to others, and read in secret. Especially at the start, people were scared of being caught in possession of these banned articles, fearing that it could merit time in jail as a subversive act. We all know that, during Martial Law, you could be arrested and held indefinitely, and if you were charged, you would be charged in front of a military tribunal, which the dictator likewise controlled.

If it was bad for the readers—just imagine how it was for those who wrote for, and produced the mosquito press. Imagine the principle of Mrs. Eggy Apostol, Netty Jimenez Magsano, and all the other true journalists during that period. Given the fact that there was hardly any mention, if at all, of my father’s burial in the dictatorship-run media, imagine the fearlessness it took to publish pictures and accounts of my father’s assassination and burial—including the multitudes of people who paid their last respects to him. I cannot tell you how much that meant to our family. Dad always believed that he did not stand alone, and you proved that through your brave coverage. Many Filipinos who believed the same learned through your publications that they, too, were not alone in the desire to stand up to the dictator. It is no exaggeration, I believe, to say that you informed millions of our countrymen, whose unity made the peaceful revolution of EDSA possible.

Thus, I have never been surprised that the Inquirer has become the paper of record in the post-EDSA years. Its relationship with government has likewise evolved as well, though still remains deeply rooted in its People Power origins. One of your columnists, Professor Randy David, described the modern-day relationship between mass media and government very succinctly in his column entitled “President Aquino and the mass media.” He said, and I quote, “The relationship between the government and media in modern society is almost always one of mutual irritation.”

Before anyone assumes it, let me clarify: If I were truly irritated, then I would probably not be here tonight. At the same time, all of you know that I have never been shy in asking certain things of media—specifically, to tell the complete story, with the good and the bad. I did this once again during the recent FOCAP forum, but unfortunately, the whole story of the gathering was not told. Again, in the same column, Professor David explains my point clearly, when he says, and again I quote, “Interestingly enough, the media ignored his main speech and focused instead on his answers to questions in the open forum. If I had not gone to the government’s official website to check out the text of the President’s speech, I would not have guessed its topic from the news reports.”

Mr. David also pointed out that my comments regarding media are not new, and I agree. I respectfully submit, however, that these comments are very much relevant; that balanced reporting is still part and parcel of media’s role as a watchdog, one that speaks truth to those in power and in so doing, serves the Filipino people.

Perhaps I can share with you how I endeavor to achieve balance in all my decisions. I ask myself constantly: How does this advance the common good? Is it not reasonable to request that the media also constantly ask this question of themselves? When you report on what is wrong, it provides all of us the wherewithal to correct the mistakes and missteps. There is a difference, however, between fair reporting and sensationalist repetition. I have seen this often, for example, when media chooses to commemorate tragedies by highlighting and rekindling all the negatives. During such times, I have to confess, I am hard-pressed to find any mention of corrective or remedial actions taken, whether by government or by hard-working private sector partners. Does this not reinforce hopelessness?

On the flip side, when media reports on what is good, you exemplify that as a model: You show the Filipino people that good will prevail; that good is not just possible, but is already happening; and that we can do so much more good in this country. This is exactly what the Mr. and Ms. Special Edition, the Philippine Inquirer, and the Philippine Daily Inquirer did throughout the decline of the Martial Law years—and of course, there are more and much more recent examples. In dealing, for instance, with the MERS-Coronavirus, there was an instance during Holy Week in which a Filipino medical practitioner working abroad was exposed to the virus. He underwent testing, and at a very late hour in that country, the results came out positive, which meant that the official notification to us was likewise belated—so much so that the Filipino had already arrived in the Philippines, and was on his way home to Bicol.

I will not go into the details of all the things I ordered done to ensure that we do not have a MERS-Coronavirus epidemic in the country, and that people do not panic. Suffice to say: we spoke to all the major media outlets and presented the matter in a very sober manner; and we asked for your help. The Inquirer was one of those who cooperated. I was and still am very grateful for this—but I cannot help thinking, in the back of my mind, if most of the media, in fact, and if the fact was that Holy Week had something to do with the cooperation of media. I would like to think that it was a conscious decision—that in that situation, you truly asked yourself, how do I help to advance the common good?

Let me encourage you, together with all other media, to keep asking yourselves this question. If, at times, the answer is by telling government what it has done wrong, then by all means, do so. Many of my cabinet secretaries can tell you how often I ask them to take action on matters based on reports that I have read in your paper and have seen in other media. At the same time, perhaps I can also ask you to put yourselves in our shoes; in the same way that I always do as President. Whenever I engage an individual or a group in a discussion, it has been my practice, because I want to understand the other side, achieve a consensus, and reach the best decision possible, to constantly put myself in their shoes and see the issue from their perspective.

When you write your stories, may I suggest that you put yourselves in my position: See what we have, what can be done, and at the end of the day, what is being done. If all of that is still lacking and you believe there are ways to do more, then please criticize us. This will undoubtedly help us fulfill our duties. If, on the other hand, you believe that everything that can be done is already being done, then perhaps you can also write about that.

For instance, regarding the issue of traffic in Metro Manila, the Inquirer came out with reports of government’s efforts: that, together with decongesting EDSA, we have also been clearing the so-called Mabuhay Lanes. You reported on how so many have abused and impeded passage on our roads, by putting up basketball courts and allowing other obstructions to include unauthorized parking slots. By exposing this, you put those who have erred in the spotlight, applied the necessary social pressure, and by so doing, helped us to expedite the process of road-clearing. For that, we thank you.

Indeed, in this respect, the Inquirer already has a head start against all of its competitors. Your own masthead proclaims: “Balanced news; fearless views.” That has been proven to me countless times in dialogues with your editors and reporters. These meetings always leave me with the certainty that I will at least get a fair hearing—that you are interested in listening to, and reporting to the Filipino people, what I and our government have to say. I also see this when I read the Inquirer: the effort to balance good and bad news. There are some days in which you write good things about me; some days, you don’t. That is only fair; and I am grateful that there are still “good days.” The OpEd page of another broadsheet is a different matter altogether. I would probably faint from shock if I got even the tiniest bit of praise from any of their columnists in the course of the year.

That the Inquirer continues to prioritize fairness is especially important, in light of the technological advances that we are making every day. You were born as a broadsheet; now, like the rest of us, you have to transition into the age of social media, with all its challenges and opportunities. In our most recent meeting a few months ago, I saw for myself how the Inquirer is handling this transition. Apart from taking questions posed on Twitter, I found the hashtag game quite interesting.  You might remember that, when asked to match a hashtag to “Inquirer,” I chose, “#ItsComplicated.”  This defines more than my relationship with you; I chose it because your job is, indeed, quite complicated.

Social media and the Internet are only part of the concerns you juggle. There is the age-old need to break a news story, while making sure that you have all the facts correct. There are the challenges of reportage: For instance, balancing the credibility of conflicting sources, or crafting attention-grabbing headlines without sensationalizing. Of course, there is the need to constantly revitalize the purpose behind the Inquirer: to guard against any monopoly of information, to combat propaganda with the truth.

I have previously spoken of—and I am sure you are aware of—the alternate versions of Martial Law circulating today, which have led younger generations to believe history has treated the dictatorship unfairly. This is another complication that you are asked to contend with, and overcome. There is the new generation of readers who are too young to remember what it was like to live with the government scrutinizing your every move. At the same time, there is also the brashness of those who are unrepentant of their crimes—those who believe they can ride a wave of manufactured nostalgia to revise history. The most striking example comes from a candidate in next year’s elections associated with the regime. He said something along the lines of, “I am ready to say sorry if only I knew what I should be sorry for.”

With your pages and very history as a record of the dangers of dictatorial rule, the Inquirer is best equipped to overcome this—and that is exactly what you did, in publishing stories on the abuses of the Martial Law period, detailing exactly what the candidate has to be sorry for. Given his unchanged stance on the matter, we can only assume that he doesn’t read your newspaper. Indeed: The context and depth you have provided in your reportage can enlighten younger generations to the full significance of what we said back in 1986, which was, “Never again.” You have already validated the old truism that the pen is mightier than the sword, and I hope the future sees you doing this many more times.

Next year, there will be an election every bit as crucial as the one we faced in 1986. Back then, we were asked if we, as a people, would be able to reclaim democracy by the ways of democracy, as my mother put it. And in 2016, we will be asked: Will we allow the past few years to be a temporary blip on the radar? Will we allow the old and broken status quo to return? Or will we say, “Never again,” to transactional politics, corruption, and greed—will we demonstrate to the world and to each other that we are a people now more mature, more focused, and more determined to build on the gains we have made?

All of you at the Inquirer likewise have a role to play, not only as members of the media, but also, and more importantly as Filipino citizens. As you stood for truth and for justice in Martial Law, so too am I confident that you will do the same at every occasion. As we celebrate your 30th anniversary, allow me to repeat some of the words of your founders in expressing my hopes for the Inquirer moving forward, that you will, and I quote, “help in bolstering our people’s confidence in themselves… in inspiring in them a feeling of helpfulness, a passion for justice… a demand for fair play, and a love of each other and of our country.”

Thank you, and my congratulations on your 30th anniversary, and again, advanced Merry Christmas.