Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the inauguration of the Mt. Hamiguitan World Heritage Park

[Declared in Sitio Tumalite, San Isidro, Davao Oriental, on April 5, 2016]

Today, we launch the opening of the Mt. Hamiguitan World Heritage Park. This is part of the 27,714 hectare Mt. Hamiguitan Range Wildlife Sanctuary, and as mentioned, it is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This sanctuary serves as a critical habitat for our prized Philippine Eagle and Philippine Cockatoo. Here you can also find 1,403 species of flora and fauna; and 341 of these species are endemic to the Philippines. To protect the unique wealth of Mt. Hamiguitan, we have intensified the patrolling and guarding of our Forest Rangers and Protected Area Enforcement Officers; including the implementation of capacity building programs for management, wildlife law enforcement, and ecotourism awareness. We also have a Regular Biodiversity Monitoring system, which inventories the species in the area.

Here in the World Heritage Park, we have a natural science museum, research and management center, butterfly garden, bird watching sites and other facilities, which will surely attract our tourists, researchers, and conservationists to visit here.

In Mati City, tourists can visit the improved Subangan Museum which features Mt. Hamiguitan, as well as the rich biodiversity and cultural heritage of Davao Oriental. Of course, the result of this is that as more people visit, local tourism will be revitalized, which will bring opportunities to the people of Davao Oriental, particularly in San Isidro. You know, for every foreign tourist arrival here, it is estimated that one job is created for our Filipino compatriots.

To expedite travel to your very beautiful natural park, we allocated P236.36 million for the construction of a 40 lineal meter bridge and the concreting of a 4.90 km road section of the Junction La Union-Mt. Hamiguitan Road. Our strategy is clear: Better roads and infrastructure, more thriving commerce and tourism, more opportunities for the citizens.

Our pledge is: To leave the Philippines better than we found it. You know, in the places we visit, sometimes we only hear about it, like in Sorsogon, they now have whale sharks. They say that in the past, they were caught, slaughtered, and eaten, maybe for a quick meal. Now, they are being conserved.

Because they are being conserved, the whale sharks have become peaceful. The tourists continue to flock to them. Instead of being eaten for one day, two days, or a week, their natural endowments now help continuously grow their economy. And truly, if there is a place where we can say that everyone is happy, it is here.

It was wonderful that we were able to tour the museum because, you know, our MinDA is something I really take care of. I didn't invite [anyone] to go on a three-hour walk to start the mountain climb because we still have a lot of work for him to do. So it's good that we were able to see this, in a way, without risking our good Secretary of MinDA.

You know, here in Davao Oriental—if Governor Malanyaon remembers—one of the first places we visited was after Pablo [Typhoon Pablo]. And when we went to Catiil, it really looked like only one building was left standing. If my memory serves me right, the building that was left, when you approached it, all the glass was broken, it looked like a building structure, but it really couldn't be used anymore, and then we saw all the coconuts that had fallen.

In our place in Tarlac, coconut production isn't a product, so we studied how long it takes to plant a coconut tree? How long before it can be harvested? They say in English, “As far as the eye can see.” Everything was flattened. The answer to us: 5 to 7 years. Of course, we asked, if we wait 5 to 7 years for it to bear fruit, what will we do, and what will be the livelihood of our countrymen in Davao Oriental? I don't know if Governor Malanyaon or I was more saddened when we saw this, because there really wasn't an immediate solution.

But you know, everything we learned from Pablo, preparing for future disasters, immediate relief and rehabilitation, as well as how to Build Back Better. I think it really started here in Davao Oriental, and this is where we learned many lessons.

You know, you might say the problems I encountered were few: We had Pablo in 2012, followed by Yolanda in 2013. And Yolanda, right, then the Zamboanga crisis, then the earthquake in Cebu and Bohol.

Now, what have we accomplished together? Let me start with coconut. One thing that really encouraged us during those times was the creation of a product called “Hot Pablo.” I asked, “Hot Pablo? What does that mean?” It turned out to be pepper.

Three to four months to plant. Then the good news there is, the estimate for every hectare of coconut farmers, you can earn P20,000 per year. Here with the pepper or the chili paste and the powdered pepper, you have an investment of P90,000, you earn a gross of over P250,000, a net of P100,000. Where else can you find a business where you earn more after roughly about four months than what you invested? Of course, there are illegal livelihoods that might be able to keep up with that, but legally, that kind of business is very rare. My understanding is that the FDA approval process has been completed, which will really strengthen our sales of this product in addition to the income from coconut farming.

Another thing that is expected to happen soon, there is a scientist, he is at Bicol State University, his name is Dr. Arboleda, and he discovered the geotextile material–the coco coir. The husk, you take the fibers, you weave it into geotextile material. It is used for slope protection, used for landfill lining. It has many uses. Even the process of making it produces something called “coco peat” which improves the soil. It is not fertilizer, but it helps to release nutrients so that the plants can absorb them completely.

So, that's how it is – our speech is a bit too technical – it was funded by the government because according to Dr. Arboleda, in Bicol, their main product is coconut farming, but all the studies of Bicol State University are only about rice and corn. He said, “We need to be useful to the community,” so that's where he discovered all these products.

Where are we now? The government funded him to build a factory for coconut farmers where all products except copra are utilized. There's coco coir, there's coco peat, there's coconut water. And they estimate that with an investment of over P30 million, the government's loaned capital will be recovered after three years. Once the capital is recovered, it can be passed on to the next farmers group so they can have their own factory. The coconut farming is there, all other products are there except for copra and the coconut oil which has been discovered and has a large market.

Now, you might say, “If you take the coconut water, what is it used for?” Perhaps two or three years ago – maybe two and a half years ago – the data shown to me indicated that we are selling 16 million liters of coconut water export. The only limitation is that the plant needs to be near the source of water because – it's complicated for me – if you leave coconut water in the air, it might turn into vinegar the next day. It needs to be packaged immediately, pasteurized. In fact, that's just America at 16 million liters, and they are telling us that if coco coir runs out in the Philippines, there will also be a shortage of materials for coconut water and other products. But that's it, this will be rolled out completely soon, especially when Congress is finished, where Gov. Cora will go to promote the use of the Coconut Levy fund to speed up the construction of these factories.

Now, I will say goodbye to you, so if it's okay with you, we can – you know Gov., you all know that when it started, we weren't from the same party, but that didn't hinder us from helping each other. [Applause] There are some places where you help, but you are made to suffer. Here, if we have reached many, it's because there is a public servant who truly cares for you, who seriously considered it important to help our countrymen instead of politicking with every breath. And that's it, we need to praise Gov. Cora who has truly been a partner in uplifting our countrymen. [Applause]

Because of that, for example, in infrastructure alone, from 2005 to 2010, the national government recorded P4.4 billion in Davao Oriental. In our years, 2011 to 2016: it reached P10.26 billion, more than double what was put in. [Applause] In Mindanao – Lou mentioned it earlier: P67.32 [billion]. What we delivered, P302.15 billion, almost four times as much. [Applause] Davao Oriental, flood control projects: P889.31 million; farm-to-market roads, irrigation budget: almost P890 million. There is also a fish port project here.

For Pantawid Pamilya, we are distributing it to 8,829 [beneficiary households] in 2010, now we have 41,250 households being helped by our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. They are just part of the 4.6 million households throughout the Philippines that have been helped by Pantawid.

For classrooms: 967 classrooms were built and are currently being built here with you. This is just part of the 185,000 built throughout the Philippines.

For PhilHealth in Davao Oriental: 503,735 are members. In Mindanao: 24.85 million members; nationwide: 93 million members are covered by PhilHealth.

There is also the Health Facilities Enhancement Program: P129.56 million. Regarding Sitio Electrification, the report to us is: there were 226 sitios here in Davao Oriental without electricity, now, the 226 that were on the list in 2011, the report to us is, all 226 sitios now have electricity. [Applause]

Brothers and sisters, you yourselves tell us if any changes have happened. And if changes have happened, let us remember, we are still in the process. It's like, stumbling, we're now somewhat standing, we're walking, then we're investing. What is the investment? For example, the children being sent to school through Pantawid Pamilya, we started with grade school. In 2014, we added up to high school. There are a few now being helped even in college. Let me give you a sample: In the high school batch, over 300,000 were helped by Pantawid. In that batch, over 13,000, less than 14,000 were honor students. The two who spoke for them were both accepted into the University of the Philippines College of Engineering. That's a quota course. In the next administration, they will be graduating. When they graduate, they will repay all of us who trusted and gave them the opportunity.

In the BPO industry, those who went through TESDA training for BPO, in the first year alone, the lowest salary in the BPO already pays for their taxes, the expenses we made to educate them.

In other words: Our vow is to leave something far better than what we received. We did everything we could do there.

Now, there are still places that have needs. I was asking around here, we stand up, we walk, will we risk this just to stumble again? And if we stumble again, will we hope that a time will come when we can get back up? We don't need to risk it.

Of course, on Monday, it's election day. You know, when I get troubled by the many problems I face, when I see a child, I get inspired. When I'm asked, “Why are you working so hard? Why are you so serious? Why do you push yourself every second?” I say I need to face these children, and when they look at me and say, “Will you fulfill your promises to us? Did you fix our future?” I can say, “Truly.” That's the point. Because, for me personally, the very foundation is, will these children, when the time comes, face the same problems we faced? That's where we fail.

Of course, as long as there is life, there are problems. If the problems are different, if their problems are better, if they have fewer problems, of course they will look at us and say to all of us, “Thank you. You really improved our situation.”

We will go back to this: on Monday we will decide. We have listened to all the candidates for a long time. Let's think carefully, “Where are we sure and where is it dangerous?” It's up to you.

Good afternoon. Thank you very much to all of you.