VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=av-RLdYOGH4[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the graduation of the Philippine National Police Academy Batch Sinagtala 2012

[Delivered in Silang, Cavite, on March 24, 2012]

Let me begin my speech with a suggestion from a former PNP chief when he was still in office, which I still don’t know if he said in jest. He said one day: Because our detachments seemed defenseless against the rebels, and armed groups repeatedly attacked our precincts and detachments to steal guns and ammunition, our good chief’s instant solution was: “If the rebels seem to be attracted to their weapons, why don’t we just give the police batons so that the attacks will stop?” So until now, I don’t know if he was joking or serious.

The question is: If we follow this advice, wouldn’t it be like the police themselves surrendering to the bad elements? Wouldn’t we be depriving them of the ability to defend the people, instead of strengthening their equipment and knowledge?

The story is different now. There is proof on all sides that our police are truly strong and fighting, and are truly ready to fulfill their duty to the country. One example is Police Senior Inspector Jay G. Dema-ala of PNPA Class 2004. Together with thirteen police officers, he led the firefight and drove back approximately thirty rebels who attacked their station in Panabo, Davao del Norte on March 19, 2011. Despite being outnumbered, Police Senior Inspector Dema-ala and his team were not overcome by the attacking members of the CPP-NPA-NDF. And this kind of display of skill by our police is becoming commonplace. There is also Senior Inspector Charity Galvez, who led thirty police officers in a firefight when their station in Agusan del Sur was attacked on July 30, 2011. Senior Inspector Galvez and her team also drove back the attacking two hundred and fifty rebels, even though there were more than eight times as many enemies.

This past February, an armed group also attacked the BJMP in Kidapawan to spring a prisoner. Even though the rebels detonated a rocket-propelled grenade and fired high-powered rifles, the force of the BJMP still prevailed. Isn’t the skill shown by the defenders of the country truly admirable?

This is what is happening now because of our adherence to the straight and narrow path. Therefore, to the 220 graduates of Class Sinagtala, forged by the PNPA, emulate those who came before you who continue to demonstrate courage and heroism for the country. To those who will graduate today, I am confident that you will wear your new uniforms with pride and be proud of your role in society. As new police officers, firefighters, and wardens, you will proudly be part of a profession recognized and respected by the citizenry, not because of corruption or extortion, but because of your sacrifice and integrity.

Even if some doubt the competence of our defenders, and say that all of this is just luck, I will be the first to present them with evidence. One of these is the continued decline in the crime volume throughout the country. The crime volume in 2009, which was over 500,000, was halved to almost 247,000 by 2011.

The 2,200 cases of car theft in 2010 became only 966, or more than halved, in 2011. The sad thing here is that when a famous person is a victim of car theft, they criticize the number of remaining cases more than the larger number that has been reduced. Isn't it better to praise our police officers who sacrifice to lower the cases, instead of dwelling on negativity? Shouldn't they also be put on the headline because of their successful operations against car theft? This is a result of the dedication and clear strategy of our police. In this state, it wouldn't be a long shot to hope that we can reduce car theft cases by half again this year.

I will not enumerate the achievements of our police, or else it will be Holy Week and you will not yet be fully graduates. My point is this: you are fortunate because the present is a good opportunity to enter the service. Upon your graduation, you will enter a system that is looked up to and not whispered about because of corruption; you now have the extraordinary opportunity to join in treading the straight path.

As someone older than you—perhaps by five to ten years—I suppose you won't mind if I give you a little advice. As I said to your batchmates who graduated from PMA last week: Congratulations because your four-year vacation is finally over. This is the time when, upon waking up, you will no longer prepare for mental and physical examinations, grades will no longer be the measure of your competence, and most importantly, you will no longer be centered on yourselves. The practice is over, the study of theories is over, and you will now face the crossroads in real society. Upon leaving the academy, the temptations of corruption will confront you—the system of patronage will try to weaken your professionalism, and a huge amount of money will be offered in exchange for your dignity and principles.

Let us think about this: If those who are supposed to enforce the law are the ones initiating shortcuts, the people will surely lose their desire to trust it. If there are still traffic enforcers with 'wang-wang' minds, who, instead of arresting those who violate traffic laws, will only ask for a bribe to settle the matter, our progress will be slow. Let us just remember that corruption is not free. Allow me to tell a story about a traffic enforcer that I have in mind right now. He flagged someone down; explained the violation to the driver, and immediately said: “You will attend a seminar for several weeks, and that will be a big inconvenience for you. Maybe it would be better if we just talked.”

The driver replied, “Just ticket me, please.”

The enforcer replied, “I don’t have a ticket here.”

“Perhaps your companion has one?”

“I have no companion here.”

“Perhaps we could go to the precinct and you can just issue me a ticket there?”

The answer to him was, “I cannot leave here. Abandonment of post.”

In short, he was probably engaged in discussion for half an hour to an hour. Those who were supposed to manage traffic were the ones causing it.

For every momentary relief from corruption, the public suffers long-term damage. When you shrug off the bad elements, you are also allowing more Filipinos to be victimized. If your answer to the people’s appeals is always “it depends” and “later,” you are also driving away their trust and respect for your ranks. The result: they will turn to those who pretend to be saviors. Instead of helping you suppress criminals, they might even side with the enemies of the state. And if this continues, the conflict between Filipinos will never end. But when law enforcers are true to their duty, and the people feel the presence of justice, the people will surely side with you.

The question is: what path will the Sinagtala Class of 2012 choose to take? Will you become victims of the mistakes that tarnished the reputation of the defenders of the nation in the past? I know you won’t. I know you will stand firm, and you will always remember that with the freedom we enjoy comes the demand for our loyalty and accountability. I know the lessons you learned from your parents, your teachers, and the Philippine National Police Academy will not be wasted.

Silence and peace are the key to our progress as a nation. If Filipinos can rely on the laws being followed—that every wrong has a consequence, and every good deed has a reward—the foundation of our social systems will be strong. It is clear: doing what is right leads to a stronger society, with a good economy. This will create jobs, a more vibrant national treasury, funds for education, health, and other programs to lift us out of poverty. We are already feeling this now, and your ranks are benefiting from it.

As we promised, we have already built 21,800 housing units, with the help of our Vice President, for our police and military personnel under the leadership of the National Housing Authority. This year, this program will continue, with plans to build and begin construction of 31,200 more housing units. Included among the beneficiaries will be personnel from the Bureau of Fire Protection, the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, and we will not forget the Bureau of Corrections throughout the country. We are also focused on addressing the lack of training and equipment in your ranks for your rapid response to the call of duty. Last year, more than 37,000 personnel from the PNP, BJMP, and BFP underwent training. This year, we have finalized the provision of Personal Protective Equipment to our firefighters, and the purchase of additional firearms for our police. This is just proof that if there is no calamity, the government can focus more on benefits and services for you.

You have gone through many trials as students of this academy. Even more challenging trials await you in your lives as you pursue the field you have chosen. As individuals with a sworn duty, you bear the responsibility of keeping Filipinos safe, and the mandate to maintain peace in the Philippines.

Now that your dreams are within reach, I am confident in your unity to promote a just society. We will not allow many Filipinos to suffer again. To the best of our ability, we will always do what is right, we will always prioritize the welfare of others, and we will always seize every opportunity to serve our flag.

You are called Sinagtala—a light seen when we look up at the sky, which is the haven of our highest aspirations. May you be a beacon of honesty and accountability, and a monument of change in our nation that is rising again in the name of integrity, justice, and prosperity.

Thank you very much. Congratulations to all of you.

Good day to you.