Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during his meeting with local leaders and citizens of San Jose, Nueva Ecija

Tomorrow, we will celebrate the 30th anniversary of the EDSA People Power, the peaceful revolution that ended the dictatorship. As we commemorate, I cannot help but recall the experiences of our family, which shaped my personality today. And one of the biggest chapters of our lives happened in 1973. I was thirteen years old then, and our world was truly almost turned upside down.

My father was imprisoned when Mr. Marcos placed the entire country under Martial Law. But instead of being silenced, my father, while in prison, continued to expose the brutality of Martial Law. He wrote an article published in the Bangkok Post that was critical of Martial Law. We smuggled that out of the prison. Because of this article, the forces of the dictatorship became even more angry. He was secretly taken from Fort Bonifacio, along with former Senator Jose “Pepe” Diokno. They were both handcuffed, blindfolded, had guns pointed at their sides, and boarded separate helicopters. They were taken to Fort Magsaysay, here in Nueva Ecija.

We had no news of our father's condition at that time. We were forbidden to visit. We didn't know if our father was alive or dead. There were even those who took advantage and gave false information about our father's whereabouts. Until one day, a truck arrived at our house in Times. All of his belongings were being returned to us, all of his belongings, even his toothbrush. Of course, we were puzzled and asked why everything was being returned? My mother asked, “Why are you returning everything, even his toothbrush?” The soldier who delivered it replied that everything was no longer needed to be returned to us. In our hearts: When would a toothbrush not be needed by a living person? Of course, if he were no longer alive.

At the end of it all, we appealed to the Supreme Court, and we were allowed to visit. We were brought to a dark place surrounded by barbed wire and bamboo. We really felt like we were in a concentration camp. We didn't know where they had taken us at that time.

We knew the Diokno family to be courageous; they were from Batangas. That's why we were really surprised when we saw them crying when they saw their father. I asked myself: Why did that happen? Why was their reaction like that? What did they see?

When we were given the chance to see our father, even though he was strong-willed, he couldn't help but cry. His appearance was really different. He didn't have his glasses, so he often had headaches, he said. They also took his watch, and even his wedding ring. All that was left to him were two pairs of underwear and two t-shirts. When I saw my father, if you'll recall, before martial law was declared, he was fat. But when we arrived, he had to hold onto his pants because they would fall off if he didn't. He hadn't shaved.

He told us then that he was praying to the Virgin Mary to give him one last chance to see his family. During that meeting, he also entrusted me to take care of our mother and siblings. Our youngest sibling, Kris, was only two years old. Even though he didn't understand everything that was happening, you could see in his eyes that he also felt the weight and sadness. He was being carried by our mother, he lowered his head onto our mother's shoulder and it was as if he was lost, “What is happening to us here?”

The rooms where my father and Senator Diokno were detained were separate. Inside the cramped and hot rooms, they would know they were both still alive when one sang “Lupang Hinirang,” and the other responded with the song “Ang Bayan Ko.”

That was how cruel it was to my father and Senator Diokno, who became the voice of the opposition against Martial Law. In total, my father was imprisoned for seven years and seven months. And when he chose to return to our country, after being exiled in Boston, he, as you know, was assassinated.

That is just one memory of the abuses of Martial Law. There are many more stories of millions of Filipinos who experienced the violence of that time. The government that was given a mandate to care for and serve the people was the very one that oppressed the nation. As his two terms were about to end, Mr. Marcos still found a way to remain in power.

If you think about it, we went through a similar darkness under the leadership of our predecessor, where a decade vanished in our country. We can no longer bring that back. All we can do is: Do what is right in the present, and ensure that the mistakes of the past are never repeated.

Our commitment to the Straight and Narrow Path: No one will be left behind in progress. As we go around the country, we identify your needs and address them immediately. Here in your province, our main focus is: agriculture. We aspire to maximize the potential of Nueva Ecija as the “Rice Bowl of the Philippines;” [applause] to give you the strength and ability to provide a good future for your families.

We have the construction of farm-to-market roads, to speed up the transport of your harvest, from farm to market. From 2011 to 2015, we have completed 112 farm-to-market roads in your province, and there are 16 ongoing projects. Because your product is delivered to the market fresher, the income of our farmers is also maximized. In addition, we promoted the use of modern technology in agriculture, and production and post-harvest mechanization. The result: your palay production here in Nueva Ecija is now 5.12 metric tons per hectare as of 2015. That is higher production, compared to what Mr. Marcos promised before with Masagana 99, which only had 4.95 metric tons per hectare. [Applause] He made the promise, we all are making his promise come true.

Alongside our efforts to enrich agriculture is the development of infrastructure. If from 2005 to 2010, the funds allocated for public works here in Nueva Ecija were P5.68 billion, that almost tripled to the P16.17 billion we allocated from 2011 to 2016. One of our projects here is the Central Luzon Link Expressway Phase 1. It will start at SCTEX, in Tarlac, pass through Zaragoza, Aliaga, and end in Cabanatuan here in Nueva Ecija. [Applause] Once completed, it will speed up the trip from Tarlac to Cabanatuan City, benefiting 11,200 motorists per day. Construction will begin next month. You know, yesterday I was in Bulacan, and there is a road that is almost finished, called the Plaridel-San Rafael Bypass Road. Those formerly idle farmlands, now factories are sprouting up, signaling new opportunities and livelihoods in the province of Bulacan. That is also what this road I mentioned will do. [Applause]

In addition, we are developing an alternative road to Region II. The route it will take: Aurora-Quirino-Nueva Ecija. With this alternative route, it will no longer be necessary to pass through Dalton Pass, which we know has a high possibility of landslides and earthquakes. Secretary Babes Singson of DPWH told us that some parts of its north and south alignment have been completed. We are also studying its tunnel section to ensure the safety of the alternative route. When the danger is reduced, the roads are good, the benefits will flow, commerce will develop, and tourism will grow, which in turn provides jobs for many Filipinos.

Just now, we came from Talavera to witness the ceremonial lighting of sitios in Central Luzon under our Sitio Electrification Program. Here in Nueva Ecija and throughout Central Luzon, 100 percent of our sitios are already energized.

You know, the press release of those who preceded us stated that all barangays in the Philippines now have electricity. We were made to believe that the entire Philippines was already electrified. But when we took office, we discovered that when they lit up the barangay hall, that apparently meant the entire barangay was electrified. When did it happen that lighting a barangay hall also means that all the sitios have electricity? I don't think I know of any barangay hall that would allow a jumper connection to the sitios.

In our inventory in 2011, we learned that 32,441 sitios still had no electricity. The sad part is, back then, the estimated cost to light up a sitio was almost P1 million. With such a large expense, it was a shot in the dark to be able to do it, right? That's more than P32 billion.

But during our term, that almost P1 million cost per sitio, we were able to lower it to around P600,000. Now, we have lit up 31,862 sitios; that is equivalent to 98.2 percent of our target. [Applause] In March, next month, we expect to light up all the sitios identified in the 2011 inventory.

You know, having electricity is very important. As the previous speaker said, if they just want to watch a teleserye, they won’t have the opportunity. Only lamps, gas lamps, or candles. But more importantly than that, especially for farmers, the Department of Agriculture has a plan to have a market using cellphones. How will that work? There will be a record; who has what product—rice, vegetables, fruits, others. This record will state, using a cellphone, how much of their product they are offering for sale. There will also be someone who reads what is listed on the cellphone, and states the price they want to buy it for. In total, because of the cellphone and this new market we are creating, and of course, electricity is needed to power the cellphone, this means that the farmer doesn’t have to rely on visiting buyers, they can rely on many buyers and get the highest possible price. The buyer, on the other hand, can be sure that they will get the best price as well. That is the Straight Path: Ensuring that everyone gets the maximum benefit. [Applause]

Regarding the provision of incentives for good governance, 28 of your 33 LGUs were granted financial assistance from our Performance Challenge Fund from 2011 to 2015. In total: This amounts to P110 million. That’s the Straight Path: Those who excel in service deserve to be recognized and incentivized.

Despite these successes, we did not make it a habit to pat ourselves on the back and say, “I did this.” These were achieved thanks to your unity, my Bosses from Nueva Ecija. Truly: You made and continue to make change happen.

In the past five years and eight months of treading the Straight Path, we are now reaping the fruits of our struggles. We fought for the Philippines, from being the Sick Man of Asia, to now being one of the most dynamic economies in the world. We fought for the unemployment rate to now be the lowest in ten years. We fought for the Pantawid Pamilya program, so that almost 84,000 households here in Nueva Ecija are now benefiting from the program. This year, we expect that 4.6 million households will be beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya. [Applause] Even now, we are seeing the good results of Pantawid Pamilya. With its help, 7.7 million Filipinos have already crossed the so-called poverty line. We fought to expand the coverage of PhilHealth, so here in your province, we now have 1.6 million of our countrymen being cared for by the state. Throughout the country, PhilHealth now covers more than 92 million Filipinos. We also fought for the fact that when I step down from office, we will be able to build and fund more than 185,000 classrooms across the country. We fought for the modernization of our uniformed personnel, which now boasts modern vehicles and equipment.

Now, the question: Will we allow all that we fought for in the past years to be rendered meaningless and wasted? On May 9th, we will once again face a crossroads, and we need to decide. The challenge and call to us: Carefully examine each candidate. Will we go with someone who lacks sufficient experience, or with someone who is already acting like a ruler even now? Will we choose a candidate who once boasted about being a lawyer for the victims of Martial Law, but now encourages someone who says there is nothing to apologize for regarding Martial Law to be their running mate? When they didn't succeed in that, the ally they took now is the very person who led the effort to topple the democracy we fought for. And now, they want to convince us that they will do what is right if they lead the country.

I ask you: You forced your former opponents to become allies now. If what you fought for before was right, is what your current companion is doing also right? Where will you go and where will you take us if you become our leader?

If we want our good beginnings to continue, we need leaders who truly carried the weight of our problems and helped with the solutions. Those who don't just make promises, but have already done something and continue to work. Those whose names are untainted; those who truly prioritize the country before themselves. For me, there is no one else but the tandem of Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

You are the witnesses, in the first debate of the COMELEC, one candidate clearly stood out among those with true “K”: With capability, with experience, with conscience, with care and love for others, with truth in words and deeds, and of course, with Korina as well. That is Mar Roxas. [Applause]

And because he is the only one with the qualities, many want to bring him down. Truly, the industry of negativity of some with their own agenda is different. What they did to me – the insults, the humiliation, the lies, the defamation, the mockery – they are doing the same thing to the candidate we endorsed, even until now. It is true what they say: The tree laden with fruit is the one that is pelted with stones. [Applause]

When there was a crisis in Zamboanga, an earthquake in Cebu and Bohol, and when Typhoon Yolanda struck, Mar was there and did not leave our countrymen until their situation was resolved. When Mar was chief of the DILG, the number of crimes in Metro Manila was halved. That's why his program called Oplan Lambat-Sibat is now being implemented in other regions. He has created many jobs, such as in IT-BPO, those call centers. More than a million jobs have already been created by this industry, and our target is to increase its income to $25 billion this year and 1.3 million direct employees. That is Mar Roxas: no complaints, no drama, no showing off, just work. [Applause]

For me, the analysis is very easy. Do you choose the person who doesn't boast about their own achievements, or do you choose the one who, when a disaster strikes, just arrives, gives a little relief goods, and says they care?

It is also important that we choose the right and deserving Vice President. As they say, it's just one step away from becoming president, so just anyone can't be there. Especially since whatever happens to the President, the Vice President will take over the responsibility. We are confident that Leni Robredo can fulfill this. [Applause]

That change brought about by her husband Jesse Robredo in Naga happened because of Leni and her family’s contribution, support, and sacrifice. When Jesse passed away, Leni became the father and mother to her three children. As a Congresswoman, she continued the progress of Camarines Sur. She could have been content with what they had contributed; she could have stayed in her district; she could have retired and taken care of her family. But when she was asked to be the Vice Presidential candidate of the Straight Path, even if it was a new sacrifice for her and her children and she hadn’t planned for it, she accepted the challenge once more. That is our bet for Vice President, none other than Leni Robredo. [Applause]

Being President of the Philippines is no joke. Many challenges will come. When you think your abilities are enough to overcome any challenge, a more difficult challenge will come. And it is important that we see the strength of character and the ability to sacrifice. You know, one of the most difficult tasks in being President was when Jesse Robredo passed away and we were currently searching for him. Leni, during those days, I didn’t really know her well. Jesse chose to separate his family life from his public life. The time came when I had to tell Leni and her children that the news we were expecting wasn’t good, because more than 24 hours had passed and we still had no news about what happened to Jesse. I think anyone would understand why Leni cried during those times. Whatever came out of her mouth during those times, we would understand. But believe me, we were really impressed by Leni’s strength of will. She really made a very heavy task easier for me because it was really in her heart, it was really in her personality to be strong during a crisis.

My Bosses, we know where we come from. If our past leaders had done what was right and reasonable a long time ago, we would have gone much further. That’s why now, it is only right that we ensure that the next leaders of our country are honest. Just as you entrusted me with your trust in 2010, I hope you will join me in the fight led by Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo; they are the ones who will surely fight for, enrich, and expand the Straight Path.

My dear Novo Ecijanos, the next President of the Republic of the Philippines is none other than Mar Roxas.