Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the 2016 League of Municipalities of the Philippines (LMP) General Assembly and Mayors’ Forum

Yesterday, we were on the island of Panay and we arrived at a school in the town of Pavia, province of Iloilo. Our purpose there was to inaugurate the eighteen new classrooms for the senior high school students of Pavia National High School. In the place where we held our meeting—the gymnasium—there was an adjacent old building. It had quite a number of classrooms, and I noticed that the adjacent building was quite old. It needed repair. We reminded Bro. Armin [to] not forget about repairing it.

I noticed some characteristics of that building. “It looks like this building has been here for a long time,” I asked. They told me, “Yes, it was built during your mother’s time.” My mother started as President in 1986. If you think about it, when I assumed office [in] 2010, it was almost 25 years. A generation had passed. Then I just thought: Is that how it is? Are there times when things can be properly fixed, improved, and made suitable to the needs to be provided to our students, and then 25 years later there is another opportunity?

Let me give you my own experience: When I was a congressman in Tarlac, we had the Tarlac River. Dennis Go is here, our good mayor of Gerona, he knows that during the summer, our river is almost without water, you only see sand. But when the rainy season comes, the water rushes and destroys all the protection of these banks.

As a congressman, we brought the problems of our constituents to our government agencies. And by God's grace, there were two projects, one in Pampanga, the other in Pangasinan. I was told who to approach to address the problem of flooding. Because Tarlac is on the boundary of these two large projects, one told us they didn't cover us, that we should go to the other. When we went to the other, we received the same answer. We keep going back and forth because we are not covered. In short, Tarlac City feels utterly orphaned: Our problems, we have to deal with them ourselves.

Why did I bring that up? In today's speech, Sandy mentioned that your IRA almost doubled. The bottom-up budgeting has 50,000 projects allocated. Your vehicles for the police, there are only about twenty left, in Sulu. Sulu is the only one remaining. And there are 1,400 vehicles for municipalities for the police. There is also an additional 1,200 for the Regional Safety Battalion, Public Safety Company, and the National Support Unit. In other words, as Mel said, we didn't promise you these things, we just delivered.

Perhaps this is a summary of what I really want to say to you today: You, as mayors, have experienced being the one your constituents run to, 24/7, 365 days a year, at any time. And like me, when I was a congressman and I went to those higher than me, asking for help and assistance, truthfully… I started as a congressman in 1998. There was the 1997 financial crisis in Asia. The refrain we heard: There are no funds. It is here that we want to truly say that we are returning the government to service. If you have problems, pass them on to us, we will find a way to address them. And I hope that in the five years and eight months that I have served you, no one can say that we haven't looked for solutions to the problems you faced.

I just want to emphasize one point: It's election season. We will choose the direction we will take. I know I'm not alone when we see other ads on TV or in the newspapers with their own slogans. We are all politicians, each with our own slogans. Some have slogans that they use for themselves, and to be honest, I thank them because I'm sure I'll get a laugh from them every day. Some claim to have certain qualifications, believing that the Filipino people are forgetful. They will compare their shortcomings to what they are promising now and what their slogan embodies.

In our organization, our belief is very simple: what we can accomplish in these six years, we can make permanent because we will make everyone feel that we can have a system, a government, a society that truly focuses on others, and we can improve without the so-called “stop and start”: it starts, it stops, it starts again. No. We can continue, we can keep improving as we move forward. But of course, this also requires something from all of us.

To those of you who gave me the opportunity in 2010, we all know that during that time, when the survey came out, how big my lead was over my opponents. You know how I was maligned, trampled on, discredited, and until now, they don’t leave me alone. So there are only 140, 141, 142 days left, but I think the criticism against me will only intensify until June 30. I’m lucky if they start paying attention to someone else on July 1, but they might still involve me. For me, that’s okay. What they are doing is really a sign that those who want to maintain a system that has done nothing but deny us the opportunity to truly progress and improve are angry at me, and that’s okay with me because I think they feel that we have already changed a lot.

If we want to return to a situation where there is flooding every year, and all you do is provide relief goods, or to our current system, “Where is the root of the flood? Why don’t we fix the problem of flooding so that next year we have a different problem, not the same recurring problem?” Our problem is poverty, and we addressed it with the 4Ps. Not just in the present, but also for the future, because the essence of the 4Ps is: keep your child in school, you have support from the state, your child graduates, and they have a better ability to get a better job. How many of you have thinned hair like me from constantly looking for solutions for everyone who comes to me needing medical treatment? And now, 91 percent of our population is covered by Philhealth. There is still 9 percent.

In other words, problems will always exist as long as people live. But I think it is our obligation, all of us who have been given the opportunity to serve, to ensure that the problem does not remain the same or that the old problem gets bigger. We should, as we progress, see the nature of the problem change, and the suffering of our countrymen, whom we have all promised to serve, should be lessened.

In the upcoming elections, May 9th, look at this, it's surprising that so many candidates are running unopposed. That's really what was said earlier, the people are content, the people are happy, maybe they can't find any issues to throw at those currently in power. There are many reasons, I'm sure. In short, many didn't dare, not that they were intimidated into not running. That's not allowed for us. But it's being said, “Match what has been done, exceed what has been done. If you can't even promise that, maybe don't even try.” That might be the point.

In the previous election, it was a crossroads. We will choose: Where will we go? For me, it's very simple. We have two candidates, here on stage with us. They promised to continue what we are doing now. [Applause] And because they will start at a higher level, they will raise us up even further. I'm sure the change in our society will be even faster. Now, all the opponents of these two on stage with us, Mar Roxas and Leni, they will promise heaven and earth, let's include the stars, let's include the moon, let's include the hereafter just in case they get through. But in the end, all their promises might not come true. But here, what has been done is certain. [Applause] All of you are respected in your communities, those who have graduated, think about it, three terms, nine years is no joke, the opportunity given to you. You are still respected by your fellow citizens, they listen to you. And you should be the ones to suggest. We hold our future in our hands. There are probably two choices: We can imitate Juan Tamad. If we have an image of Juan Tamad, right, lying under a guava tree, mouth open, waiting for the guava fruit to fall. I didn't understand when I was young how that kind of thinking could be sensible. Because if the guava falls without being picked, it's probably not at the right ripeness. Maybe it's already spoiling, or rotten. Then you have your mouth open to catch the spoiling or rotten fruit. You could just pick it at the right time.

Here, July 1st, I think I was already courting during that time, I was still able to catch up. You, on the other hand, can wake up and say, “Okay, our advocacy has succeeded. The Straight Path continues because we worked hard for it and we can be sure that our problems will decrease and decrease.” [Applause] Rather than maybe thinking on July 1st, we made a mistake, or we were lazy, or we didn't act correctly. Maybe on July 1st, we're saying, “It's over…” We'll go back to the old ways. We won't have anywhere to run when we have problems, and the problems that aren't addressed will just get bigger and bigger. It doesn't have to happen that way.

While we empower our citizens, we in higher positions, we tried to empower you. If you think what happened in the past was right, almost six years now, if it was good, why would we change our path? It's in your hands, you will shape our future. I hope we can work together to maintain the change we have implemented on the Straight Path.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much to all of you.