Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the Nikkei 21st International Conference on the Future of Asia – Special Session

[Delivered in Tokyo, Japan, on June 3, 2015]

In an ever-shrinking world, the issues that confront us are becoming less and less parochial, and more and more common. At the moment, all of us are confronted with a seemingly endless catalogue of issues that do not adhere to national boundaries, whether they are global pandemics, the effects of climate change, or the threat of terrorism, along with other issues in regional peace and security. It is only natural, thus, that nations have begun to see not just the benefits, but the sheer necessity of cooperation, and of thinking critically about how our actions impact the region and the rest of the world.

Peace and security are the foundations of all progress; they are the pillars on which all forms of prosperity are built and sustained. After all, in the long history of the human race, is there even one example of a nation that has developed—and consequently, paved clear paths for its people to live dignified lives—despite being enveloped by conflict? Japan and the Philippines know what it is like to overcome the scars of the past and build ties of friendship that promote each other’s stability and prosperity. These past 59 years, our bond has grown to transcend diplomacy and set a global example of cooperation and friendship that leads to security in every possible aspect.

An unforgettable example of this solidarity was during the waning years of the dictatorship in our country. In 1983, after my father was assassinated, Filipinos uncovered the truth not by viewing the state-controlled local media, but by watching Betamax tapes containing investigative TV shows from Japan, which were smuggled from household to household. These showed analyses proving that my father could only have been assassinated from behind before setting foot on the tarmac. There was even a study conducted by engineers of sound on the gunshot and the time elapsed further proving this point.

In 1986, the Filipino people overthrew the dictator and lifted my mother to the Presidency, the Japanese people and their government stood alongside Filipinos once more by being one of the first countries to recognize my mother’s government. Understandably, Japan also became one of the first countries to receive my mother in her official capacity as President. Indeed, there is no denying Japan’s hand in encouraging and nourishing the democracy our country now enjoys.

These are only a few anecdotes from our long history of friendship. Japan and the Philippines have always focused on maximizing each other’s advantages, not simply to address our shortcomings, but to build a relationship where we truly strengthen one another. For example, the Philippines has recently entered a demographic sweet spot, which means that majority of our population is of working age. It only makes sense that we partner with countries who need more young people to work in vital sectors. Japan, among others, needs capable and intelligent nurses, and the Philippines has an abundance of them. This addresses a need for Japan, while Filipino nurses benefit from exposure to the most modern technology available here, and consequently our country benefits from that experience.

The Philippines has a great number of synergies it can forge with Japan, and the numbers serve as proof. Today, Japan is our largest trading partner, with trade between our countries amounting to $19.1 billion in the last year alone. It is not surprising then, that a great number of Japanese companies have a presence in the Philippines, to the extent that their names hold prominent places in our national consciousness. The brands are familiar to many Filipinos: whether it is Mitsubishi or UNIQLO, Toyota or Epson, Honda or Yamaha, Ajinomoto or Yakult, among many others. Japanese brand names have become so deeply embedded in the modern lives of Filipinos. In fact, there is even a Philippine snack brand named “Oishi.”

After five years of hard work and reform, our economic fortunes have changed dramatically for the better. Our administration’s reform agenda has taken full effect. From 2010 to 2014, for instance, our economy grew by an average of 6.3 percent, marking the fastest four-year growth period in the last 40 years.

It logically follows that our improved performance opens up greater possibilities to further synergize our economies. Japanese companies realize this and are demonstrating confidence through an even greater willingness to bet on our country and our people. For instance, recently I spoke with Mr. Nagamori, President of Nidec Corporation, who I am told was chosen as the “Best President” by other presidents surveyed by your very own Nikkei Business magazine. He told me of their company’s openness to putting up a research and development facility in the Philippines, as long as we can develop enough engineers with masters and doctorate degrees, which we are working on right this moment.

We are proud of our economic numbers. They speak for themselves. Yet economic growth only becomes meaningful when the benefits are felt by each and every one of our countrymen. This is why we have channeled our economic gains into massive investments in our people: to empower them to take advantage of the opportunities that are arising in our country, and allow them to take hold of their own destinies. Over the course of our administration, we have increased the budget of our Department of Social Welfare and Development by more than 600 percent, more than tripled the budget of our Department of Health, and nearly doubled the budget of our Department of Education, which by our constitution has to have the lion share of the budget, amongst many other agencies.

In the area of empowering Filipinos, Japan, too, has been a partner that has never failed to extend a helping hand. After all, among nations, you are the largest contributor of Official Development Assistance to the Philippines, through which you have brought development to where it can make the most impact. For example, you have been working very closely with us to improve urban transportation. In our capital, we have a daytime population of around 14 million, and a night time population of around 12 million. This means a rush of travelers of nearly two million at all times of the day. Having witnessed the efficiency of transport systems in your country, we truly appreciate your help in this field. In terms of adapting to climate change, you have been equally helpful. For instance, you have shared your knowledge with us on how to construct infrastructure that have catchments as a feature, thereby helping us in our effort to build back better from the previous natural calamities and become more resilient in the face of increasingly powerful and frequent typhoons. These initiatives, among others, prove beyond doubt Japan’s contribution to the everyday lives of Filipinos.

This brings me to your support for peace in the Philippines. My very first meeting with the leaders of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front happened because Japan opened its doors to us on very, very short notice. They provided an environment where both sides could see the sincerity of their dialogue partners. This was a breakthrough in the peace process, which we thought had reached a deadlock. Now, we are determined to get the Bangsamoro Basic Law passed in Congress, which will be a major step in freeing thousands of our countrymen from the shackles of conflict and in attaining lasting peace and prosperity in the autonomous region. This was made possible with the help of our gracious and faithful ally—Japan, whose commitment to peace and security really shone through.

In the sea known by many names, estimated by some to facilitate the travel of about 40 percent of world trade, Japan has been steadfast in demonstrating its solidarity with the Philippines as we advocate freedom of navigation and the rule of law in the face of China’s unlawful territorial claim. We are united in the belief that the continued growth of Asia necessitates an environment where freedom of navigation is uninterrupted, and where the rule of law is respected by all, with no exception. All parties have expressed their desire to resolve this issue through peaceful means under international law. The Philippines, in particular, has followed through on these words with action. We have pursued arbitration to clarify maritime entitlements, and have pushed for the expeditious conclusion of a legally-binding ASEAN Code of Conduct. For Japan’s support for our peaceful, lawful, and principled approach, again we thank you.

Ladies and Gentlemen, the Future of Asia, and the future of the world as we know it, rests on the ability of nations to identify, maximize, and broaden the pathways that connect us all. I believe the relationship between Japan and the Philippines is one of the best examples on how to do this. Ours is a friendship that spans not just a single sector, but the entire landscape of our interests as nations.

This is precisely why I have come all the way here for the sixth time in my Presidency: to solidify the Philippines’ commitment as a friend to the Japanese people, and as a responsible member of the community of nations. Our people are grateful to have the Japanese people as friends, and hope to continue our exchanges characterized by dignity and kindness for decades, if not centuries, to come, towards creating an Asia and a world that is safer, more prosperous, and ultimately, better than what we found.

Thank you and good day.