Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In the opening program for the 30th year of the Center for Agriculture and Rural Development Mutually Reinforcing Institutions

[Declared in Brgy. Tranca, Bay, Laguna, on March 16, 2016]

You know, my first job… My father was killed in 1983, in 1984, I was accepted by the Philippine Business for Social Progress. I was the executive assistant of our executive director at that time, Ernie Garilao. I was brought here to Laguna, to the Center for World Technology Development. I just want to clarify, Aris is a manager, I was a new employee at that time. If he is young, I was younger at that time. [Laughter] Just to be clear.

When we visited, just imagine, the goal of the Center for World Technology Development at that time, as I remember it, was how to maximize the income from a one-hectare land, including housing. The housing, underneath, had pens for various animals. Their irrigation was also made into a fishpond. The dikes were planted. The area above the garden was also filled with [trailings]. Every way to maximize income was done there.

To be honest, these are the things that shape our race, the genes given to us by our parents, and then our background. Perhaps, God's plan for us is already there. I saw this, how can we maximize the opportunity for everyone? And that is our goal at present.

Now, what I want to tell you is, after they brought me—because I was my boss’s driver—we went to Calauan, Laguna. When we arrived at the cooperative being helped by PBSP RTD, they served us pineapple. You know, in Calauan, there’s still a pineapple monument there in the plaza, right? I just went along with it. Normally, we put salt on pineapple, it’s a bit sour. When it’s juice, in Tarlac, I put a lot of sugar in it to reduce the sourness. I was surprised when they peeled the pineapple, put it in a basin with some ice, and when I took a bite: It was really sweet! It even tasted better than mango. This pineapple is different. It’s better than the canned ones with a lot of sugar added.

I was so happy, I bought some. It was like I was also helping the cooperative. Two sacks fit in my car. And that day, Friday, we were going to visit my grandmother, my mother’s mother, I was going to give it to her, to my aunts, to my mother, so I could be my mother’s favorite son. [Laughter] When I arrived, I was in a hurry, I carried the two sacks into the kitchen. “Please peel these. Prepare them.” After dinner, my grandmother ate it. My grandmother was a bit deaf then, so she didn’t know how loud her voice was, but she was still thinking clearly. After a bite, she said, “It’s sour!” [Laughter] Even her face, it was really sour. I said, “How can it be sour when my trip was just short?” Of course, I also ate some. After a bite, “It is sour!” [Laughter] Honestly, I don’t know what happened to my two sacks of pineapple. I just left them there.

Part of the learning experience, when I was buying, the person running the cooperative said, “You know, it’s no longer pineapple season here.” I, internally, fully accepted what he said, “It’s no longer the season, yet it’s so sweet. It must be great during the season.” It turned out that what was being sold there was no longer Calauan pineapple, it was already coming from another place. They just put the Calauan label on it, the price was a bit high, it was a warning to me, “Don’t buy here because this is no longer our product.” We were a bit slow to pick up on that. It was in 1984 or 1985, I think. Now, my grandmother has long passed away, she might have already called for me. I didn’t mean to. [Laughter]

Perhaps we can compare this situation to my experience. We were led to believe in the sweet success of those who came before us, but when we examined the true state of the country, we could only grimace at its sourness. Under the Straight Path, our situation wasn't like this. Through our contributions and cooperation, we are now reaping the sweet fruits of the reforms we planted.

During my mother's time, her advocacy was “people empowerment through microfinance and cooperative-based activities.” Especially after she served her term. You know, one of the things I learned during my time at PBSP is that when you establish people’s organizations, cooperatives, you can’t just give them a project right away. You need to build the organization first. And I was taught during that time, it takes two years for them to be fully formed before their projects can gain [pressure]. I mentioned this to my mother when she was President. She said that the country’s funds during her time were only enough for four months of training. I said, “Can we condense the two-year program into four months, and hope that it will be successful?” But she said, “That is the limit. That’s all we can do.” Like us, her governing principle was inclusive growth, or ensuring that no one is left behind in our progress.

And that is exactly what we are doing now. You know, we have many countrymen who are hardworking, have good plans, ambitions, but cannot start a business because they lack capital. An example of this are some of our cooperatives and micro-, small-, medium-enterprises or MSMEs. According to data from 2013, our MSMEs comprise more than 99 percent of the business establishments in the country, and they created 63.7 percent of the jobs in the Philippines in that year. If their needs are not met, their potential to improve will be wasted, as well as their ability to create more opportunities for our countrymen. That’s why we strived to strengthen the industry, including ensuring that they receive sufficient support and aid.

This is where we promoted microfinancing, as part of our agenda known as “financial inclusion.” The government is working with institutions like CARD MRI to provide financial support to our Bosses, to help them rise from poverty. Aris Alip is truly a role model and inspiration to many of our countrymen to maximize the benefits of what they have. We thank him for his dedication to helping our countrymen fulfill their dreams. It’s no joke that for thirty years, it has been growing and growing.

Under the leadership of the Bangko Sentral, more LGUs now have access to services such as microfinance, microenterprise loans, and microinsurance. There is also the Economic and Financial Learning Program and Financial Empowerment Sessions of the BSP, which aim to provide sufficient knowledge in fund management. Last year, the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion was launched, which will ensure that everyone, from indigenous people to women, is included in our financial system.

We also signed several laws that will strengthen our initiatives: We passed the Microfinance NGOs Act—which our good Kuya Bam really lobbied for, and Aris, and many others—which strengthens our NGOs in providing microfinance services and other assistance to poor families who want to start a business. You know, I remember, when this law was being shaped, the Department of Finance had concerns, Bam, Aris, and many others talked and listened. And because they wanted to find a solution, they pushed my role as Father of the Nation, I was the referee for my children. But because they had the same destination, they reached an agreement and the law was passed. We also just passed the Credit Surety Fund Cooperative Act, which will help our MSMEs, NGOs, and cooperatives obtain loans which they can use as capital. You know, that surety fund reduces the concerns of banks in lending funds to our countrymen.

The good news is, because of these initiatives, the Economic Intelligence Unit recognized the Philippines as number 1 in Asia and third in the world in promoting financial inclusion in 2014 and 2015. [Applause]

That is a well-known company—a sister company of “The Economist” magazine. This is proof: On the Straight and Narrow Path, we are fulfilling our promise that in our progress, no one should be left behind.

We are doing all of this to empower our Bosses to build a good future. We believe: Filipinos are our most valuable resource. That is why we are pouring funds into education, health services, and other social services to meet their needs.

In education, as you know, we addressed the backlog of classrooms, school seats, and textbooks that we inherited, and we reformed the basic education system in the country. We have expanded the coverage of our Pantawid Pamilya: from the previous 786,523 households covered, this year, the last 200,000 will complete our target of 4.6 million beneficiary households nationwide. In the initial results of the program, we estimate that 7.7 million Filipinos have already been lifted or raised above the so-called “poverty line.”

PhilHealth now has a wider coverage as well: from 47 million Filipinos in 2010, it is now 93 million Filipinos. During our term, under the Sitio Electrification Program, according to the Department of Energy, all the sitios we identified as having no electricity in 2011 will be lit up before the end of this month. You know what, let me add: Recently, I was informed that the sitio did not participate in the Reproductive Health Plan because, back then, there were those who did not register in 2011 because they did not seriously believe in the government. Now, there are sitios left behind again and those that were not sitios before have become sitios. I said, “So that’s how it is. It seems like electrifying is a moving target.”

Later, we will also inaugurate the Calatagan 63.3-MW Solar Farm, which is the first solar farm funded and built by a Filipino company. The question is: With all our achievements, does anyone think we could have done this in just under six years?

You know, let me give you another example, what we call “holistic.” Recently, we came from Pangasinan, where our DTI is providing a Shared Service Facility. This means that, perhaps from here in Micro CARD, someone received capital, and then the DTI comes to add these facilities to further expand or help expand the businesses you are establishing. For instance, in Binmaley Rural Insurance Club, they have a bangus (milkfish) processing project. Their production, from 1,500 to 3,150 kg a month, is estimated to reach 8,000 to 10,000 kg per month after this project. So their sales, from P211,000, are estimated to reach P723,000 due to this production.

There is also a food processing project of the local government unit of Sto. Tomas, again in Pangasinan because that’s where we came from. They were given equipment worth P618,000 for the production of corn siomai—there’s siomai, pastillas, polvoron, puto, yema, cookies, and others. I’m almost advertising this, but the bottom line is, they used to produce 200 to 300 packs. Now, 400 to 600 packs. Their sales due to this have increased from P63,500 to P226,000.

Perhaps the best example, to illustrate this to you, we have a fellow countryman named Christina Reyes—not the actress. [Laughter] This Christina Reyes, after finishing BS Accounting, didn’t seem to get a job here, so she went to Kuwait. Upon arriving in Kuwait, she said she was abused by her employer there. She even said that when she returned home, she was holding her employer’s passport, travel documents provided by our DFA, DOLE—who worked to bring her back to the Philippines. Upon her return, she was given fare to return to Pangasinan, and after that, she was reminded that we have a program for our OFWs for retraining. She was told that you have a scholarship for this, she enrolled in TESDA, and she studied massage therapy and hilot wellness program—Joel might get mad at me if I got the name wrong.

Why am I telling this story? Because of that training, she was able to get into a spa, became an operations manager, and in 2012, when she returned, she told me that within that year, she was able to establish two branches of her own spa. She was no longer an operations manager. And not long after, after two years, she had four branches of her spa, with 32 employees. And now, the new phase of her company is franchising her spa. Let me repeat: She said, “I came from Kuwait, I was an OFW. Even though I didn’t finish my contract, I returned to the Philippines, and this training…” She now has a fairly good business. It won’t be long now, perhaps, before her spas become nationwide.

The point is this: We are striving that if you are going to help, as my parents taught me, go all out. Let's start with the children: Can we expect anything from a child if we don't educate them properly? That's how much we're increasing the funding for education from basic to CHED—and congratulations on your college that you built. After that, let's also ensure that to continue their studies, their health is good. That's why the DOH budget is so large. During our term, it has tripled since we started. Sorry, I think I heard my mother, “Can you please not boast?” [Laughter]

The point is this, like what you are doing: There is already microfinance, there is also insurance, there is also training in college—we are not that far apart. Perhaps we are like bamboo shoots from the same rhizome, so it is really easy to help each other. And we have one goal: How can we lift all our countrymen from the mire of poverty?

It's clear: Under our 'Daang Matuwid' (Straight Path), we have empowered Filipinos to dream and make those dreams a reality. From a long history of falling, now, we have learned to get up and are ready to move forward. We have already begun to change the story of the ordinary Filipino. And may I ask, you know, with these constant travels of mine, I think I only have 105 days left. 105 days left, and I will already be retired. I might apply to Aris—oh, wait, I can't apply to you. You know, in our law, members of the Cabinet, like me—I cannot participate in an industry that I used to regulate. Because I am President, I regulate everything. That means I am prohibited from working for one year. So I said, “That's okay. You won't earn anything for one year.” Your livelihood, hopefully, your pension and savings will be enough. In TESDA, those who graduate there, give them a few months, and their salary is already double mine.

What's more painful about that is, the Secretary of Finance, because he is a member of the monetary board, he is not allowed to work in banks and other entities they regulate for—just a little—about two years. [Laughter] That's my problem, not yours. [Laughter] I'm thinking if I can become a farmer because it falls under the Department of Agriculture. There might still be an issue with that.

I will be stepping down: Given what is happening to us, will we change direction? Another election is coming. The Filipino people will choose again. It feels like this is my farewell to everyone. And of course, before we part ways, I want to make sure, number one, that your situation is good or you are in a good place, but secondly, that your future is clear and that you will be in a better place. I believe that is still my obligation.

Question: Will we continue on the path of progress, or will we return to a time of many abusive people and a corrupt system? And as Father of the Nation, my conscience cannot allow me to remain silent; it is my obligation to guide our Bosses and ensure that all our hard work will not be in vain. We have already laid the foundation of good governance, and we have let Filipinos feel what “good governance” means. We have strengthened our institutions so that they will no longer be tools for the corrupt. But in the end, it is up to you whether we will continue this. If you ask me what we should do, in my opinion, there is only one who will uphold this—and I invite all of you to examine, let's all examine the candidates now—because in my view, there is only one who will truly uphold or further strengthen all the good things we have started. In my opinion, with full confidence, I can say that the tandem of Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo, the Righteous tandem, will continue what we have already started. [Applause]

As they say: True change starts from the bottom and with each individual. With the help of our partners in delivering services like CARD MRI, we have uplifted our Bosses towards a more developed, more beautiful, and more prosperous future. Long live CARD MRI. Long live Doctor Ali, and all of your colleagues, all of your members. I hope that the government will continue to care for and truly listen to the voice of the Bosses.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much.