Speech

of

His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

during the 17th Asia Pacific Retail Convention and Exhibition

[Delivered at SMX Convention Center, Pasay City, on October 29, 2015]

Some of you here might not know that my resume includes a stint as a retail sales supervisor for a well-known athletic brand here in the Philippines. I worked in that job for a couple of years, experiencing enough to understand how truly challenging it is to work in retail.

At the time, we were introducing this brand to the Philippines, which would be in direct competition with a more established foreign brand that had already been in the country for quite some time. When anyone thought of athletic shoes at that point in time, they thought of our rival. Our total advertising and promotions budget was a very small percentage of theirs. For us, running an ad in a magazine or a newspaper was already a major event. For our competitor, it was an ordinary matter.

As if that weren’t challenge enough: our shoes and their shoes were practically the same, except for color, logo, and most importantly, price. You’ve probably used the “introductory price” strategy at some point in your companies’ lifetimes; it can be extremely effective in getting those initial sales. However, we did not do that. We were actually selling at a premium over the regular retail price of the established brand.

Even with these disadvantages, we came up with innovations in terms of our promotions and our systems, where we saw the behemoth brand reacting to every initiative we did. We had succeeded in establishing ourselves. Perhaps, in hindsight, this was part of my training for a more daunting challenge—when, in 2010, I was elected Salesman-in-Chief of the Republic of the Philippines.

All of you here know how much easier it is to sell when you have an excellent product. The Philippines has always been that. We are blessed with an abundance of resources: strong human capital, an excellent location, and vast potential for industry growth, among many others. These would seem to ensure that the job of Salesman-in-Chief would be very easy. However, these qualities had been obscured by the rampant corruption and impunity that plagued the past administration—to the point where we became the laggard among our neighbors, in so many different aspects.

Establishing a new brand is already a challenge. A different one altogether is reworking an “old brand”—rejuvenating and reviving the image of something that may already have negative associations with its name. And back when I first took office, the Philippines was known as “the Sick Man of Asia.”

In spite of the challenges my administration faced, we were determined to succeed. Our job was to effect true transformation, and convince all stakeholders—from the common citizens to investors abroad—to partner with us to rebuild the country. We had to undertake drastic reform, utilizing many of the strategies you employ. There was a need to strengthen our system and reinvent our entire image. We plugged leaks and closed loopholes in processes, instituted transparency and accountability, went after the corrupt, and leveled the playing field. We invested, and continue to invest, massive resources into our greatest competitive advantage: the Filipino people. By channeling funds into health, social services, education, and welfare, we empower our countrymen to take part in the growing industry and the economy at large. These past few years, we have also been conducting an aggressive marketing campaign, to tell everyone that the Philippines was once again open for business under new management.

Our campaign has been extremely successful. We did not only revamp our image, we also effected true change. The Philippines is now called Asia’s New Darling. Since 2010, we have climbed the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Rankings: When we started, we were at 85 th ; now, we are at 47 th and we have every intention of being ranked even higher in the near future. Our GDP growth has been one of the region’s fastest, clocking in at a 6.2 percent average over the last five years. Last year, we broke our record for the largest ever net foreign direct investments.

This is the best possible time for the Philippines to play host to this convention. I am told that the Asia Pacific continues to be the top destination for retail brands, with a market of billions. You will likewise be happy to know that recent reports give us so much reason to be optimistic for the Philippine retail industry. In the Nielsen 2015 Second Quarter Global Consumer Confidence Report, the Philippines showed the biggest quarterly improvement in consumer confidence, rising seven points. This makes us second only to India in terms of consumer confidence, in a survey of 60 markets.

It’s easy enough to see proof of this. In terms of apparel, we have seen the arrival and expansion of foreign brands such as UNIQLO, H&M, Herschel, Forever 21, Longchamp, Miss Selfridge, Basic House, and Cotton On, among many others. On top of this, several international food brands are now available here, including Applebee’s, I-Hop, Tim Ho Wan, and Ippudo. There are many more I failed to mention, but suffice it to say that the Cabinet Secretaries are very happy with their current dining options.

The Department of Trade and Industry has been working very closely with the Philippine Retail Association to ensure the growth of your industry. For instance, there are the Outstanding Filipino Retailers and Shopping Centers of the Year Awards and DTI Bagwis Award for Certified Business Establishments that recognize excellent business practices and the growth of retailers. I am certain that our efforts to capacitate Filipinos, and to spur the growth of the IT-BPM and manufacturing industries, among others, have likewise resulted in creating empowered consumers, who can patronize your products and services.

Those in my generation can attest to how stark the transformation has been. When I was a new entrant in the work force, my computations showed that it would take me twenty years of work just to buy a secondhand car. Now, it is very different. Early in my term I visited an IT-BPM company, and I found out that they actually had investment seminars, where employees were given advice on how to invest, and save up to own a car in three years, or a condominium unit in five years. That is the market you have today.

Of course, the retail industry is not limited to shops we see in malls or highly developed complexes. A large part of retail involves micro, small, and medium enterprises operating all over the country. In the Philippines, we have very small, neighborhood stores called sari-sari stores. You can imagine the sheer volume of goods that passes through these small shops, as well as the number of people who derive their livelihoods from them.

This is why we believe the vibrancy of the retail sector rests not simply on maintaining an empowered consumer base, but on ensuring that all businesses—including those owned by small businessmen and entrepreneurs—are managed well. This is the rationale behind our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority’s partnership with Coca-Cola, namely the Sari-Sari Store Training and Access to Resources Program, or STAR program. Working together, they train owners of sari-sari stores in bookkeeping, inventory management, accounting, and various other disciplines, which allows them to run their businesses in a more strategic manner. The results have been much better than first envisioned: Constantly, we have heard of owners increasing their income five-fold after finishing the program, to the extent that they have somehow managed to match my own monthly income, and that is before taxes. Now, the program also focuses on training the beneficiaries on how to maximize their new income. As of September 2015, this program have trained 35,655 graduates, towards our goal of reaching 200,000 individual entrepreneurs.

The PRA has likewise been working with the Department of Tourism to train micro-entrepreneurs in popular destinations around the Philippines in retail and tourism trends, through the Lakbay-Turo para sa Micro-Tourism Enterprise Program, which roughly translates to the Travel-and-Teach for Micro-Tourism Enterprise Program.

This creates an atmosphere of cooperation and solidarity, in which each stakeholder is empowered by his fellowmen: to do greater things, to move, every day, a little bit closer to the realization of his dreams. Indeed: More professionalism on your part—the willingness to share best practices and knowledge—opens up so many opportunities for everyone involved. We see this also embodied in FAPRAs, and our very own PRA, which strives for collective success in an industry typically characterized by intense competition.

The question of how we must make the most of the future is best answered by the theme of your conference: We have to fast forward. This is not only apt for your drive to realize the potential of the Asia Pacific Market; it is also apt for us Filipinos. Whether for your sector, or my countrymen, it is clear: Now that we have so many successes under our belt, now that we are realizing our aspirations, we cannot allow ourselves to backslide. This is the time to work even harder, and even more closely with one another, to build on what we have achieved.

In a few months, our country will be faced with a choice: do we continue along the straight path that has seen us achieve so much together, or do we allow our country to return to the dismal past? The Filipinos in this room know well that their decision will determine the course of the next six years: whether or not the Philippines fast-forwards, and by so doing, spurs growth that benefits all, from the common Filipino to the largest companies represented here today. I am confident that our people have a clear answer in mind. They know that the depth of skill and talent in our country has yet to be fully realized, and that we need to not just continue, but double down on reform to give rise to a Philippines that is a shining example of sustainable and inclusive growth.

Thank you. Good day.