[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YgwlHVy2a4&feature=relmfu[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT:

Good day to you, even though there is a storm today.

I will admit to you, when I woke up this morning, I was a little sad. You know, in five days time, it will be my mother’s second death anniversary. Of course, I still miss my mother. Yesterday, we had a funeral mass for an uncle, my mother’s eldest brother—and we were adjusting to that situation when, unfortunately, an aunt followed soon.

So it is really timely that I come before you today, because normally, when I see Mario Montejo, good news is but a word away.

I am pleased to be a part of a gathering that recognizes the natural talent of Filipinos in science and technology. This celebration proves that the creativity inherent in Juan dela Cruz bears meaningful results, and his inventions and initiatives are centered on improving the quality of life of his fellow citizens.

It is not new to us the names of Filipinos who have left their mark in the field of science and technology around the world. Let us begin with Gat Jose Rizal, who made a type of lighter made of wood that he called a sulpukan. We cannot also forget the name Fe Del Mundo, who created an incubator made of bamboo for communities without electricity. And even in the present time, the king of the road—the Jeepney—continues to speed by, which is also a symbol of Filipino creativity and innovation. Who would have thought that the piled-up scraps and parts of American military vehicles would be the source, not only of livelihood, but of the very cultural identity of our race.

From the past until now, the contribution of our creative thinking is meaningful, not only for us to be recognized in the world, but also to protect the welfare and progress of our fellow citizens.

Under the excellent leadership of Secretary Mario Montejo, who truly brings good news, projects we can truly be proud of are coming left and right, and will bring relief to Filipinos.

One example: Who would have thought that a black can containing black wood and a blended organic solution could help lower the cases of dengue this year? Instead of going through the failed fogging and superficial processes again, for mosquito control, we have already distributed 250,000 mosquito traps to ensure that the mosquito eggs and larvae themselves will die. Simple, cheap, and truly beneficial to the citizens: this is the new mindset guiding the inventions of the DOST.

You probably have also heard about the DOST’s plan to thoroughly study the construction of a monorail system. Several years from now, instead of squeezing into the city, our countrymen from the provinces can enter their workplaces in the city without feeling tired or paying expensive fares.

Furthermore—the train, you want it, the mosquito trap, don't you?

You know, there are two million people who work in Metro Manila who have to commute every day to the outlying areas. So that monorail really will help them a lot, and also make possible our efforts towards addressing the informal settlers sector’s problem.

In addition to this, the DOST is also leading the use of landslide sensors that will monitor ground movement to deliver warnings if there is a risk of landslides; and the creation of a filter that can filter microbes in the water to ensure that the drinking water of our countrymen in remote areas is safe. There is also the promotion of a telehealth system that will bridge the health needs of our countrymen in far-flung areas with our professionals through text, email, or telephone; and the multiplication of Automated Weather Stations (AWS) that can quickly analyze the weather to immediately know if a storm is coming.

The DOST is working hard on many more things to create and further develop our capacity in the fields of biotechnology, nanotechnology, genomics, advanced food production technology, and robotics.

Aside from the innovations led by the DOST, a professor at Bicol State University also showed brilliance in creativity. By using what he calls coco coir fiber to hold the soil and prevent it from collapsing, we have really saved funds for the slope protection of the DPWH. Coco coir replaced the previously used, more expensive but more easily cracked gabions and concrete. The effectiveness of this innovation has been proven on the slopes of the SCTEx.

We are truly encouraged when we hear that our potentials are expanding, which will serve as a source of hope and progress for many Filipinos. I thank the entire DOST for promoting the government's goals for the continued advancement of the sectors of agriculture, health, education, security, and others.

I also thank and congratulate Dr. Lorenza Lirio-Gonzalez and Dr. Luis Rey Velasco for the honor you received due to your expertise in science and technology; and Dr. Raul V. Fabella and Fr. Ben Nebres, who is currently abroad, who are now part of our Order of National Scientists. These awards are not enough to thank you for the dedication you have poured in, so that the field you are in may serve as an instrument to give your fellow Filipinos the opportunity to enjoy a more comfortable life.

The DOST and our awardees repeatedly prove the competence, intelligence, and creativity of Filipinos—that earning money is not always the motive for inventing a product and undertaking a meaningful project. May you serve as an inspiration, not only to the youth, but to all Filipinos. Despite the more lucrative opportunities in the field of science and technology abroad, you still chose to stay here in our country to prioritize the welfare and progress of your fellow citizens.

Our country has indeed changed so much. We are now doing things that we could not even dream of before. There is no reason now to be afraid to dream. Believe that with our continued cooperation and support for each other, we will collectively achieve our dreams. Our country is now gearing up for further progress towards a brighter future.

Before I finish, let me repeat—lest you say I am a sycophant to Secretary Mario Montejo: I admit, he is my friend. I have known him for at least 25 years; but I cannot claim that he is my classmate—he was ahead of me in school. But, really, what? I will just repeat: why are we being criticized, why did I appoint a friend or classmate to various positions? Perhaps those I chose, for example, Mario Montejo, have been a good example and have helped our country.

Of course, if not for his colleagues at DOST, Mario Montejo would have been a lonely cowboy. So, long live you all, and I really have high hopes for you.

Perhaps before I finish, just one story. When I was first a Congressman in Tarlac, a dike collapsed and the water really rushed in, stopping everything in its path. Due to the speed of the rushing water, the barangays near the part of the dike that collapsed only heard a noise, woke up in a flash, and jumped out of their houses. They were able to save almost nothing from their barangays. Because of the speed, the captain of one barangay had a water buffalo tied to a tree: due to the speed of the water, the force of the water, the water buffalo was hanged on that tree.

And for a long time, when we are visited by at least 23 typhoons every year, it seems like we can do nothing; it seems like what they say is just endure, endure, endure.

With the use of science and technology, we expect that we can better prepare for the onslaught of bad weather, and truly save our countrymen—we can even provide direction on where it is safer to establish their livelihoods and homes. There, we can truly say that it is not confined to your laboratories, to your schools, but is truly becoming beneficial to our countrymen.

Therefore, thank you all very much.