Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the inauguration of the Fishport and Cold Storage Facility

[Delivered in Salabang, Calabanga, on May 5, 2016]

Good afternoon to all of you. [Applause]

But that’s all I know in Bicol so far, [laughter] but you know, it’s really pleasing to see this: Earlier, as I was approaching here, I saw all the fish stalls, and then I started thinking, it’s like they’re saying that if it’s made into dried fish, right, selling fish, fried—how many kilos? Of course, when it’s dried, the weight goes down, the income goes down.

Because of this cold storage facility, we won't be obliged to immediately sell the fish at consumer prices. So it will really be good, Leni pointed this out, your barangay council pointed out that this is the key to having the opportunity to improve your lives, and that's what we're aiming for with the Straight Path, right? To give you all the opportunities.

Now, I just ask for your cooperation, this is very new, we can work together, it will grow and grow, when it becomes, you know—in English they say: “Success has many fathers, failure is an orphan.” That means, when we succeed, we will have even more allies, they will help you with what comes next. What's next? I was told there are a lot of crabs being frozen here.

I'm not making a dig at our council. [Laughter] I won't even say that I love crabs. Let's not, okay? But the point is, it's being sent to be processed, put in plastic, put in cans. When we have a good volume here, it will likely be processed here too, creating more jobs, but it's crab meat, but of course let's help each other, let's not be envious, let's not badmouth each other, let's not intrigue left and right so that we can really improve this facility.

Perhaps I'll take this opportunity, I probably won't be able to return to you. Before we step down from office, there are only 56 days left. I thank you for your support and this is truly the meaning of the Straight Path, right? No promises are broken, if we say we will improve your situation, we will strive to give you all the opportunities, so thank you. [Applause]

Thank you to our councils, thank you to Congresswoman Leni. You know, I feel what they call a sea wall, we don't have a sea in Tarlac but we have a river that when it's dry, it's sand; when it rains, it rushes. And I had an ambition there, there's a town there with us, its name is Gerona. When it rains, the town is divided because the river is in the middle. To cross to the town center, those from the Western part of Gerona have to go around two towns to get to their town center. So when I was a congressman, I was told, we need a bridge and I worked on it. I fought with the DPWH, I said. “Can we have an installment plan? Give all my PDAF to you, three years of PDAF, let's make this a bridge.” I was told, “We cannot start if it is not complete.” And to be honest, I felt like a very good beggar when I was a congressman, but I still collected very little. Now, imagine, this entire coastal zone we're talking about, it's very possible because of course our congresswoman is good and will be Vice President. [Applause]

But for all of this to happen, right, you gave us a chance in 2010. So perhaps, let's remember that, where are we now? Where did we come from? Where can we be tomorrow if we continue the Straight Path?

Good afternoon to all of you. Thank you very much.