Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, Before his state visit to Japan.

As we move forward on the straight and narrow path, we have proven that our relationship with other countries is no longer just to receive their kindness: We are also ready to help solve the challenges facing and that will face our region. We are also contributing to the achievement of our collective goals. And as we showcase ourselves in the community of nations, we strengthen our ability to provide benefits to our Bosses, the Filipino people.

This morning, at the invitation of their government, we will fly to Tokyo, Japan for a state visit. As we always do when we travel abroad, we have really packed our schedule.

We will meet with Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko to personally express our gratitude for their unwavering help and support. We will also meet with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to further strengthen the relationship and cooperation with their country. We will also attend a joint session of their National Diet to express support for their ongoing transformation, which is sure to bring more progress and opportunities for them and our people.

We will also meet with representatives of the Nippon Keidanren, Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Keizai Doyukai, and Boekikai, some of the largest organizations of companies and business associations in Japan. We will personally inform them of the renewed vigor in our economy and society. The story from Ambassador Manuel Lopez and me is that there is a continuous influx of inquiries at our embassy about investing in the Philippines, especially after the road shows and business forums there. This is a result of the changes happening in the system and culture of doing business under our righteous governance.

We will also attend the Nikkei 21st International Conference on the Future of Asia, organized by the largest media group in Japan. We will share there the reforms we have implemented in our government, which have yielded positive changes for our countrymen. Through this, we can show our readiness to contribute to the integration that will take place in our region.

Of course, we will also take this opportunity to be with the Filipino community in Japan again. We will personally dialogue with them because we consider them ambassadors in other countries: They are proof of the skill, intelligence, and dedication of Filipinos; they are the reporters of the positive transformations happening in our society. We will also check on our 9 cadets who are part of the exchange program between the National Defense Academy of Japan and our Philippine Military Academy, as well as some of the Filipino nurses and caregivers deployed there under the Philippines-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement.

I am also pleased to inform you that part of our visit is the acceptance of the award “Grand Cordon of the Supreme Order of the Chrysanthemum,” the most prestigious award in Japan. It is clear to me that this honor is not only recognition of my achievements as an individual, but, and more importantly, also of the collective participation of every decent Filipino to promote progress, peace, and democracy. We will also bestow the Order of Lakandula (Rank of Supremo) on Emperor Akihito, and the Order of Sikatuna (Rank of Rajah) on Prime Minister Abe as recognition of their unique contribution to the strengthening and promotion of Japan-Philippines relations.

This exchange of honors is also a symbol of the further strengthening friendship between our countries and peoples. It is not hidden from many: In the past 59 years, the Japanese have given more than required in terms of assistance, support, and concern for our country. In our administration, when we were hit by Typhoon Yolanda, aside from being one of the first to open their hands to us, they also provided a great deal of help for our affected countrymen to recover. They also stand with us in upholding that the rule of law should prevail to achieve a fair and just resolution to the territorial dispute. With the help of Japan, we have planted the seeds of trust that have opened the path towards a more peaceful and more progressive Mindanao. To our countrymen who frequently go to the mall, you surely feel the increase in Japanese businesses here, which we have reciprocated with warm patronage. There are now more restaurants offering ramen, sushi, and tonkatsu; more stores selling clothes and household items with Japanese brand names. Someone also informed me that with the number of Filipinos going to Japan for vacation, some hotels have put up a greeting of “Welcome!” in their lobby.

On June 5th is our return. During this visit to Japan, we will do our best to bring home many good news as pasalubong (souvenirs) for our Bosses. We will ensure that those who are already eager to invest will be even more encouraged, and those who are starting to show interest will cross over to definitive investment in the Philippines. This will further expand opportunities for our countrymen. You can count on it: In strengthening our relations with other countries, we can better address the challenges ahead and get closer to realizing our dream of a more developed Philippines.

Again, good morning to all of you, and thank you very much.