[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k6KAZvrzAeU&[/youtube]

Statement of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, Regarding the Filing of a Motion for Reconsideration for the Supreme Court’s Decision on the DAP

To my beloved countrymen, my Bosses:

I requested time to face you tonight, to explain some things related to the Supreme Court’s decision regarding the DAP.

The first thing I will discuss: What was the situation we found ourselves in?

If you will recall, when we assumed office, the 2010 budget was already running, and we also inherited the proposed budget for 2011. Think about it: Of the 1.54 trillion pesos in funds we inherited in 2010, only 100 billion, or 6.5 percent of it, remained to be used in the remaining six months of the year. You really have to wonder: Where did they put the money?

You probably also remember anomalous projects like the dredging of Laguna Lake, where we would spend 18.7 billion pesos just to play with mud; or the GOCCs (Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations) that showered bonuses on officials and employees even though the companies were losing money.

It was clear that a lot of corruption was happening in the budgeting system back then. That’s why we removed them. We cancelled the anomalous projects, fixed the management of the GOCCs, and began to stop the trickery with the national treasury. Through Zero-Based Budgeting, funds will only be allocated to projects that will truly benefit the people; there will be no room for what is called continuing appropriations. These continuing appropriations were one of the reasons why there was a fragile and complicated bureaucracy, an opportunity for corruption, and programs that were profited from by a few, while no benefits came to the people.

But even if it wasn't our intention, the intense management of our budget became linked to the delay in the public sector's contribution to economic growth. Due to underspending, our GDP decreased. It's like an irrigation system, we inherited waterways with many leaks. That's why we first needed to fix these leaks so nothing would be wasted, and to make the irrigation more effective. And because of the many holes, we weren't immediately able to deliver enough water to the plants that needed it for their growth.

We studied the situation. We discovered that some departments were moving projects quickly because they immediately corrected their systems. There were also agencies that were still adjusting their systems to ensure that no public funds would be wasted. But of course, time is running, and they admitted that they couldn't use the funds in the year the budget was allocated. The question is: What do we do with the unused funds?

Let me first clarify the issue of savings in the government. Isn't it, in our homes, always a good thing to have savings? For example, if you spend less on the meat you buy, you have extra money to buy side dishes.

In government, the meaning of savings is more complex. Sometimes it's good, like the more than 26 billion pesos saved by the DPWH due to orderly and honest bidding and procurement processes. But sometimes, savings mean misfortune for the people. Why? Every year, the Executive Branch proposes to the Legislature a list of priority programs, activities, and projects with associated benefits that need to be funded. Once the budget is enacted, it is clearly stated that it must be spent within the specified year. And if the money is not spent on the allocated program, the benefit will naturally not reach the people. Doesn't this cause misfortune to our citizens? This means that every time the government has these savings, every time public funds are idle, we have a Boss who is deprived of benefits.

Of course, any sensible government leader would want to expedite projects that benefit the public. I don't see any reason to delay the benefits, especially since we have the ability to do so. It is clear that when you don't deliver the benefits immediately, you also prolong the suffering of the Filipino people.

Our response: the Disbursement Acceleration Program or DAP. This is the second thing I will explain to you.

The DAP is not a project—it is a management method in accordance with the law and the mandate given to the Executive Branch. We implemented it to help allocate funds and maximize the benefits it brings to the people.

How did the DAP start? It was like this: On the very day of the SONA in 2011, a few hours before I delivered my speech, all government departments gave us a progress report. I was surprised by some of the data I discovered.

For example: According to the DepEd report, of their target of building eight thousand school buildings, they completed only eighteen. Frankly, their reasons are reasonable—such as searching for additional land, new assessments of actual needs, and the complex bureaucratic processes. Therefore, we directly asked them: Will you be able to meet the construction target in the remaining five months of the year? The honest answer from DepEd was, “We are doing everything we can, but we can only build three to four thousand classrooms for 2011. We will catch up on the rest next year.” And that’s what happened: Although the construction was slow at the time, DepEd recovered. Now, they have closed the backlog of 66,800 classrooms that we inherited.

Another example of a project successfully implemented due to the effective use of savings is the sitio electrification program. In 2012, our target for electrification was 4,053 sitios. The national budget allocated 3.87 billion pesos for this. And because of the quick and efficient implementation of the project, the National Electrification Administration requested additional funds to light up an additional 2,110 sitios. With the help of DAP, 1.264 billion pesos was allocated to complete a total of 6,163 sitios in 2012. That was for the number of 36,000 sitios that needed to be lit.

Question, isn’t it right that we allocate funds that are just sitting idle to programs that have been proven effective, and that can really deliver on their commitments, and deliver benefits as quickly as possible? What’s good about this system is that projects we temporarily stopped that year will not compete for funds with completed projects the following year. It’s truly a win-win situation.

Let’s move on to an agency like the National Irrigation Authority or NIA. When I spoke at their anniversary, they proudly told us that they were doubling their target achievement in rehabilitation and reconstruction projects. However, when I saw the data regarding their new projects: In the past ten years, it has always been far from the target, which they themselves created. We all know: If you plan to engage in corruption, it’s easier to do and get away with in repair projects. But for new projects, there are only two possibilities: is there one or isn’t there? For example: can we see a canal that has been built or not?

The head of the agency also explained during that time why the accomplishment rate in irrigation projects fell from 87 percent in 2011 to 65 percent in 2012. They said that 40 percent of the projects were in Mindanao, and were hit by Typhoon Pablo. Just a reminder: Pablo arrived on the first week of December 2012. My question is: What were you busy with all year, and why did you only push for the completion of projects in the last three weeks of 2012? Worse, they timed it during Christmas and New Year—when the number of working days would be reduced due to vacations. It’s really outrageous. I don’t think anyone would agree with this kind of administration, and this kind of deception cannot be allowed. We have already replaced the administrator of NIA.

What we want is to avoid delaying the implementation of a project. The agreement of the entire Cabinet regarding their respective budgets: Use it or lose it. And if it’s clear that you can’t really use the funds allocated to you this year, then it’s clearly savings. We were given the opportunity to immediately implement benefits with immediate benefits for our Bosses. In this way, delayed benefits are replaced by benefits that are more quickly received by the people. Let’s remember: we have a budget deficit; there are funds borrowed by the government to be allocated to projects. If we just let it sit idle, we are only paying interest for nothing. The people don’t benefit from this system.

In the Supreme Court’s decision, we are being questioned about the use of savings and when we can use what is called unprogrammed funds. They want us to declare savings on December 31st. In this system, when can we actually use it? In this definition of savings, a project that could have been funded in the middle of the year will be postponed until the following year.

We also have a list of projects that can only be funded if the government has sudden and unexpected income. These are called unprogrammed funds. As ordered by the Supreme Court, the delivery of benefits will be delayed because it will be March of the following year before all the requirements for its use are completed. There is also a process of bidding and procurement, which will take at least four to six months. Before this is finished, what date will it be? If the report is in March, it will be September before the funds can be used the following year. Therefore, you are going towards two years before the people have the opportunity to benefit from the funds.

What could be the implications of this? We have programs for the relocation of informal settlers to safer areas away from dangerous locations. With the system that the Supreme Court seems to be ordering, the second typhoon season will be upon us before we can relocate our countrymen. Let us remember: approximately twenty typhoons pass through us each year. Is it right to tell those living in dangerous areas to just rely on prayer?

I cannot allow my conscience to accept this. I cannot accept that our countrymen will be harmed because I allowed the delivery of benefits to them to be delayed. Let us remember: The people are the owners of the national treasury.

Effective spending of funds is not only dictated by my conscience, it is also clearly stated in various provisions of a law called the Administrative Code of 1987, and discusses the use of savings. For example, let us read now (it's on your screens) Book VI, Chapter 5, Section 39 of the 1987 Administrative Code of the Philippines:

—Except as otherwise provided in the General Appropriations Act, any savings in the regular appropriations authorized in the General Appropriations Act for programs and projects of any department, office or agency, may, with the approval of the President, be used to cover a deficit in any other item of the regular appropriations…

As you can see, according to this law, the President is expressly empowered to transfer savings to other projects. There is nothing stated that the transfer of savings is limited to one department or branch of government. Simply put: We did not violate the law when we implemented the DAP.

We were surprised to see that the basis we used for the DAP was not considered in the Supreme Court's decision. How could they say that our way of spending was unconstitutional when they didn't even discuss our basis? Until this moment, Section 39 of the Administrative Code, and many other parts of it, are still in effect.

This is even more disturbing if we include the “operative fact doctrine,” which the Supreme Court also mentioned in their decision. It's simple. Once the Supreme Court declares a law or executive order unconstitutional, only projects that are yet to be done under it are prohibited. The declaration does not cover projects that have already been completed if removing the benefit would harm the people. This is only natural because it is not right to dismantle bridges that have already been built, or demolish homes that have already been given to families of informal settlers.

Likewise, under this doctrine, it is recognized that those who implemented the order are not liable under the law if they did so “in good faith.” But in the decision of the Justices, they immediately presume there was no good faith, and we still need to prove it in one or more trials. Where is the principle of “innocent until proven guilty” here?

Some also say that the DAP is the same as the PDAF. Excuse me. The DAP is different from the PDAF. In the PDAF, some brought government funds to fake NGOs, and allegedly divided it among abusive individuals. In the DAP, government funds were not stolen—they were used to deliver benefits to the Filipino people. Not later, or in the days to come; now. What could be implemented immediately, was implemented immediately.

And isn’t it true that even the Supreme Court, the World Bank, and even the critics of the DAP, admit that it helped boost our economy?

Clearly: The Supreme Court has things to consider in order to clarify their decision regarding the DAP, and hopefully, they will realize its negative impact on the country. We will appeal the Supreme Court’s decision. We can do this by filing a Motion for Reconsideration to allow for a more complete and thorough examination of our laws.

I also hear whispers that I am being personally targeted in this issue; that it’s as if they are challenging me to personalize it as well. I just say: As President and father of the nation, I need to remain calm and pursue the proper process.

Even any lawyer we talk to will warn against this step. The Supreme Court voted 13-0 against the DAP; one abstained. Almost, our consulted lawyers say, the hope of overturning it is a shot in the dark. They even say: if you continue with this, you might just get into more trouble.

My message to the Supreme Court: We don't want to reach a point where the two equal branches of government collide, where the third branch of government needs to intervene. Your decision is difficult to understand. You also did something in the past, which you tried to do again, and some say it is even more intense based on the decision you recently released. We trusted that you were doing what was right in accordance with the concept or principle of “presumption of regularity,” especially since you are the ones who are more knowledgeable about the law. Now that we have implemented something—which you yourselves said benefited the people—why is what we did wrong now?

I believe that most of you, like us, desire good for the people. To the Honorable Justices of the Supreme Court: Help us help our countrymen. Please reconsider your decision with consideration for the explanations I laid out tonight. The people are hoping for your reasonable response. I hope that when you see the arguments we will submit regarding the law and the economy, we will unite, and strengthen the capacity of the entire government to promote the interests of the people.

No one will doubt that, in the past four years, we have promoted reform. What is expected of us in promoting reform?

The system we inherited did not help, or provided insufficient help, to our country — we are fixing it so that it can fulfill its sole purpose: to protect the interest of the people, who are the ones who put us in power. Our appeal to the Supreme Court: please do not hinder us. Shouldn't you be with us in this reform? Let us end the system that harms the people.

Please allow me to share a text message I received just last week. It said: “The politicians are making fiesta regarding DAP; but to our simple non-legalistic mind, it is like a motorist who parked in a ‘no parking zone’ because he had to rush to save the life of an accident victim, which has more value. I’m praying hard that these people will see the good of the people rather than their own ambition.”

My response: That's how the situation is, but honestly, it's even worse; because I was charged with “no parking” for parking in a zone that has not yet been declared a “no parking zone.” Is that right?

Bosses, in the coming days, I, the members of my Cabinet, and those who benefited from DAP will release additional details about this issue. I also invite you all to read the Supreme Court's decision, as well as its accompanying concurring and dissenting opinions, so that you can better understand what I discussed tonight. To those who are worried about the programs that have been stopped, because we need to follow the order of the Supreme Court, do not worry. We will return to Congress and request a supplemental budget to continue your benefits.

In conclusion, I reiterate: DAP is good. The intention is right. The method is right. The result is right. Bosses, I promise you: I will not allow your suffering to be prolonged, if we can alleviate it now.

Thank you very much, and I hope we are all enlightened.

__________________________________________

Read in English