Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the gathering of partners in the Straight Path

Good day to you all. Even during my mother’s time, you were already helping, and to all our colleagues.

I also need to greet Angel warmly, you know. Angel Amante, and her father. Her father… I’ll start with her father: [Applause] Manong Edelmiro wasn’t really known to my mother. But when my mother was president, she said – Manong Edelmiro was a congressman then – she said, “Congressman, how is your hospital in your district?” “Ma’am, it’s like Mona Lisa.” [Laughter] My mother had received many titles, she didn’t understand why it was Mona Lisa. “I’m sorry, I don’t understand it. Why is it Mona Lisa?” “Well, you just lie there and you die there.” [Laughter and applause] That’s Manong, clever. Not insulting, but making it felt that “We were forgotten.” Less than two weeks passed, the medicine was sent. Then all the equipment followed. That’s his style. I said, looks okay. We learned from that.

So when we ran for senator, he was also one of the first to help us, especially here in Mindanao, and all our colleagues here on stage, he was there. It’s good to see you all.

I have an initial problem I want to share with you. The cough, it will also go away. [Laughter] So is being single. Next year. [Applause] Next year my hopes improve there. I’m not sure though. Even now, I wouldn’t be able to invite all of you if it pushes through. [Laughter] Because it’s not happening yet. Just include prayers.

This is the problem and let’s go back to it – maybe you’ve heard this from me before but this really happened in Cebu. After this, I will go to Cebu. During the time of the dictatorship, there was a senator. He was a senator before Martial Law. He arrived at a rally, a little late. We were waking up the people. When he arrived there, he found only three people. He looked, “There are only three people left here.” He approached the emcee. He said to the emcee, “Should I still speak, there are only three people here?” The emcee’s answer to him was, “It seems those three aren’t convinced yet. [Laughter] Why don’t we try, maybe you can convince them?”

So when he spoke and spoke, it wasn’t, wasn’t it, three people, he was the fourth, you could just have four chairs. He went up on stage, used the mic and the loud speaker. Many loud speakers. He spoke in the plaza. Halfway through the speech, one of the three stood up. He left, went home. He looked at the emcee, the emcee said, “You’re great. We only need to convince two more.” [Laughter] As the speech was about to end, the other one stood up again. He looked at the emcee again, “Everyone before you couldn’t convince those two, you’re the key. Continue on. Just one, just one.” [Laughter] The speech ended, the third didn’t leave. He went down from the stage, approached him, shook his hand. He said, “I guess, I’ve convinced you.” The man replied, “You really know I was convinced. Even before you arrived, I was already convinced. And the proof of that, the loud speaker you’re using, it’s mine. I just lent it. [Laughter and applause] He said, he needed to wait for you to finish so he could take his system home. [Laughter]

This is the problem, I’m coming here to convince you, but you’re already wearing yellow. [Laughter] Lou, even his shoes are yellow. [Laughter] I was told they ran out of yellow merchandise here in this huge mall. Well, I guess I should say goodbye. You might lose your conviction. But let me add now, that’s why it became only one and a half pages long.

Perhaps I'll start with Ms. “G Funny” and everyone who spoke earlier. They said, thank you to me. I think that's wrong. Why are you thanking me? I promised you I would serve all of you, right? For me to have this opportunity, it also came from all of you. The change that the entire country is enjoying, you made it happen, I was just perhaps the face of it. As the critics say, I'm the first to be exposed to the cannon. But the point of this, I will repeat, I will not get tired of saying it: No matter how much ambition I have, if you didn't help me, could I have done anything? [Applause] In all the runs for National Election, I always hear “anyone but.” Meaning, let anyone win as long as it's not me. I say, I'm sorry. I rely on my bosses and my bosses are strong. [Applause] So that, everything they mentioned, also came from your trust.

Perhaps, and I don't even have a teleprompter, you know, because I prefer to say things more directly to you. The first batch of those helped by 4Ps for high school graduated this year—let's expand the program. In the first batch, more than 300,000 students were helped in high school nationwide. And of those 300,000, more than 13,000 were valedictorians and other honor students. Two of them represented the entire group, I faced about 15,000 here in the National Capital Region. The two who faced me representing everyone, were accepted—my understanding is—at UP and in the College of Engineering at the University of the Philippines. [Applause]

That course, they call it a quota course. It's difficult to get into. But the test results are good. It's not certain they will reach college. You all helped. Our government helped, our country helped. And think about it, after four years—or engineering, maybe five years after their exam. How many Filipinos will they be able to help because they were helped?

Let me go back: TESDA. The expansion has been significant. Joel, when he comes here, will tell you how many millions have gone through his courses. I've probably been heard many times mentioning that upon graduation from TESDA, we started with a 28% placement rate, those who get a job within six months. Now, more than 70% are getting jobs. [Applause]

I've heard many times how their lives have improved. One example I used, because I said after he graduated, he was a mechanic, and he's now in another country. He wrote to us asking if he could no longer be used as an example. I thought he was angry. It turned out he said, because I mentioned his salary, it's now double my salary. So I should have studied to be a mechanic if that was really my goal.

Now, there's a sari-sari store owner. He was taught how to run the sari-sari store more professionally. P800 daily income, that's the actual profit. Now, after going through the program, it's P4,000. Some increased five times, some three times, some ten times. It reached a point in the course [about what to do with their additional income.

I'll repeat, you know. What's the point of this? They were all given an opportunity. They all improved. That's all we promised: We can give you an opportunity. Will you improve or not? Well, that depends on what you do with the opportunity.

Now, all politicians, perhaps since the time of Muhammad, even before the term politician existed, have promised, “Elect me, right, support me, I'll take care of you. Support me, I will serve you. Support me, your lives will change.” Is that right? How many of them have done that?

Perhaps now, let's have a question-and-answer session. How many politicians have you heard in your entire life who made promises and then broke them? Isn't that right?

My father taught me: 'If I give my word, whether easy or difficult, it must happen.' And that's what we strived for. [Applause]

Now, should we continue what we are doing now? I say, why not? Take, for example, those we helped earlier. Because we have compassion for them, should we help them? You know, compassion is a good reason. But I'll add to that. It's called logical.

Of those we trained at TESDA, how many of you here now know that within one year, they earn more than the minimum wage, and none of those who graduate accept the minimum wage.

When one graduates from the program, the first tax they pay on their income tax is the investment we made for them to be able to study, it's already paid for. What does that mean? That person won't just work for one year. Every year they pay taxes, there's an opportunity to provide for another person. Let's say just one person, for every tax they pay. Let's say they work for 30 years, 30 people, because we helped the first one, right? [Applause]

And that's what we're pursuing: no one left behind, everyone given an opportunity. Here with you in Mindanao, why am I pushing for the Bangsamoro Basic Law? It's important that we push for it. It's important that you have peace. And what will everyone really benefit from when Mindanao becomes peaceful? Look at the map. Who is neighboring Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei? You are the closest. Do you know that one part of Australia is closer to traveling to Mindanao than the other part of Australia?

What does that mean? The BIMP-EAGA – we've been hearing about BIMP-EAGA for decades – until now, there's little progress, right? If we are peaceful here, as part of the Philippines, Mindanao is our bridge to expand our markets. [Applause]

I'll go back to my problem. Why would I convince you, you wouldn't come here if you weren't already convinced, right? [Applause] But it's important, perhaps, to find those who are not yet convinced. And this is what I will help you with.

Someone asked me, why should we help Mar Roxas? Let's look at Mar's character. In 2010, for a long time within the Liberal Party, we were pushing him as a candidate. But it came, the people spoke, they requested us. Did I force Mar? Did I, didn't I, do what we did to give him the opportunity? No. He voluntarily initiated that this was the call of the people. My personal ambition, it can be set aside for the country. And Mar really gave us that, didn't he. [Applause]

That is the opposite of a politician who, when facing the people, all their words start with, “I.” “I will build a bridge for you. I will give you a school. I will create jobs. I.” We should be worried when it's all “I.” I think when that 'I, I' speaks, I would say, well, you can do everything, don't take our vote. Just do it. But we know that someone who talks too much about 'I' is self-centered. This job is focused on others. Nothing will happen if it's not focused on others. [Applause]

In his work as our secretary, how many times did he risk his life to truly focus on the needs of our countrymen immediately? In Zamboanga, during the crisis, he arrived before me. He arrived before me, he was the last to leave. I was there for eleven days. He went to all the areas there, visited our countrymen whose homes were burned, sympathized, brought relief, and didn't leave until the situation was normalized. After Zamboanga, he rested a little. He didn't rest. He went to Bohol and Cebu. He continued to need to organize our communities that were affected by the earthquake. Then, after resting a little, for one day, [laughter] what came next was, of course, Yolanda.

What is the difference between Mar and others who we might say are aspiring for office? Mar immersed himself. Before Yolanda arrived, he was already there until the situation calmed down, until basic services like water and electricity were restored. He didn't just arrive, bring a few relief goods, pose for pictures, make videos, “I care.” [Applause] I'm not targeting anyone. Just throwing stones at the sky.

But my point is very simple: When I reviewed, of course you know when I started in 2010, my hair was much thicker. [Laughter] Now it's just thick. And of course, when I was asked, a few months passed, “Who should we support?” Everywhere I went, that's what they asked me. Some even said, “It's your obligation to find us the right replacement and after you've found it, make sure they win.” I said, I remember, we have the same vote. In the Straight Path, the number of votes is only one each. How can I do all that?

Lately, I've been constantly asked, “I am a beneficiary of 4Ps. How can you guarantee that it will continue?” “I am a beneficiary of other programs, how can you guarantee that it will continue? How can you guarantee that everything you've done will continue when you step down from office?” Of course, when I get home, how can I guarantee that when I step down from office? But it can be answered with a “yes.” And how, where does that courage come from, where does that confidence come from? Well, you are here. You and I will work together on this, everything will continue. [Applause]

Someone is whispering behind my back, you seem enthusiastic, you said your speech was only three pages long. Maybe I'll finish with one strong request. Do we have anything important in our lives that we obtained that just fell from the sky or someone just threw at us? Truly, everything of value to us we worked hard for. If we have a title now, we graduated. We were happy with the good teachers. We will pray for the teachers who weren't very good. [Laughter] Whatever field of life you have achieved success in, it was really hard work, something meaningful.

Here, let's not convince each other. I think we are already convinced. Let's find those who are not convinced and ask: What's wrong with continuing to care for the 20 million Filipinos who are being helped by 4Ps? What's wrong with the 84 to 89 percent who are in PhilHealth, whose membership has been expanded, whose coverage has been expanded, what's wrong with continuing that? What's wrong with giving more opportunities to those who want to go to technical vocation in TESDA? Or provide other scholarships, let's expand those in college? Why is it wrong to continue everything that is happening now? Why is it wrong that the infrastructure you have been promised for a long time, now many infrastructures were promised 20 years ago, 30 years ago, I visited earlier, we have been waiting for it for 50 years? I said to them, one of them, thinking about the Jalaur River Project in Iloilo. When I was born, they were already thinking about that project. I didn't think I would be indebted to it because when I was born, I was taken out of my mother, of course, I didn't know there was a Jalaur River.

But I will return: Why do we need to suffer? Why must we cling to our wrong beliefs? Why is it wrong to give everyone the opportunity to improve themselves? And we will return to that. Mar has been with us for a long time, when we were still in the opposition, while he was already in power, like me, he endured a lot of ridicule. Like me, he doesn't like to boast. If I fulfill my promise to you, that's enough for me. I don't need to put my accomplishments in TV advertisements on the left and right. I don't need to have kilometer-long tarpaulins made to remind you that I've done something for you. No. If I've done something real for you, I don't need to tell you because you will know it yourselves. [Applause] If we are shy, – isn't the opposite of shy in Tagalog 'thick-skinned'? I'm not saying anything. You, when you think of something thick-skinned, I don't argue. I'm just saying what's true.

Let's go back. Next year, I keep saying, a referendum. What is a referendum? Do you like what we've achieved in these six years? Do you think we've surpassed what we hoped for when we started on the Straight Path? If the answer to that is yes, who will continue here?

Noynoy Aquino, one vote. No one will win with one vote. That's why we need to get the mandate. First, get the answer. What happened was right. Second, we must continue this. Third, we are working towards the realization of our aspiration for further progress. [Applause]

My three pages are finished. But I will repeat it again and again, my brothers and sisters. When I was asked, because from the beginning, 'Who will replace you?' When the question was finished, 'It's good that just continue there to be sure.' I immediately saw the faces of my siblings who weren't just crying, they were sobbing. For us, my siblings rarely cry. Next, my nephews and nieces will sob even more. Even Yolly, in my home, taking care of us, from the beginning, 'Yolly, you'll –' 'Tutu' only, not yet 'We will continue,' I think she was already crying too. They are with me in all the hardships we have gone through here. I think that's wrong. To rely on one person, one group. What if this person is gone? What if this group is gone? Will it end there? That's wrong. Then we'll give others a bridge or opportunity like in 1972, right? His two terms that he could run for were finished, Martial Law happened. It was supposed to end in '73, so he preempted it. Before his time ran out, we had Martial Law. He gained plus 14 years.

You too, right? It seems like someone is running, preparing to replace him. One term is good. Do what you need to do and what you can do, then pass the baton to show that the Filipino people can continue in the right direction. [Applause]

I should probably be speaking in Cebuano right now. Luckily, they are understanding. I will just repeat, I have nothing to be proud of except the strength you give me. You are truly the strength of the Straight Path. Let us continue the fight towards success. [Applause]

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.