Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the proclamation rally of the Liberal Party in Manila

[Declared at Plaza Miranda, City of Manila, on March 28, 2016]

You know, this Plaza Miranda and our Liberal Party really have a long history. And here, in 1971, the leadership of the Liberal Party almost perished, was wiped out. So for us, this land is sacred. The Quiapo Church is still there. Why is it sacred? Blood was literally shed here to fight for the welfare of the people. That's why here, we always repeat two things: Especially in Plaza Miranda, you cannot lie. You must always tell the truth because this land is sacred.

Perhaps secondly—and this is what I'm asking… Earlier, before I went up on stage, I saw this marble here beside the stage. Now, there's something left. I don't know if that's called art—abstract art—because there's really nothing drawn on it. Or maybe there used to be a sign here. Who knows what's on this marble? It's quite large, in Plaza Miranda, but I don't understand what's in front of me. It seems to have been missing for a long time. I hope this isn't a sign of the condition of Manila, as if even our monuments from the past have been forgotten.

Anyway, you know, we just finished Holy Week. Thank you that we had a little time for our families. We also used this time to pray earnestly and reflect. We also had time to watch an old movie about the life of Archbishop Oscar Romero of El Salvador, who was killed while fighting for the rights, especially of those on the margins of society.

I was thinking: With so many events shown in that movie, let's just change the names of the people, the places, the situations. For example, they called them “campesinos” there. We call them “kasama” here. What happened in El Salvador is the same as what happened to us in the Philippines, and the time period is almost the same.

You know, because those who were criticized by Archbishop Romero were afraid, their solution was to assassinate Archbishop Romero while he was celebrating mass. And now he is beatified; he is close to becoming a saint.

I believe none of you are against our administration here on the Straight Path. And because the election is approaching, some are enticing you, using the sweetest words, to convince you to change course. Truthfully, all those running for President, to replace me, I know, and we can say that at least in some way they are still my friends. But my role as leader and father of the nation prevails, despite our friendships. Let's look at where they come from.

As they say: Man is created. Because he is created, he is not perfect. No one can claim to be right all the time and in all circumstances. The beauty of the democratic system is that we can have different beliefs, but when we come together, we shape a path that everyone agrees on.

My problem is: When I hear and read what Manong Digong Duterte says, he said in the debate in February, “If I become president, it will be bloody. Because we’ll order the killing of all criminals, the drug addicts and drug lords.” What is he saying? Does what he said mean that he will be the one to identify, judge, and punish? Is it not allowed in his system to have opposing opinions and for him to always be right? If that is what he says, am I the only one who should be a little worried about our possible fate?

You know, my father taught me something. He quoted the life and words of a pastor named Dietrich Bonhoeffer during the time of Hitler in Germany. “First they came for the communists, but I was not a communist so I did not speak out. Then they came for the socialists and trade unionists, but I was neither. So I did not speak out. Then they came for the Jews, but I was not a Jew, so I did not speak out. And when they came finally for me, there was no one left to speak out for me.” In short: They gathered everyone little by little, and I was the only one who wasn't. In things that I wasn't involved in, I didn't speak up, until the time came when I was the only one left and I was the last one eliminated.

Manong Digong portrays himself to us as a very strong leader. Shouldn't we be worried about what he says? Many things will be done quickly; isn't that accompanied by shortcuts? And what could the meaning of shortcuts be, if not also disregarding the proper process.

To Senator Grace Poe: Again, a friend of ours. She mentioned twice in the last debate that she would appoint former Marine Colonel, or former Philippine Marine Colonel, Ariel Querubin as her crime czar. At first glance, that sounds good; the Philippine Marines are tough, they will fix the crime problem. The question is: Did she pronounce that correctly? The job of the police is to arrest criminals. Deadly force can only be used in self-defense or in defending others. The job of a soldier, on the other hand, is, if not to arrest those who invade us, to defeat them. Reflect on that idea and our history and the history of the whole world. Isn't it true that soldiers don't arrest enemy soldiers? And if there are soldiers who are captured, they are forced to surrender because they have already been defeated.

Colonel Querubin is capable. That's true. But is he suitable for the job? Let's compare the problem of crime to sewing clothes from fabric. What you need to shape the fabric into a garment is scissors. You follow the patterns, you put them together, and you create the garment. You can't use a chainsaw to cut the fabric to make clothes. Let's give Senator Grace the benefit of the doubt, regarding what she wants to say. But in her proposals, the question I think is appropriate: Is she really ready for all the decisions she needs to make?

As for Vice President Binay: We know he fought the dictatorship. But don't we wonder: What is he proud of in Makati? The cake? The free movies? Is it true that the number of poor people in Makati has decreased, or as we were told, were they simply transferred outside of Makati? We know the resentment of VP: He was in power for a long time, but now, many are questioning him. As for me, you know me; I have no hidden questions, or issues I'm running away from. That's where we definitely differ from him.

This is part of my analysis of those aspiring to be the next leader of the country. I believe we all have only one desire for our country: to continue the progress of each and every one.

Mine: Why stop the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, which previously had less than 800,000 beneficiary households, and now, will reach 4.6 million before the year ends? Here in your area, the former 2,777 beneficiary families or households in 2010, has increased to 46,723 currently.

Why stop PhilHealth, which previously had only 51 percent members, now, we are almost reaching 100 percent coverage because we are at 93 percent according to PhilHealth? Here in Manila, why will we hinder the funding for the Health Facilities Enhancement Program, which reached an amount of P281 million, in Manila alone?

Why will we deny our Bosses, the Manileños, the infrastructure that you need? For roads, bridges, flood control, and other infrastructure: From the year 2005 to the year 2010, the allocated funds for your city by our predecessors was P4.73 billion. During the same period, 2011 to 2016, we tripled this to approximately P16.33 billion, for Manila alone, equivalent to many provinces. This includes the Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3, NLEX-SLEX Connector Road, as well as the redevelopment of Roxas Boulevard, reconstruction and improvement of the Bonifacio Drive and widening of Anda Circle, development of Ayala Bridge.

Why will we sabotage the Metro Manila Flood Control Master Plan, which I am keeping our countrymen away from the danger of floods? There is the Pasig-Marikina River Channel Improvement Project Phase 2 and Phase 3, Manila Bay Seawall Project, Blumentritt Interceptor Catchment Area.

Let me emphasize: We have already planted a lot, and we are harvesting quite a bit. But we can harvest much more, and we can further develop the sweet fruits of all our efforts if we continue what we have started.

As Father of the Nation, it is my duty to guide you. It is my duty to present to you the right leader. He is the one who will surely continue the reforms, because he himself sacrificed and became a part of us in our journey along the Straight Path. For me, there is no one else but Mar Roxas. [Applause]

My parents told me that if you endorse someone, you must be able to guarantee it. This Mar, it is clear that he will prioritize the country before himself. While other candidates are burdened with controversies, Mar holds experience, knowledge, and success in good governance.

He was dubbed the “Father of BPO” because of starting and expanding this sector. Now, more than a million have been directly employed. He also lowered crime in the National Capital Region and other regions, using the law and not violence. With the many things he has accomplished, you see him being humble, instead of boasting. That is what a President should be: He will not deceive you, he will not abandon you, and above all, he will not steal from you. That is Mar Roxas. [Applause]

With her, of course, is Leni Robredo, our champion as vice president. When Jesse passed away, instead of losing heart, Leni became a beacon for her children, for me, and for all of us. In 2013, her constituents called on her to run as their representative. She faced the challenge, even though she would be up against a large family. Now, we are calling on her again. Honestly, she could have refused, and said, “Haven’t we already contributed enough to the country? I need to take care of myself now. My family comes first.” But once again, she is with us fighting for what she knows is right and just. That is Leni Robredo. [Applause]

Honestly, Mar and Leni could have been content with a quiet and comfortable life. But like me, like my parents, Mar and Leni see that they can really do something to improve the situation of our countrymen.

Here in Manila, we only trust two names: Of course, Mayor Fred Lim, and his future Vice Mayor, Atong Asilo. [Applause]

There are only about three months left in our term. And we cannot avoid feeling sad sometimes when saying goodbye. Many stories reach me. I remember the stories my friend Sandy Javier told me. He reportedly visited Fairview and spoke to the tricycle drivers there. He told me that he asked them: Who do you want to be president? They replied and also asked, “Can Pnoy just be president again?” They said that when he became President, their lives improved; their fares increased, from P300 to P700 per day.

To be honest, my parents fought for democracy, and I cannot bear the thought that the beginning of reopening will come from me, especially if a second term is granted, it might open a door for someone like those in our past who refused to step down from their position. Our conscience cannot allow us to give any space for such ambitions.

To be honest, I did not bother to make myself look good during our term. I did not chase after photo opportunities to prove to you that I am working. I am content when you yourselves say that I did the right thing. I am content with being handsome, my mother and my girlfriends were the only ones who said so. [Applause] It’s okay with me if others cut ribbons on everything we build; it’s okay with me if they take credit when the time comes. The next administration will get the recognition. But for me, I am at peace, because with Mar and Leni, I will leave the country in good hands. [Applause] With Mar and Leni, I am sure they will not only continue, but truly expand and defend the Straight Path.

This is my question: Now that we see where the Straight Path will lead us, to a Philippines that is more developed, where the fruits are truly abundant, where the stew we painstakingly prepared tastes so good, will you gamble our country on a “maybe”? Let me share something that was once said to me: It is your obligation to train your successor. Let me clarify: Come May, on May 9th, Noynoy Aquino, like you, will have only one vote. The vote of Juan and Juana Dela Cruz is the same. And in the end, we are all affected by all the votes that will collectively sign our future.

It is clear to me that if we want the Straight Path to continue, we must elect, campaign for, and fight for Mar and Leni. [Applause] As they say, everything of value or truly valuable is earned through hard work. It is our duty to promote what is right and bring our beliefs closer to others. We need to revive, show the strength of People Power.

The time will come when we look back on this moment in our history. And I hope that all of us can say, “I was part of shaping a beautiful future for the Philippines. Together with Mar and Leni, I continued the fight. I was part of positive change.”

My Bosses, now, I will introduce the one who will lead our fight, the next President of the Philippines, none other than Mar Roxas.