Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the 65th anniversary of the Department of Social Welfare and Development

You know, as we are gathered here today, I cannot help but think about the situation we found at the DSWD. I remember, after Typhoon Ondoy in 2009, this was still the pre-Daang Matuwid era, the DSWD tarpaulins were all over, all about where people could give aid and donations. It turned out that the DSWD itself was asking the public for relief goods. There was one instance, they even seemed proud of how long it took to deliver aid to Bicol, boasting that the convoy came all the way from here in Malacañang and Manila. That was the prevailing style and mindset back then, wasn't it? Consequently, because of the negligence of those we replaced, the first thing people thought when they saw someone from the DSWD: a major disaster; surely, there is a big problem. The personnel, wanting to do charity work, found it very difficult to do anything.

Now, the change in your agency is clearly visible. We have sufficient funds now, so there is no longer a need for widespread appeals for donations. When people think of the DSWD, they immediately think: ready and alert. As soon as news breaks of an approaching typhoon, the prepositioning of aid is automatic. The entire agency is there, with complete data, to prepare correctly and properly.

However, we are not saying that everything is perfect. Just like during Yolanda: Due to the intensity of the typhoon, even our warehouses were affected, and many of our prepositioned relief goods were swept away. Even the first responders in the localities were affected. We are studying this, along with other things that can be improved, to further improve service to our Bosses.

Now, we all know that the DSWD is not just for calamities or social welfare. If before, the end of your name was forgotten, we, on the other hand, emphasize the “D,” or the “Development” part. When you say DSWD, you are the bridge to our 4Ps or the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. Just look at the difference: Before, the program was used for political maneuvering; now, through Listahanan, we identify those who truly need it. We empower them through education, health, housing, and aid during disasters.

Let's also look at the data: The budget for Pantawid Pamilya, from P10 billion in 2010, is now P62 billion in 2015. The number of beneficiaries we inherited, from 787,000 households, is now at 4.4 million. For this year, we have increased its budget to P62.7 billion, for our target of 4.6 million beneficiary households.

Some say: Investigate Pantawid Pamilya, and we are spending so much on it. I believe that most of us, who are open-minded and reasonable, would say that the 7.7 million Filipinos who have risen out of poverty with the help of 4Ps—it’s really worth every peso we allocated to the program. In truth, that’s just an initial result. Of course, now that we have expanded the coverage of Pantawid Pamilya to high school, along with the help of TESDA and CHED, we will have more young skilled workers—meaning, they have more secure, higher-paying jobs, and are more capable of improving their lives.

We also strengthened the KALAHI-CIDSS project. Here, poor communities are trained to think, implement, and manage local projects that they themselves identify. Examples of these include: roads, irrigation, schools, barangay health stations, and agricultural facilities. From July 2010 to December 2015, we have completed 16,282 projects, which directly benefited an estimated 3.9 million beneficiary households. The goal of this is: We not only address the immediate needs of our Bosses, but we also give them the ability to build a better future.

Of course, we wouldn't be able to ensure the success of our programs if not for the very capable head of the DSWD, Sec. Dinky Soliman. [Applause] As I said before, she also mentioned: In service, she is on call, 25 hours a day, 8 days a week, with no overtime or incentive bonus. [Laughter] So I just try to occasionally treat her to something to eat. Because when we finish work, we end up at a 24-hour eatery. That means it has to take a lot of hours because the food there isn't that delicious. So, to Sec. Dinky: On behalf of the people, I sincerely thank you for your dedicated care and attention to our Bosses (citizens).

In every instance of service, Sec. Dinky is accompanied by the exemplary personnel of the DSWD. There's Chona Calamba from Region 7, who was among those who helped families affected by the earthquake in Bohol in 2013. You know, even though she was pregnant and also affected by the earthquake, she still chose to go around the communities. She was among those who assessed the situation of our affected countrymen, so that the government could immediately address their needs. We also recognized Danny Bitara from Region 5 and Noemi Mongaya from Region 8—who were once involved in an accident and their lives were put in danger while responding to Typhoon Yolanda in 2013. Despite this, they continue to care for our countrymen to this day.

Aside from our personnel, there are also other Filipinos who are partners with us in social services. Venus Raj, Iza Calzado, KC Concepcion, Gary Valenciano, and Anne Curtis are just some of those who help and unite in promoting our projects. Let's also include the thousands of volunteers who generously give, not only during disasters, but also in the agency's regular projects, truly providing all-out service to our Bosses (citizens).

To our exemplary personnel and volunteers: Every bit of your compassion for your fellow Filipinos now will eventually yield even greater change. All of your help to the beneficiaries now will be inherited by future generations. The freedom from hunger; freedom from lack of education and health services; the freedom to dream and control one's own destiny—they will carry all of that, and those who come after them. You truly make change happen. Again, thank you very much. Now, allow me to reciprocate, in some way, on behalf of the state: Executive Secretary reminded us that the anniversary bonus for your DSWD personnel has been signed. [Applause] We divided the work: Problems come to me; good news like this, he takes care of. [Laughter]

To be honest, it is very difficult to encapsulate the total contribution of all of you social workers to our country in a single line. But if we look at the simple logo of the DSWD, perhaps we can more easily understand the spirit of your service. There are hands holding a heart, symbolizing your generous offering of yourselves to others. You truly are the face of our government's care. My only request is this: In the face of future trials, may you not lose heart, but rather serve as the strength of our Bosses. I have faith that you will defend what we have beautifully started. As I step down from office, I am confident that you will continue to tread the path towards the comfort we dream of for the Philippines and the Filipino people.

The remaining days of our term are approximately 149. Atty. Delantar reminds me, my diligent executive assistant, that we have 149 days, while she has 6 years and 149 days if she is lucky. I said, that’s right because you are younger than me.

But you know, earlier, of course, we were also thinking, where will we end up after we step down? Earlier, we heard our future double major social worker, who I’m sure will really graduate in June. I will no longer accept your invitation to a feast. [Laughter] I know you have many guests. But why am I pointing this out? One of the first people Dinky and I met at the beginning of our term, a woman, sixteen years old at that time, from Baseco. She was there when Mayor Lim inaugurated their hospital, she had just given birth, that sixteen-year-old. Is that right, Dinky, that it was her second child? Second child and sixteen years old. As I understand it, we have been helping her until today.

But as I said to Dinky, “You know, I admire you, I admire your department because by definition, your job means you face problems every day: breakfast, lunch, dinner, while you sleep, right when you wake up.” Then where do you get the strength to get up every day, face, and address the problems of others? And tomorrow, do it again? And the problems you face, will you continue to do the same thing? Is there a limit to your ability to love your fellow human being? And you are truly amazing for joining those who aspire to respond to everyday problems. If that is our attitude, of course, problems will decrease, and the future of our Bosses will become better and better.

There is our Boss, my fellow provincial from my district… Nanay Charing. You know, in Gerona, to be honest, at first, I am Kapampangan, most of the people in Gerona are Ilocano, I said to myself, “Will we understand each other?” But they are very straightforward, sure of the support and help of the people of Gerona. You can see, you are seventy-eight [years old], Nanay. You don’t wear glasses, I think you’re still ballroom dancing. [Laughter] But that’s it, thank you.

Our students, they are really taking advantage of the opportunity, and that is right.

Perhaps, the core of my message [is] very simple. There is a saying, “When there is success, there are many fathers and mothers. When it fails, completely orphaned.” [Laughter] Because of what you have done, it is easy to support you, fight for your needs, because you show support. Continue that, and whoever succeeds us, I think, will recognize those who work well. And although you often face problems, and when Dinky calls sometimes, we slowly brace ourselves, “Dinky texted. What could it be?” But we have confidence that with the problem, the immediate solution is also part of the discussion of this problem. Continue that, why wouldn’t you be given more ability to help our Bosses.

Good morning. Thank you all very much.