Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the Conference on Public-Private Partnership Programs for Infrastructure Projects in the Philippines

[Delivered in Brussels, Belgium, on September 16, 2014]

I think he just got an introduction of how efficient our government is—the Secretary of Trade and Industry was just suppose to introduce me, but we had to tweak the speech a little, so he bought us some time, and he delivered his impromptu speech, which was being edited and formulated as he was delivering it. [Laughter]

[Greetings]

It was in November of 2010 that I first stood in front of an audience like this one, in order to make our earliest pitch for private-public partnerships. It was not easy. We understood the apprehension that businesses must have felt at the time, given my predecessor’s reputation, borne of constant allegations of wrongdoing. In 2010, the only reassurance we could give you was the promise of integrity: that, under our watch, the playing field would be level, and that the Aquino administration would render true public service—by empowering our people, by harnessing their optimism and solidarity towards equitable progress, and by working with the private sector to change the landscape of the Philippines. The promises we made to business and to the Filipino people were promises we intended to fulfill—through good governance, transparency, and accountability.

We shored up our systems to strengthen institutions that were weakened by corruption and impunity. For example, we used zero-based budgeting to eliminate ineffective programs—in gist, what we said was: Reevaluate all the projects, programs, and activities, those that did not redound to immediate and tangible benefits to the people will be eliminated, and doing so we channel funds into those that would truly serve our people. Budget reform continues to this day: for example, our agencies’ performance targets are now detailed to the finest extent possible in their budgets—there are no generic titles—in order to demonstrate their transparency and the eventual accountability of each agency to the Filipino people. Streamlining the procurement process in each government agency allowed us to cut waste further. Meanwhile, prudent management gave us even more fiscal space to make greater investments especially in social services and in infrastructure development, amongst others.

We did not waste any time using our improved capacities to invest these funds where they would redound to the greatest benefits: For our people. We engendered a shift from a trickle-down mindset, wherein our people will somehow benefit from progress, to a mindset wherein we proactively put our people in the most optimal position to take advantage of the opportunities opening up through economic growth. We are coordinating with companies and industry so that the skills needed in the future are imparted to our youth; in effect, we are doing away with a cycle where our youth enter schooling for professions that are in demand at the moment they entered college, but become saturated by the time they graduate. The challenge we put before ourselves: To make inclusiveness a cornerstone of our strategy, rather than merely an after-effect of our efforts.

Our budgets for social services, health, and education received massive increases from 2010 to 2014. This allowed us to make significant changes, like the K to 12 program, which has put Philippine basic education system at par with international standards. Companies in key industries work with our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority to train, and later employ, our countrymen in key sectors.

High-impact programs were expanded. For instance, our flagship poverty reduction program, the Conditional Cash Transfer program, now covers 4.1 million households and homeless families—3.3 million more than its scope back when we entered office. This program provides cash grants to the poorest of our countrymen, the primary condition being that they keep their children in school. Another example: For many of our people, being afflicted with a catastrophic illness used to mean financial devastation. Those living barely above the poverty line, in addressing their ailments, often spend so much that they are later reduced living below the poverty line. Hence: We expanded our national health insurance program service to cover many more of our population. Now, the poorest quintile of our population receives medical treatment for free.

The early results are proving that our strategy is working. Comparing the first quarter of 2012 to the first quarter of 2013, studies show that 2.5 million of our citizens have been lifted above the poverty line. And we continue to exert every effort to ensure that those who have been lifted out of the poverty line, or beyond the poverty line, will be given every opportunity to keep moving further away from the poverty line, so that no single illness or natural disaster can pull them back under.

All this is being done in adherence to our belief that the Filipino people are our most important resource. Government interventions in the most strategic areas creates a virtuous cycle of productivity, confidence, and investment—and we set about doing our jobs with a stronger resolve.

For instance, streamlining the process of setting up shop in the Philippines eliminated opportunities for corruption and redounded to savings in time and energy by various companies, government included. To obtain business permits and licenses, for example, you now need only one form, for a processing time of three days maximum—a vast improvement from the previous more than ten-step application process and a hopeful three month processing time.

The world has taken notice of our efforts. As it turns out, all investors needed to see was a government dedicated to integrity and public service. We do not have to look beyond the area of public-private partnerships, in order to see the transformation that has taken place in industry. All of you know that PPPs are regarded as ideal ventures precisely because all parties do benefit from them: private enterprise can profit by putting their expertise and knowledge and other resources to good use; government is able to complete large-scale projects at a more opportune time for the benefit of the people. Unfortunately, for the past three administrations, the scales were rather unbalanced: every incentive was seemingly put on the table just to be able to interest and attract investors—from commercial developmental rights, to subsidies.  Not to mention the fact that only six solicited projects were awarded in the 18 years before we entered office in 2010.

Contrast this to what our administration has achieved: from December 2011 to September of this year, we have been able to award and sign off on eight solicited Public-Private Partnership projects, for a total value of 62.6 billion pesos or around 1.3 billion dollars. Under our administration, we get the infrastructure we need quicker than if we remained reliant on our budget process. On top of that, investors can see a clear potential for profitability, so much so that they provide incentives for the government in the form of premiums. The state is thus afforded the best possible bid because of a level playing field, which engenders fair competition amongst interested parties.

It has indeed been a very productive four years for my administration. Average annual GDP growth rate since 2010 stands at 6.3 percent, compared to 4.3 percent from 2006 to 2009. Our GDP growth for the second quarter of this year stands at 6.4 percent, and we are well on our way to achieving our target of at least 6.5 to potentially 7.5 GDP growth for the entire year. From the mere promise of reform that we gave businessmen back in 2010, today, the results of our good governance agenda have allowed us to come so far, as we stand in front of so many potential partners.

Today, I am confident in telling you: take a look at what we have to offer. Listen to my colleagues—from the Executive Director of our PPP Center, to the Secretaries of the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Transportation and Communications. There is indeed a wealth of opportunity in the Philippines, and we hope to forge new partnerships or even broaden the existing ones in the near future—partnerships where all parties involved will benefit, and will contribute to the rise of Asia’s next tiger.

Thank you for paying attention and good day.

[ For more on the President’s European trip in September 2014, click here. ]