Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the 68th commencement ceremony of Manuel L. Quezon University

[Declared at the Sofitel Plaza, Pasay City, on April 20, 2016]

Let me clarify at the beginning of my speech that I have been friends with your Chairman for a long time, we are approaching three decades of friendship. [Applause] But what we need to remember there is that we are not from the same generation. [Laughter] He already has a senior citizen card, while I still have a long way to go.

And because of this occasion, I am grateful, Linda Baldoz who is truly a very capable Secretary of Labor and Employment. [Applause] I first discovered, you are an alumnus, [applause] the second thing I discovered, after almost 6 years of working with her, she is a lawyer. [Laughter] I only learned that now, but Linda Baldoz is truly excellent because currently, we have only witnessed, only 17 strikes occurred in six years throughout the country due to the diligence, perseverance, and skill of Linda Baldoz. [Applause]

He really does a lot of marathon sessions to resolve any issues. That means, until the issues are resolved and both parties have reached an agreement, he doesn't give up. Their—conciliation meetings, I think they're called—often end at 5 o'clock in the morning. And after that, he reports to me. So sometimes, one of the benefits included is not getting to sleep. [Laughter]

Every time I attend graduation ceremonies, I see the faces of the graduates, and it seems like a question envelops them. Primarily, or many questions, the main question is, “How long will this man speak? [Laughter] We have a feast that might get cold.” And I even told the chairman, “Chairman, I don’t think I’ve seen a feast here, which means we each have our own snacks after this.” [Laughter]

But more importantly, of course, in graduation, it’s like we’re going through—a review of what we’ve been through—and we’re also thinking about the future. Perhaps I should start with what President Manuel L. Quezon reminded us of. I’ll come back to that later.

When I was still a student, when I graduated from grade school, one year after Martial Law was declared, my father was imprisoned and couldn’t attend my graduation. When I graduated from high school, Martial Law was still in effect, my father was still imprisoned, and he still couldn’t come, join us at the graduation ceremony. When my college graduation came, Martial Law was still in effect, and during that time, my father was allowed to go to America for his heart bypass operation. Now, during that time, Filipinos couldn’t freely travel wherever they wanted; they needed what was called an “exit visa.” We were granted an exit visa. My mother was worried that this exit visa might be revoked, and she told me, “As soon as possible, you need to leave the Philippines.”

About four or five days after our graduation ceremony, I was already sent to the United States, so I wasn't able to join our graduation march either. That was the fate of our generation. And perhaps, it would be good for us to look at the current situation of our Motherland.

First of all, we thank you for the honor you have bestowed upon me as Doctor of Public Administration Honoris Causa. Often, I am given a Doctor of Law, Doctor of Humanities, and Economics. With the granting of the first Doctor of Public Administration, I thought to emphasize, what does Good Governance really mean? Perhaps it would be good for us to go through what we have accomplished in 6 years.

I promised the Filipino people before I stepped down from office: When I step down from office, I want to be able to say that what I leave behind is far better than what we inherited. Through our collective efforts over six years of service, we have built 18,000 kilometers of national roads, 1,000 kilometers of tourism roads, 107,000 lineal meters of bridges.

In education: Before, the budget could only support 8,000 classrooms nationwide. When I assumed office, we discovered that 66,800 classrooms were lacking. 8,000 per year times 6 years: 48,000. Short of the 66,800. I will be stepping down from office with a debt still outstanding. So we decided to complete that lack of classrooms, textbooks, teachers, and chairs. We completed the 66,800 as early as 2013. When we step down from office, we will have completed not 48,000 classrooms, not 66,800 classrooms, but we are heading towards 185,000 classrooms nationwide, including those needed for K to 12, those damaged by typhoons, and 30 to 40 year old buildings being replaced. [Applause]

Regarding health: In the Department of Health, we have increased the budget by 300 percent. Along with this, we strengthened PhilHealth. Before, PhilHealth claimed: 47 million Filipinos were its members. Now, 93 percent of Filipinos are covered by PhilHealth.

Regarding the Pantawid Pamilya program: We started with 780,000 households in 2010. This year, we will complete the last 200,000 households, reaching a total of 4.6 million households that we are currently caring for and helping.

We also expanded the program in 2014 to help not only grade school students, but also high school students. And the first batch who graduated in 2015, two of the speakers among the more than 300,000 who were helped by Pantawid Pamilya to finish high school, were accepted into UP College of Engineering, a quota course. This means that if we hadn't helped them, they probably wouldn't have even finished high school. In about four years, the nation will be able to benefit from their talents and maximize their opportunities.

Let me also tell you about a child named Nurashia. Nurashia is from Lanao del Sur. Her father's job is to plant cassava. She said in her account that what they eat every day is: cassava, for breakfast and dinner. Lunch wasn't mentioned. She said, “The key to our progress is if I can graduate so I can help my parents who are struggling to earn a living.” She is now in Grade 10 and it was really the most beautiful scene I saw there, this Nurashia is a consistent honor student. When the video was shown to her, three medals, when she got home she was with dozens of medals she had received. And let's give her maybe four to six more years because she is in Grade 10, and we can really say that Nurashia will also maximize her opportunity.

You know, regarding TESDA: We have already graduated more than 9 million course graduates. The good news about TESDA is that the placement rate of TESDA used to be 28 percent. That meant that six months after graduation, they already had a job. Currently, 72 percent of our course graduates have a job after or before the sixth month of completing their course. Joel Villanueva often tells me that when I step down from office, I might want to go to TESDA, because a TESDA graduate’s salary is far better than the President of the Republic of the Philippines’ salary.

You might think I'm joking. A mechanic deployed to Australia earns P250,000 a month. Mr. President, my current salary—it will increase when I step down from office—is P120,000 per month. So there's a difference of P130,000. The difference is even bigger. Even the sari-sari stores helped by the Coke TESDA STAR program are having their operations professionalized. One person we spoke to—and there are many stories like this—had a daily income of P800, now they have a daily income of P4,000, P5,000. P4,000 times 30 days, we're even. P5,000 times 30 days, they're ahead again. So Joel Villanueva might be right, I chose the wrong job if we're just talking about salary.

You know, our strategy and really our ambition from the very beginning: If you're going to help, go all out with the help. That's our ambition from the very beginning. That means, you built a classroom, the child is malnourished, gets sick, can't finish school. Maybe the child, with parents, can't even afford—because education is free for grade school and high school. The mother, the father can't even give them fare to get to school. That is the concept of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program.

When we get a child to finish high school, their income increases by 40 percent compared to if they only finished grade school. How do we maximize that? So we help, we built a school. The school, they can't attend because they lack funds, we helped them with Pantawid Pamilya. Health programs are also included to take care of their health. Then, we have TESDA, CHED, DepEd, and DOLE, so that when they graduate, right from the start, we want to change the situation.

One of the things we encountered was people studying physical and occupational therapy because those were hot courses with many job opportunities. They graduated, completed a four-year course, and took the board exam. They finished all of that. But the jobs they expected when they were freshmen were no longer available when they passed the board. They shifted to nursing because there was a need for many nurses. They repeated the process: four years of study, another year for the board exam. After five years, the jobs in nursing were also gone.

We tried to reverse this and we seem to be succeeding. We instructed DOLE, CHED, DepEd, and TESDA to talk to each other, and also to the industry: What kind of workers will they need two years from now, four years from now, six years from now? The result of that is our lowest unemployment rate. The result is also the placement rate I mentioned earlier, which is now at 72 percent in general, and in other sectors assisted by TESDA, 96 percent, especially in the semi-conductor industry.

Now, the question: Can we provide that opportunity to everyone? I think we can. If you graduate from TESDA training, for the BPO—the call centers and others in the business process outsourcing industry—after you finish, the minimum salary in the BPO sector, even in your first year of work, will already cover the government's expenses for your education. Those who work there won't work for just one year. Perhaps 30 years is a conservative estimate. In other words, for 30 years, they pay the correct taxes and help at least 30 of our fellow citizens receive the same opportunity. What did we do? We started the process of giving them the opportunity to improve their situation, and they will become a bridge to improve the situation of others.

As President Quezon said, “I believe that education is the right of all citizens, an educated people. An educated people is needed to ensure the upliftment of the masses and the creation of wealth for all.” As you know, my parents’ journey started with People Power. Our job: Empower the people.

And perhaps to be very clear: I just came from Bacolod recently—we’ve been to Bacolod quite often. And Bacolod, after Bacolod City, is a typical province, right? I suppose you’ve all been to the province, with a municipality, a plaza, maybe a few shops around the plaza, a very quiet place.

I was surprised when I went to Bacolod just two days ago, that from their airport, going to the airport—their airport is in Silay, you pass through Talisay going to Bacolod City. The road, first of all, I didn’t recognize it because it’s new. It’s like ours now, it could already be an expressway. Secondly, a lot of the original natural scenery has changed. At the end of our trip, we were taken to Villa Angela—the Bacolod East district and around the city hall.

First of all, there’s something that happened here like on Roxas Boulevard with restaurants, etcetera. I was taken now to a place called “Marketplace.” It’s a new place, less than a year old. The Marketplace, it’s like you went to Metrowalk, it’s like you went to Bonifacio Global City. And what’s important here, all the places we passed through, on both sides there are malls, on both sides there are vacant lots, they are being developed.

I want to emphasize the story of Talisay. In Talisay, it’s a typical Bacolod—sugarcane plantations, roads for trucks, one lane on each side. Now, when we opened the road from the airport in Silay to Bacolod City, there was suddenly an opportunity to really develop Talisay among others. In Talisay, we now have two big developers building there, Megaworld and Ayala. What they’ve built so far is a fence. Because they are interested, the price of land around it has increased. Consequently, the real property tax collection of the local government of Talisay has increased.

Result: With the added funds, their so-called “Special Education Fund” increased. With which they bought IT equipment, bought a bus, were able to build additional buildings, had books and school supplies for their students, additional travel allowance for their teachers going to remote barangays, and even a feeding program from kindergarten to grade 3. This, according to Bro. Armin, is the highest [cohort] due to malnutrition causing students to drop out of school.

Let me also mention: Previously, our out-of-school youth in 2008 was 2.9 million. Now, it’s 1.2 million in 2013. Even the number of out-of-school youth, whether as a percentage of the general population, not just in percentage, but also in actual number, has significantly decreased: 1.7 million, just the number from 2008 and the number from 2013. I believe this is proof that we are succeeding in bringing the youth back to school, and giving them the ability to use when entering the job market.

Perhaps what I really want to emphasize here: All public servants, they say, “I want to change the situation and form of our society.” In this election, many are saying, I saw an ad of one candidate the other day, “I will create millions of jobs every year.” Of course, I am trying to do that now, while he is just promising. My question is: How will he do that? Is there anything else we can do to really speed up the process?

Let me repeat: We didn't just ask businessmen, “Set up a business.” We did that. Not only that, we fixed the education system so that our educational system is appropriate to the real potential of our economy and the opportunity for our countrymen to have jobs. We took care of health so that they can really maximize the opportunity to study, and complete a proper course. We are expanding assistance not just to grade school, we are moving towards high school. In other words, we didn't discuss just one thing. We tried to discuss all the problems at the same time where we can change the situation. How can we empower our countrymen?

Let me revisit the example of Talisay. What changed there? The government built a road in the former sugarcane area. Because there was a road, developers saw the potential to enter, saying, “This looks like it can be developed.”

They had confidence in the government that they would not be made to struggle to enter their businesses. This means there was assistance, and the competition was fair. Improve the appeal to the market to see who will succeed. It wasn’t about connections to those in power. Because of this, they had the confidence to invest heavily, for the long term—not immediately, not in one or two months will they recover their capital. But they are betting that the future of the Philippines will continue to improve and they are ready to participate.

Let me repeat: One road is equivalent to empowering the local government of Talisay, further improving their educational system, resulting in students who are far more capable and with more opportunities available to them.

Now, I believe you have heard a lot about what we have achieved. Before, you know, we were called “The Sick Man of Asia.” Now, “Asia’s Rising Tiger,” “Asia’s Bright Spot.” Before, in the competitiveness or global competitiveness index of the World Economic Forum in 2010, we were in 85th place. Now, we are the 47th most competitive. We have moved up 38 places.

Let's talk about unemployment: For the past decade, we have the lowest unemployment rate. The lowest annual average hunger rate in 11 years. I think we can proudly claim the achievements of Linda Baldoz—the fewest labor unrest issues. The highest GDP growth: an average of 6.2 percent, and we are being compared to the time of Martial Law in the 70s.

There's a difference: Back then, if you were close to the dictator, you would be given a sovereign guarantee. You would establish your business, and if you had debts, the country would guarantee them. That's where the country's debt began, from what I remember, 4 billion, and became the 192 billion left to us by Mr. Marcos.

You know, the achievements we've made here, even with electricity in remote areas, we said no one would be left behind. We have electrified over 32,600 sitios across the country. And perhaps, 7.7 million Filipinos have risen above the poverty line.

This is the summary: So much is happening now. I know that in the courses you offer, there is also an accountancy program. Back then—of course, especially the chairman who is older than me—he remembers the time when there were so many accountancy graduates with no jobs. Now, we are also running short of accountants, especially in BPO operations. They are lowering their criteria to get the employees they need. I just came from Negros Occidental, and I spoke with Governor Marañon. His contractors are going to him. They are telling him, “We are short of carpenters, plumbers, electricians. These projects of ours will be delayed.” You will be surprised by the large companies whose turnover of condominium units is being delayed. It's the same problem. They are competing for employees, there are not enough employees.

When you read the newspaper on Sunday, look at the classified ads. Please notice the urgent and immediate hiring. You might also want to look back at old newspapers. Before 2010, look at what jobs they were hiring for then, and what they are hiring for now. I think you will see that they are looking for, truly not low-level jobs, but high-level ones.

Let me repeat: Perhaps, I can go around the entire Philippines. Until now, thank you to those who sent warm greetings to us earlier there in the back, your relatives who are really very proud of your achievement. The future especially for those who are graduating, is far greater than the future we encountered.

When we reached the next Christmas, we were very happy, “Wow, we made it past another year.” We couldn't believe we would reach 30 years. When there is an authoritarian regime or dictatorship—normally, when you look at world history, bloody revolution is the way to regain freedom.

For us, we were lucky, we had EDSA. Our revolution was not bloody. And after that, we who came before you—perhaps a vow is that we must, first, leave something better than what we found. But perhaps it is also important there, that all the horrors that we went through, if the next generation goes through them again, it would be a great failure on our part, a mistake. It is necessary that what we went through is not repeated, and while there is life, there are problems, your problems are far smaller than the problems we faced before. And that is what we worked on.

Perhaps this is my last message to you: We were able to do all of this, things that were once impossible. So many things have been tried for poverty alleviation. I think that what we are enjoying now is just a taste of what’s to come. What we are studying because of the 4Ps, the scholarships we increased for high school and college, of course, they are still graduating. Those who trained with TESDA, some of them have truly become entrepreneurs, not just employees.

There was one woman, let me tell you her story too—these are the people who inspire me. She finished an accountancy program and was offered a job as a cashier in the Middle East. When she arrived there, she was given a contract substitution. With the contract substitution, she wasn't made a cashier, she was made a domestic helper, and she was even maltreated. She escaped, was helped by our embassy, and returned to the Philippines.

Her story to us was: When she returned, she didn't know what she should do, her spirit was truly broken. Perhaps, to be able to go there, she incurred debt. She didn't finish her contract, she didn't receive the salary she expected to pay off that debt. She came back here, without a job, not knowing how to fix her life. But you know what? She was told upon her return that there were various training and scholarship programs offered for our Overseas Filipino Workers. She entered a wellness massage and what is called hilot therapy course. She took two courses. She got a job at a spa.

She became a good employee, became an operations manager, and learned the business. She left there, established her own spa, and now has four branches of her spa in Pangasinan. She even franchised her spa business, with three located in Tarlac. From being down and deeply depressed, she is now an inspirational speaker for others in the same situation, sharing what they should do next.

Let me reiterate, how did we get here? In 2010, I approached you, I asked for your support, and the overwhelming majority of our countrymen believed in our message, helped while I was in office, and this is what we have achieved.

And let me repeat to you: There is no place in the Philippines that I cannot return to without holding my head high, because we have truly achieved so much. Now, I will go back to this, we have a saying: To see where you are going, look at where you came from. Something happened for almost ten years that I followed. Everything we have done now could have been done by my predecessor. If he had done it, where would the Philippines be now? But it wasn't done. Now, the elections are coming, May 9th, we will decide again. It is important—and this is my earnest request to you.

Perhaps, let me give an example, some of you might start a business. Let's say, we'll put up a restaurant. Of course, the key to a restaurant's success is delicious food. We hire a cook, then suddenly someone arrives, applies. The person graduated as a mechanic but is a good storyteller, speaks well, might be a good dancer, a good singer, a good comedian. We were happy with him, we hired him as our cook, we hired the mechanic as a cook. If your restaurant fails—because a mechanic shouldn't be a good cook—if it fails, you won't blame the cook. You will blame yourself for hiring the mechanic to be a cook. That's probably wrong.

Let's examine. Let's examine who has the qualifications. And excuse me, let me take advantage of the opportunity. As you know, I am campaigning for Mar and Leni. Perhaps, let me just mention a little of Mar's qualifications. Candidates promise jobs, millions every year. Mar established the BPO. The BPO industry—and he didn't benefit personally from it—this year, we will reach 1.3 million direct employees. This employee will be added to our economy and their operations to our economy, this year, $25 billion. They say that being in the BPO is like being an OFW without leaving the Philippines.

There's more to that. Three to four employees supporting the BPO industry, driving vehicles, working in convenience stores, homeowners, etcetera. Three to four are indirect employees in the BPO. 1.3 times 3, times 4: that is the employee who started from what Mar thought of, to look for opportunities for Filipinos.

Others say it will suppress crime. Mar also thought of Lambat-Bitag, Oplan Sita, One Time Big Time operations of the PNP. Let me mention One Time Big Time: When those with warrants are arrested, one by one, it helps others with warrants. “You better hide, there’s a warning.” One Time Big Time, in every province, these warrants of arrest are served all at once. There’s no time for criminals to hide. Result: Many of the most wanted have been arrested. Hundreds of people have been arrested, and because the mastermind is gone, there’s no instigator, the crime rate goes down. That’s a fact.

As for Leni, is she qualified? First of all, she is a lawyer who first worked at PAO, then in non-governmental organizations. Focused on farmers, fisherfolk, and others on the margins of society. She worked at that NGO for 15 years. She could have worked in big companies, in their corporate staff, but she chose to believe that her life had meaning here. That’s her qualification.

Let's think about the candidates. Qualified—that’s the answer. So-and-so, I should vote for him as President because he is qualified, fill in the blanks. If we can’t fill in the blanks, we should probably think a little bit. I repeat: President, in our government system, will lead us, it’s important that we have the right leader to take us to the right place.

Let me repeat: I extend my deepest gratitude to you for the honor I am receiving. I accept this, not for myself, but for everyone who has joined us in traversing the Straight Path, which is truly changing our society. If I am not speaking correctly, you yourselves will be the judge on May 9th. But if I am speaking the truth, it is in your hands to continue our transformation of the Philippines, not just a “Rising Star,” but hopefully a “Risen Star.” Not a “Rising Tiger,” but truly “The Tiger Incarnate.” It is in our hands, and that is what our parents have taught us from the very beginning – that power, what is it? Rely on the people, and you will truly not fail.

Perhaps in closing, you know it is a great honor to have the opportunity to lead a great race, and in all the challenges I faced here for almost six years, I had peace of mind knowing that I could rely on you, that you would not abandon me, so we can overcome any problem we face.

Good day. Thank you all very much.