Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III upon his arrival from a visit to France, Italy, and the Vatican.

It is truly wonderful to return to our country, especially when we bring with us good news.

We first went to Paris, France, to attend the 21st Conference of Parties on climate change. There, we presented the Philippines’ position: It is necessary to reach a broad and just solution to the issue of climate change. In the Climate Vulnerable Forum, we led a group of countries most affected by climate change. The membership of the CVF is indeed growing: From the original 20 countries, 23 more have been added. With this unity, our voice becomes stronger, and we are better able to advance the rights of countries most damaged by disasters, even if our contribution to the world’s carbon emissions is very small.

The good result is: France and Germany now support the position of not allowing the global temperature rise to exceed 1.5 degrees Celsius. Along with this is our call for assistance to countries like ours in terms of climate financing and technology, so that we can do more to contribute to efforts related to climate change. As more large and industrialized countries support our position, gatherings like COP 21 become more effective and meaningful.

We also had a series of meetings with leaders of major businesses in France. Sanofi Pasteur, a well-known pharmaceutical company, wants to release a vaccine for four strains of dengue in the Philippines at the most appropriate cost and as quickly as possible. We also gathered interest from Airbus, which can help further develop our own aerospace industry.

CRH France, which we also met with, has invested approximately 60 billion pesos in Lafarge-Holcim in the Philippines. According to their leader, they plan to invest another 2.3 billion pesos in us, along with designating the Philippines as their investment hub for ASEAN. We also spoke with Jacobi Carbons, which opened its manufacturing facility in Cagayan De Oro last September, worth approximately 517 million pesos. They told us: This is their largest plant in the world. Jacobi also plans to expand its operations to process coconut shells as an ingredient in activated carbon filters. This will create approximately 2,850 direct and indirect jobs for our countrymen. The main beneficiaries of this will be our local coconut farmers, who will help supply coconut shells to the company.

After the meetings, we also visited the facility of Usine IO, one of the companies in the field of innovation in manufacturing and helping inventors concretize their ideas. While we were there, they showed us what is called a smart toothbrush, which sends information to an app on a smartphone about whether you brushed correctly. This hi-tech toothbrush was designed in France, but made here in the Philippines by Filipinos.

From France, we went to Italy: there, we met with their President and Prime Minister, who both expressed support for our peace process in Mindanao, and even for our position on resolving the issue in the West Philippine Sea/South China Sea. They agreed with our efforts to find a peaceful and just solution to this issue.

During our conversation, we also felt their admiration for the contributions of our countrymen in various sectors in Italy. This prompted them to give preferential status to our countrymen who choose to work in their country. The Philippines and Italy have already signed a labor agreement to implement this. Of course, while there, we also made sure to connect with our countrymen. We told them about the transformation we are experiencing now, and emphasized the need to protect it so that we do not return to our dark past.

On the last day of this trip, we were interviewed by the Holy Father at the Vatican City. We offered a national prayer for peace, justice, and broad development. I will also share this: there is a unique lightness of feeling that comes with facing Pope Francis. He is indeed the leader of the Catholic Church, but he is truly very humble. He told us and the members of our delegation: please pray for me. My response to him was: Filipinos love him very much, and even our countrymen who are not Catholic also pray for him.

We also discussed the peace process with the Cardinal Secretary of State, and the concrete ways to alleviate poverty in our country. Although the Holy Father just visited last January, we conveyed the invitation for him to return and once again witness the depth of Filipino faith. As the final activity in the Vatican, we inaugurated an image of Our Lady of Peñafrancia. Only a few countries have their national image of the Virgin Mary in the Vatican Gardens, so it is a great honor that we were given the opportunity to share with every Catholic in the world the image that gives strength, hope, and inspiration to our people.

Bosses, we have really come a long way on the Straight Path. You probably still remember: Just recently, we didn't even dream of being able to buy modern and caliber aircraft that could be used by our Air Force. Immediately after this speech, I will personally attend the turnover and blessing ceremony for our first two FA-50 fighter jets that landed just last week. The remaining ten to complete their squadron will be completed by 2017.

The Philippines is truly different now, and the world's view of us is different. Truly: You made the change, and you will continue it. What I can say is: It is wonderful to be President of a race that continues to show off, continues to believe, and continues to receive admiration throughout the world.

Thank you very much, and good afternoon to all of you.