Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the ceremonial lighting of 1,199 sitios in Central Luzon, under the Sitio Electrification Program.

Tomorrow, we will celebrate the anniversary of EDSA. Thirty years have passed since EDSA. Whatever I am today, I was shaped by all that we went through in our lives. And one of the biggest chapters in our lives was the declaration of martial law in our country, which happened in 1972 [but 1973 is what I want to refer to]. I was thirteen years old then, and the world of our family was truly turned upside down.

Even while my father was in prison, he continued to reveal the truth about the brutality of Martial Law. It was only one year into Martial Law then. He wrote an article published in the Bangkok Post that was critical of the Martial Law implemented by Mr. Marcos. Because of this article, the forces of the dictatorship were angered. He was secretly arrested in Fort Bonifacio, along with the late Senator Jose “Pepe” Diokno. They were handcuffed, blindfolded, had guns pointed at their sides, and were taken on separate helicopters. They were brought to Fort Magsaysay, here in Nueva Ecija.

We had no news about our father's condition at that time. We were forbidden to visit. We didn't know if our father was alive or dead. There were even those who took advantage and gave false information about where my father was during those times. Until one day, army trucks arrived, carrying all his belongings, returning them to us, even his toothbrush. My mother asked, “Why are all the belongings, even the toothbrush, being returned?” And the simple answer from the one who delivered it was that there was no longer any need for these items. Imagine putting yourselves in my situation, you are thirteen years old. A toothbrush is being returned; when would you no longer need a toothbrush? That was all the worry we had.

At the end of it all, we appealed to the Supreme Court, and we were allowed to visit. We weren't told where we were going. From the headquarters of the Philippine Army in Fort Bonifacio, we were taken to a remote place that we couldn't pinpoint. And here in this place, it was dark. There was a camp surrounded by barbed wire and bamboo mats. We felt during that time that we were brought to a concentration camp. The appearance of those who were there was strange, though we weren't sure if they were soldiers in the camp, because during that time, crew cuts were really popular. But here in this camp, you would think they looked like they were working on the Beatle’s because of their long hair and everyone was in civilian clothes.

When we entered the camp, the family of Senator Diokno was the first to be allowed to see their father. They were from Batangas, and we all know how strong the people of Batangas are and we really admire the courage of the Dioknos. But our worries increased when we saw that almost everyone was crying after visiting their father. I even asked myself: What did they see that would make them cry? How could tears fall from such courageous people?

Somehow, our fear disappeared when we were finally allowed to see my father. But I was surprised and his appearance was very different. He faced us, without glasses, holding his pants up. We all know his photos before martial law, he was really very healthy. But it was here that we first saw him, because after a long time of not being allowed to visit, he needed to hold up his pants because otherwise, they would fall. He had really lost that much weight. Even his wedding ring was taken, his watch, his glasses. The only things left on him before we faced him were his underwear, two t-shirts, two pairs of briefs. My father, it was very important for him to always wear glasses because he was near-sighted. If you remove his glasses, he would get dizzy in just a moment. If you remove his watch, he would lose his sense of time. His cell was painted white: white floor, white walls, white partitions; and his cell was really very hot.

How do I know that? Because I was there, almost in front of the door of the building where we were taken to see him, the building where they were imprisoned. I leaned against the wall, and even though it was already night, the wall next to the door leading out of their cell was still very hot.

My father said that for a long time, he had been praying to see our family, even just once. He prayed to our Virgin Mary, and that was his only request, just to see us once. He entrusted me at that time to take care of my mother and siblings. My youngest sibling, Kris, was only two years old at that time. He probably didn't understand what was happening to us at that moment, but I saw him lower his head, carried by our mother, leaning his shoulder on our mother, he felt how heavy and sad our ordeal was.

Senator Diokno and my father were held in separate cells. Inside the cramped and hot room, they knew they were both alive when one sang “Lupang Hinirang,” and the other responded with the song “Ang Bayan Ko.”

That was how cruel it was to my father and Senator Diokno, and that was just the beginning of their Calvary, they who became the voices of the opposition against Martial Law. In total, my father was imprisoned for seven years and seven months. And when he chose to return to our country, after being exiled in Boston, he was assassinated.

That is just one memory of the abuses of Martial Law. There are many more stories of millions of Filipinos who experienced the violence of that time. The government that was given a mandate to care for and serve the people was the one who oppressed the nation. As his two terms allowed by our Constitution were coming to an end, Mr. Marcos still found a way to remain in power.

If you think about it, that was the same darkness we went through under the leadership of our predecessor, where a decade was lost to our nation. An example of the twisted style of his governance is making us believe that all barangays throughout the country already had electricity. But when we investigated, it turned out that when they lit up the barangay hall, they would list the entire barangay as well, including everyone. How audacious of them to boast about this, right?

Truly, under our administration, we will no longer allow the mistakes of the past to be repeated. We are restoring a government that truly cares for and nurtures our Bosses. On the Straight Path, we are really bringing light to our country.

To address the problem inherited from our predecessor, we conducted an inventory to determine how many sitios still lacked electricity. From this, we learned that 32,441 sitios still needed to be lit up throughout the country. What is even more disheartening is that it would cost almost P1 million to connect each sitio to the grid. Let's multiply that: 32,441 times P1 million, that amounts to P32.4 billion. Where would we get that huge amount? If you recall, what was left to us was only seven percent of the budget in 2010.

That is why we are so impressed with the Department of Energy and the National Electrification Administration when they reported to us: The previous estimate of almost P1 million per sitio, due to honest and proper processes, has been reduced to just over P600,000. [Applause] We saved almost P400,000 per sitio there. This proves that on the Straight Path, instead of pocketing the funds, it goes directly to programs that deliver benefits to our Bosses.

Perhaps we should explain how we managed to save that much. In the past, even connecting to the grid or having electricity was subject to politics. It was said that if you won in a sitio, especially the one farthest from the town center, it would be prioritized. If the politician lost in that sitio near the town center, they would only get electricity later.

Now, all areas, whether they win or lose, that is no longer the basis. Whoever has the need, their electricity should be addressed. [Applause] Now, 31,862 sitios or 98.2 percent of our total target have been energized. They say that by March 2016, we will also finish lighting up all those identified in the 2011 inventory. Aside from that, for remote areas where it is not practical to connect to the grid, we have promoted the use of solar and other modern technologies. Here in Central Luzon, 100 percent of the sitios, or all 1,199 sitios, are now energized. [Applause] We thank the agencies behind this success, led by the Department of Energy, together with the National Electrification Administration, electric cooperatives, and our local governments. Of course, we would not have reached this point without the cooperation of our Bosses, the Novo Ecijanos. To all of you: Thank you very much. [Applause]

This Sitio Electrification Program is just part of our broader strategy to brighten the future of our Bosses. Here in Nueva Ecija, which is the “Rice Bowl of the Philippines”, the government is focused on developing your agriculture. We have improved the roads and introduced new farming technologies that were reported to us earlier to ensure the high quality of your harvest.

During the time of Marcos, he promised what was called “Masagana 99”. Even Governor Umali will admit, I know he heard about it during that time because we were young then. Here, there were 99 sacks containing 50 kilos each of rice. That is equivalent to 4.95 metric tons per hectare. With us, through our cooperation, your average here in Nueva Ecija is now 5.12 metric tons per hectare. Mr. Marcos promised, we have delivered, and with your great help. Again: Thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

With this, we ensure that there is sufficient infrastructure to support your province. From 2005 to 2010, the funds allocated for public works in Nueva Ecija reached P5.68 billion. Under our administration, this increased almost threefold, where we allocated P16.17 billion from 2011 to 2016. To quickly deliver your harvest to the market, we constructed and repaired 112 farm-to-market roads, and there are 16 more currently being built. We also allocated P374 million for production and post-harvest machinery and equipment, to increase the production and income of our farmers.

One of our projects here is the Central Luzon Link Expressway Phase 1. It will start at SCTEx, flow through Tarlac, traverse Zaragoza, Aliaga, and end in Cabanatuan here in Nueva Ecija. Once completed, this will speed up travel from Tarlac to Cabanatuan City, benefiting 11,200 motorists per day. And naturally, it will also improve access to Region II. [Applause] Construction will begin next month. In addition to this, we are developing an alternative road to Region II. The route it will take is Aurora-Quirino-Nueva Ecija. With this alternative route, it will no longer be necessary to pass through Dalton Pass, which, as we know, has a high possibility of landslides or being hit by an earthquake. Several sections of its alignment in the north and south have long been completed. We continue to study its tunnel section to ensure the stability of the alternative road.

We also know that frequent flooding, which damages many infrastructure and livelihoods, is a problem in your province. Before, we did not have a definite and reliable system to keep our citizens safe from danger, and to avoid or reduce the damage caused by disasters. That is why we launched Project NOAH, so that our LGUs can fully prepare for the arrival of heavy rains. Using local technology and modern equipment, we have improved our rainfall and flood forecasting and warning system. Now, we can issue warnings to our communities four hours before rainfall. Here in Nueva Ecija, the enhanced landslide susceptibility map using Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) was completed in September 2014. Using these maps, we can identify the areas most prone to flooding whenever heavy rains fall. With its help, we can also immediately evacuate and provide assistance to those in need in affected areas.

In addition to the support given by our government to Nueva Ecija is the expansion of our social services. If before, only 11,430 households here were beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya, now, 83,953 households are covered by it. [Applause] They are among the more than 4.4 million households being helped by Pantawid Pamilya in the country. In PhilHealth, 1.6 million individuals are now covered by the program. They are among the 92.4 million Filipinos who are now benefiting from the benefits of PhilHealth.

These achievements in Nueva Ecija and throughout the country are just some proof of what we have accomplished in the past five years and eight months. With all of this, is there anyone with sound mind who would say that we should stop pursuing the Straight Path?

In May, our Bosses will once again face a crossroads. We will choose again those who will lead our country. If you think this reform we are doing is right, will we deviate from our direction? Will we allow all the changes we are enjoying to be wasted? Who else can we entrust our future to, if not those we know have integrity, competence, and a clear platform of governance; those who have proven themselves in public service, and prioritize the country before self? We are now on the path with no drama and working for the benefit of our Bosses. If we want to continue what we have started, we are with those who will undoubtedly lead us to even greater change. And in my opinion, there are no others but Mar Roxas and Leni Robredo. [Applause]

As we promised, on the Straight Path, no one will be left behind. We are lighting up every sitio, no matter how remote, so that students no longer have to suffer studying in the dark. The infrastructure that our countrymen have long awaited, we are building and continuing to build. The service that was once used only for politics, now, is helping many Filipinos onto the path of progress.

We have come so far; and this would not have been possible if we had not trusted and worked together. In our unity, we can achieve much more, and we are sure to reach even greater victories.

In closing, as you know, we in Tarlac have often received care and sympathy from the people of Nueva Ecija. When our governor didn't want to [allow the quarrying of] large stones when our road was being built, Nueva Ecija helped to build our roads during the time I was a congressman. During the turmoil in Luisita, the head of the Regional Peace and Order Council, as I recall, was your former governor, who, instead of hiding, faced the situation and tried to give us peace and stability.

Here in Talavera, if I'm not mistaken, in 2010, when we were campaigning, an older woman told me something. She said, “You will face heavy opposition. Be careful.” I lived by that. I know that what I entered into is truly dangerous. I think when I step down from office, that’s when the people we call “[Disturb the rice bowl]” will come out. We stopped the corrupt from doing heinous acts, they will seek revenge. That’s okay with me as long as in the end, I can say that I will leave you in a much better state than when I found it. With your help, we can truly continue that change.

Good afternoon. Thank you very much.