Remarks of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines during the unveiling and blessing of the mosaic image of Our Lady of Peñafrancia

It is an honor to be here in the Vatican Gardens today. For centuries, this has been a place of refuge for Catholics, and standing within it now, I am not surprised that it has brought serenity and guidance to so many members of the Church. Seeing the various titles of the Blessed Virgin reminds me of how she has become a tangible sign of unity and of universality. Thus, I am thankful that, today, the very beautiful mosaic image of Our Lady of Peñafrancia—who we affectionately call “Ina” which means “mother” in our native tongue—has been unveiled and blessed in this garden. It is a symbol of our nation’s deep bond with the Virgin Mary, who has protected us during many of our darkest moments.

In 1986, when millions of our people came together to peacefully overthrow the dictator, they most prominently gathered under her image. A look at the photographs of the revolution would reveal people clutching rosaries and carrying statues of the Virgin Mary on their shoulders. More recently, there was the comfort that Our Lady of Peñafrancia bestowed on the family of Jesse Robredo—a member of our Cabinet and a dear friend—who passed tragically in an aviation incident. Jesse shared a home with “Ina,” having been born in Naga City. Every year, he took part in the feast of Our Lady of Peñafrancia without fail. And I remember, as we commemorated his life of service in his home, our heads bowed in mourning, it was the cries of “Viva la Virgen!” that raised everyone’s spirits. Indeed, it was through this humility and faith in the name of Mother Mary that we found the greatest comfort, and the strength to carry on.

It is clear that this recognition of the Philippine Marian devotion here in the Vatican is a great blessing for all Filipino Catholics. We are grateful to the Holy See for allowing us to share this devotion with the rest of the Catholic world who embark on pilgrimages to the Vatican, who can now stop and reflect in front of the mosaic image of Our Lady of Peñafrancia. It is also a constant reminder for the Filipinos who find their way onto this Holy Land that, far though they may be from their homes, we are bound together by our roots, and by the faith that we share.

Once more, I thank the Holy See, the members of the Filipino community devoted to Our Lady of Peñafrancia, and all those who have worked to make this possible. I pray that this undertaking give further honor to Our Lady of Peñafrancia, and also serve as lasting proof of the unwavering faith of the Filipino people.

Thank you, and may the image of Mother Mary further inspire us.