Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during his visit to Iloilo.

You know, here in Iloilo, your airport is beautiful. In our place in Tarlac, the airstrip is good. [Laughter] Of course, in Iloilo, there are many Ilongga women. In our place in Tarlac, we have delicious longganisa. [Laughter] I was told by Babes earlier that you have six billion [pesos] in infra [infrastructure]. Was that just one year, Babes? Just one year, huh. We in Tarlac have a billion. You have six billion. So I should start learning to love la paz batchoy because I might not be able to eat tocino anymore and I might not be allowed to return to our home in Tarlac. [Laughter]

But it really feels good to return to your province, together with colleagues who continue to walk the straight and narrow path. I told Governor Art Defensor: Iloilo is really very beautiful now. If we translate that into Ilonggo: There are so many beautiful people here in Iloilo. Is that right? [Applause]

Earlier, it was said that my parents met and I blossomed. They forgot to mention the most important part. I, you might not know, am my parents’ favorite son. Let’s not forget that. [Laughter] There is no doubt about that. No matter how you look at it, I am really the favorite son. Because I have four sisters. [Laughter]

Just a while ago, we visited and inspected some of your new infrastructure. We passed by roads named after my parents; and we are truly grateful for this recognition—to the House and the Senate, to your local government, and to our fellow citizens here in Iloilo. Tomorrow is Independence Day, and I just want to emphasize: The Filipinos we commemorate made great sacrifices for the country. This also reminds us all to contribute, and to give what we can give, so that we do not impose heavy burdens on those who come after us.

A while ago, we also went to Dungon Bridge IV. I asked Babes, “Dungon Bridge number four? Why number four?” Because this bridge is probably one, two, three, four. Ah, one, two, three, four, five! In Tarlac, I remember, I had a bridge there that is still an ambition until now. You, one, two, three, four, five. How many will be completed this year? All will be completed now! Ours, I think, will just start. [Laughter] Sec. Alcala is laughing. How many bridges are there in Quezon, Ka Procy? At Dungon Bridge IV, which is about to be completed this month, and will provide you with a more comfortable journey here. After that, we inspected the Muelle Loney Bridge, which we are targeting to complete this September. But if I know Babes, maybe August is really what he intends. He just made sure, in case it rains, he made it September. If you want July, Babes, that’s okay with us too. No one will complain if it opens earlier. And once it is opened to the public, it will be an alternative route to the Iloilo Ferry Terminal, easing traffic on North Marginal Wharf Road, which currently serves as the only route to your ferry terminal. Likewise, we were presented with upcoming infrastructure projects that will surely further improve the lives of Ilonggos.

That is the Straight Path: We are focusing on the construction and development of roads, bridges, airports, ports, and other important infrastructure. Perhaps the question of others is: What is the value of these infrastructures to the ordinary Filipino?

Just imagine: A student, used to walk kilometers every day just to get to school; we built a road, so his commute was faster and more convenient—isn't that good? A farmer who only relied on rainfall to irrigate his crops; we implemented the necessary irrigation system, so he can farm all year round, and increase his yield—isn't that good too? There is also a farmer who crosses several rivers and mountains, just to deliver his produce to the market, so his goods, fresh from his farm, rot and are wasted, damaged during the journey; that's why we built farm-to-market roads, so his sales are fresh, and his income increases. The vendors are also happy because the customers are happy. Of course, that’s good too, isn’t it? Therefore, the right infrastructure has a good effect on the lives and livelihoods of our countrymen; its benefits are directly related to the progress of our Bosses.

Now, we are already enjoying the positive results of our reform agenda. Benefits that the government seemed to have long denied are now reaching the Filipino people. And let us remember: We are achieving these without raising taxes, except for the so-called Sin Tax; what we focused on is the prudent use of public funds.

Despite this, we sometimes feel saddened by the emergence of those who oppose our initiatives. Recently, I read in the newspaper; there were reportedly protests against our Jalaur River Multipurpose Project here in Iloilo. Let me remind you: This project was envisioned to be built when I was born, that was in the 1960s; we are now in 2015, and finally, there is an opportunity to start and finish it. But I thought: This irrigation project has been planned since the sixties. After about 55 years, someone suddenly decided to question it and complain. I hope that the five and a half decades of waiting by those who will benefit from this project, from farmers, fishermen, and our other countrymen, were used to improve their lives and not made to wait for more than two generations. Perhaps the point is, if you have a valid objection, you should have thought of it 55 years ago. Why only now?

You know, on one hand, I understand that we are in a democracy, and anyone is free to express their opinion. What I don't understand, however, are the people who do nothing but look for the negative in everything positive we do. Someone said: In any society in the world, there are what are called “contrarians.” These are people who, whatever you suggest, they are against it, against that, against that. If I say white, they say: “No, black.” If I say, “Ah yes, black,” they say, “Oh no, it’s actually white.” Whatever we say, they have to be against it. That’s where they find happiness. There’s probably nothing we can say to them except, as you say here: “Oh, I don’t know!”

It would be good if I was the only one being criticized. What’s more painful, sometimes, is that our projects and programs for the benefit of our Bosses get involved. Do they enjoy finding the smallest flaws, while slowing down, if not stopping, the benefits that the people should have been receiving? Do you think we should still listen to them? Or do you think we should just focus on supporting what is right and benefits the majority? I hope that instead of just complaining, they will help us find more solutions. We are ready to listen; but they are the ones who don’t offer any suggestions. As I said, tomorrow is Independence Day, I hope they will also free themselves from their boxed-in thinking.

In 2010, I promised you before stepping down from office that there would be significant changes in the Philippines. I believe we now have ample proof to demonstrate this; and truly, only those who cover their eyes and ears cannot see and hear the changes we are enjoying.

You know our beginnings: I had no intention of running for President of the country. In truth, during that time, I thought I would have the opportunity to get used to being completely orphaned. But as you know, less than 40 days after my mother passed away, I had to make a decision. So while other candidates were perhaps preparing their entire lives, we only had a few months to organize, raise funds, and prepare the campaign.

But what was meant to happen, happened: you chose, and you gave me a huge mandate. This is why I always say that everything we enjoy now, you made happen; it started with you, and the change comes from you. Recently, I was asked abroad: What will happen to the Philippines after your term? Who will continue the good things you have started? My answer was: No one will continue this positive change but the Filipino people themselves. You will ensure that we remain on the side of what is right and just; you will ensure that we never stray again, and that our united nation continues to progress; we, the Filipino people, will write the destiny of the Philippines. My beloved Ilonggos: Let us together bequeath to future generations the progress of our nation that we have long dreamed of.

Thank you very much.