At the University of the Philippines, Diliman 2011 commencement exercises

[ English translation of the speech delivered at the UP Amphitheatre, Diliman, Quezon City on April 17, 2011 ]

My father used to say there is only one university in the Philippines—the University of the Philippines and no other.

He has been saying this since we were children. In fact, here is a story:

My father asked my eldest sister, Ballsy, where she wanted to go for college, and she said: “Dad, I want to follow in your footsteps. I want to go to UP.”

My father answered: “That’s good.” Immediately after my sister left the room, he told my mother: “Send her to Assumption College.” I was still a child then. I was watching cartoons, and I looked at my parents talking and wondered to myself what their dialogue was about.

I suppose I cannot blame my father for having apprehensions. It is only natural for a father to worry about his daughter—UP’s long-standing reputation of being a bastion of free thinkers did not help. UP would not be UP if it did not foster a culture of active scrutiny of authority, and defense of the rights of the Filipino people. UP’s triumphs spring from more than its high quality of education; but also from the freedom of our National Scholars to voice their opinions of society.

How many times did UP expose the dubious decisions of the past administration? If you will remember, it was the UP Law Center in 2005 that investigated the questionable Northrail project contract. Through their help, we were given the opportunity to revisit that said contract.

Apparently, we also share same belief with this institution, that it is unjust to pass off the work of other people as your own: Just because you are on top, it does not mean that you can just take and capitalize on the hard work of other people.

Indeed, no one can argue against UP’s prominence in many fields, therefore, at this point, may I just say it is an honor to receive the title of Doctor of Laws.

It would take hours for me to enumerate your successful alumni one by one, but it is certainly good to be in the company of Supreme Court Justice Meilou Sereno and of new Commission on Audit chairperson Grace Tan, both of whom graduated from your College of Law. It is just as good to be in the company of Heidi Mendoza as well, who is a proud alumna of NCPAG [National College of Public Administration and Governance]. These are people who will help steer us back onto the straight path—to fix what needs to be fixed so that we may reach our shared aspiration: A future where you can work toward achieving your dreams; a society where there is power for every light; where there is water for every faucet; where there is hard-earned money in every wallet—a future we can achieve without putting our principles up for auction.

Today, all of you, along with your summa cum laude, John Gabriel Pelias, are now among those who have been given the opportunity to change this society from within. To John: you have proven that there is no challenge you cannot hurdle. I believe the future promises you more success, especially now that we are making initiatives to change the situation faced by our people.

We have gained much ground, which is why it disheartens me sometimes that the good news fails to reach our people. I hope you do not take it against me if I take this opportunity to reduce the negativity.

Since your university is littered with acacia trees anyway, allow me to begin with some good news on the environment. Truth be told, I recently discovered why, even with the Clean Air Act, our country was seemingly becoming even more polluted in the past years. The Science majors here know this: the pollution in our air is measured by the total suspended particulates. Am I right? The UN Standard is 90 micrograms per cubic meter of air. When we stepped into office, the Philippines weighed in at 166. Why? Well, here is what happened. Each machine in our emissions testing centers can test a total of eighty vehicles per day. But according to the LTO, they were giving 300 to 600 testing certificates each day. In short, hundreds of these certificates were released through under-the-table deals, which is why there are still so many smoke-belching vehicles on our roads.

What did we do about this? With the help of the DENR and the LTO, we cracked down on the testing centers that were involved in these practices, which is why in the most recent reports, our total suspended particulate has gone down to 120 micrograms per cubic meter. The solution is simple, is it not? We may not be able to wait for the trees to grow, because that takes some time, but at least we have eliminated those who were corrupt; and we did not need to summon Captain Planet to do this.

Whenever we see some roadwork on our streets, don’t we all suspect that it is another scheme through which government agencies can pocket public funds? Lucky for us, our DPWH Secretary Babes Singson is another UP graduate. The Filipino people asked him to fix the system. And he did. Babes investigated all the contracts and opened all the anomalous ones for rebidding. The result: 1.3 billion pesos rescued from sure theft, which may even reach 6 or 7 billion pesos by the end of the year. He has reallocated these funds into services from which you, our bosses, can actually benefit.

In terms of education, we have increased the budget for basic education from 175 billion last year, to 207.3 billion pesos this year, because it is in the elementary level where fundamental concepts are introduced to our students.

We have also poured a significant amount of government funds into the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program, because we know that poverty is a serious problem for many of our countrymen. Last year, one million families benefited from this program, but our target for this year is to raise that number to 2.3 million. The good news is, of the 1.3 million families we plan to include in this program for 2011, we have already reached 500,000 of them. We are way ahead of schedule, thanks to the leadership of DSWD Secretary Dinky Soliman, who is another proud alumna of UP.

Let me make it clear that these CCTs are not given in exchange for votes for this politician or that. The conditions are for the families to send their children to school, to have their pregnant mothers checked by medical professionals, and to have their babies vaccinated. Nobody loses out.

I remember this child I met in Baseco who looked as if she was bearing the weight of the world on her shoulders. At 16 years old, she already has two children. How can she manage to feed the kids, or to send them to school, given that she and her husband don’t have jobs?

Who is responsible for this? What pushed them into this situation? How did such heavy responsibilities end up on their shoulders? And the most important question: What can I do about this?

I am resolved to enact into law the principles of Responsible Parenthood .

I am aware there are those who oppose this. But it is my duty as our country’s leader to reach out to all sectors, to talk to them and calmly discuss the issue at hand—even if there are those who have said that I should be excommunicated. We must listen even to those who, as some point out, come close-minded to the discussion. Ultimately, I need to make a stand. I need to follow my conscience, and I need to do what is right.

The University of the Philippines has never been short of integrity. This is why, when I was a senator, I voted for the amendment of the UP Charter, which grants you the authority to retain your earnings, including those from your property in Commonwealth. Whereas before weeds overran this land, now you have expanded the university grounds and have even provided jobs to many Filipinos. I thank Senator Angara, Senator Escudero, and the many graduates of UP who reminded me of my obligation to help this University.

It is a difficult job to enact reforms; the corruptions of the past system run deeper and stronger than the roots of the Sunken Garden’s oldest trees. But who would not be furious if the person tasked to defend the rights of ordinary citizens would rather protect plundered loot? We do not need to elaborate—you know who I mean. Our collective weary, angry sigh is a simple “OMG.”

Is it not simple? We have a mandate to bring justice to all, under a fair and transparent process—there are no camps or political parties before blind justice. For those who feel singled out by our efforts, and who would consider themselves targets: Perhaps they are being paranoid, and perhaps the only thing attacking them is their conscience, finally awakened.

I confess: It is not easy to face you, especially since the Republic  of Diliman upholds a tradition of welcoming government officials with ire and protests. I understand: We have different perspectives, we come from different paths. But I hope we still seek a single destination.

This is how I view the process of democracy: I have an idea that I think is right. Someone else has an idea that he or she thinks is right, which runs contradictory to mine. And my ready encouragement is: come, let us sit, let us talk, for once we reach an agreement, the result of our combined ideas will be a better idea that together we can see realized.

Let us be frank: there are issues that impede the flourishing of our nation, and I don’t take it against those who are frustrated by this fact. But let it be clear to everyone that in this path my administration takes, we take it not for our selves. We have difficult jobs, but we do them with open hearts and minds, We do our jobs without stealing. Our primary concern is to ensure a Philippines almost stripped of the problems we inherited, of these impediments to our country’s enduring progress.

I did not study here, but I have never forgotten my father’s words: UP helped shape his principles, how he thought, and how he found the strength to take a stand. The Filipino people were suffering greatly during those dark times. My father could have led a quiet life in Boston. But he said, and I quote, “I hear my motherland crying.” He did not come home because he wanted power; he came home because he wanted to be part of the solution.

It is still difficult for me to accept that this person, with only the purest intentions, was, like meat struck down on the tarmac and flung into the waiting AVSECOM van. And it will be more difficult to accept this if, despite his sacrifice and the sacrifices of many like him, change for our country will continue to elude us. Every single day since my father’s death, I had this in my mind: If I cannot be part of the solution, then my life is not worth living.

Here we are today, perhaps because of fate, but more likely because of the decisions we have made. And you graduating today have the opportunity to decide what path our nation is to take. We can choose to leave a Philippines with a legacy that can be likened to the UP Ikot jeep—whose circular, unending route on the same tired path prevents its passengers from journeying beyond the familiar stations of suffering. Or we can choose to mend this corroded system our society has inherited; we can decide to break away from this cyclical route of enduring the suffering, so we can move forward, steadily, to progress. I urge everyone: be part of the solution. Walk alongside us, so we can arrive more swiftly to our desired destination.

This is a request to the Iskos and Iskas of UP: while we set out to fulfill our tasks and fix this government, may you embody and fulfill your own obligations as Iskolar ng Bayan . A lot is expected of you. May you be able to give back what our countrymen have invested in you.

The questions posed to you today: once you have acquired the power and the high positions you seek, will you remember the slogans you chanted as you boycotted class? If you could bail out a brod, sis, or org-mate from the trouble he caused, would you? If you are earning tons and tons of money overseas, will you even wish to come back home? Will your hearts remain bastions of integrity, especially in the face of illicit handshakes, or when your company has imposed upon you its quotas?

May you keep in mind that, like us in government, you are here because of the people— for the people . You owe the Filipino the honor to have studied and graduated from the University of the Philippines. One day, you will be tested by whispers and temptation. On that day, may you remember the challenge posed by this elderly Atenean in front of you now. May you continue to carry with pride the name of this noble institution.

To the Iskos and Iskas UP has embraced and nurtured: Congratulations. Your country awaits you.

Thank you and good morning to you all.

Read the speech as delivered