Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of the 2015 Pantawid Pamilya graduates, “Your Graduation, the Filipino’s Triumph”

During my mother’s time, after the EDSA Revolution, one story I will never forget is about the members of her staff, who during that time—during the campaign period—were called volunteers because they didn’t have a salary. They came from the private sector and some of them really expected a significant reduction in their accustomed salary when entering government service. They were greatly surprised because they didn’t immediately receive their salaries upon arriving at Malacañang. How could it be otherwise: the funds of their predecessors had been completely exhausted; so the volunteers who entered were still volunteers even when they were already in the Palace. They thought that their sacrifice would end there; but it turned out that when they arrived at their office—their department—they also had to pay for their own office supplies. As Joker Arroyo said back then, even the bathtub at the Premier Guest House became a filing cabinet due to the lack of equipment when they started working in their offices.

Perhaps, to better understand the situation my mother found herself in, it would be good to compare her to a cook—or chef, as we call them now—who was tasked to cook sinigang. Of course, if you have complete utensils and ingredients, and you have a menu or recipe to follow, you are sure to serve something delicious. In the case of my mother: It was as if she was only given water and a pinch of salt, and was expected to make delicious sinigang. It was truly a difficult task assigned to her. But despite this, her administration worked hard, and one of the important initiatives they pursued was the Free High School Education Program in 1988.

For the first time in our history, free public education has been extended. Our countrymen who could not afford to attend private schools have been given the opportunity to study in high school. The idea behind this initiative is clear; according to my mother, “The mind is the best resource of a country, and if we do our work well, it is potentially infinite.” This is true: If you invest in the education of a Filipino, you can expect him/her to improve himself/herself, his/her family, his/her community, and therefore, the entire nation.

Secondary education is now free, but with that came the clear problem of out-of-school youth. How can it be otherwise: Because they have no fare, because they need to help their parents on the farm, because they are sickly or physically weak; there are young people who cannot go to school. And if they fall behind in grade level, the child will become even more ashamed and choose to skip class. If they don't finish their education, they will likely have difficulty getting a decent job when they grow up; their income will be meager, and they will have to make ends meet for their spouse and children. The result: Instead of rising out of poverty, that person's livelihood will sink even further.

This is where our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program comes in. Through the program, youth are encouraged to enroll in school; parents have an incentive to ensure the continued education of their children. Because of the government’s monthly stipend, families have additional expenses covered, and children have transportation and allowance. Aside from this, there are free vaccinations and medical check-ups, as well as a feeding program from the government. Simultaneously, there are various government initiatives to further encourage children to attend school: from clearing the backlog we inherited in classrooms, textbooks, and chairs, and addressing new needs, to reforming our basic education system; and even constructing new roads leading to new schools with new facilities. In this way, we address the problems we see, and maximize the opportunity to help every Filipino child study.

We truly do not believe in what is called the trickle-down theory in Economics: That when the economy progresses, grace will eventually reach those at the margins of society. Our strategy is: Strengthen our economy, along with the direct and immediate delivery of aid and services to our countrymen, so that they can participate in the advancement of greater society. We are truly planting a tree that will bear abundant fruit. We nurture it until we harvest the fruits of our labor. And that fruit is clear: A child who is knowledgeable and capable. Because they have the ability and sufficient skills, our Bosses can take advantage of the emerging jobs. When it comes to widespread well-being, it will no longer be a matter of chance, maybe-chance, and hopefully-chance.

That is what we call the Straight and Narrow Path. We are already investing and sowing the seeds for the child’s future at a young age. The investment we made for Pantawid Pamilya is no joke. From the budget we inherited in 2010 of P10 billion, we increased the funds for Pantawid Pamilya year after year; if you add it all up, P232.2 billion is the total fund we poured into this program.

The return on this is: the youth are given the opportunity to develop and maximize the opportunities brought about by the growing economy. It is clear: it is not enough that we have simply done something for our citizens; we are not content. We continue to identify measures to further improve the standard of living of the average Filipino.

When we learned that the average daily wage of a high school graduate is 46 percent higher than that of an elementary school graduate, we were convinced that we should expand Pantawid Pamilya further. And in 2014, we started a program that would cover young beneficiaries aged 15 to 18.

And today, we reap the initial fruits of our collective effort through the Pantawid Pamilya program. We celebrate the graduation of 333,673 youth who comprise the first batch of high school beneficiaries. They are part of nearly 754,400 youth nationwide who are currently covered by the program’s assistance for secondary education. Just imagine how far we have come: When we assumed office in 2010, Pantawid Pamilya reached only around 800,000 households. Now, we are helping more than 4.4 million households, and we are expanding assistance for beneficiaries who are of high school age.

Your government is focused on strengthening our Pantawid Pamilya program, so that more Filipinos will have the ability to take control of their own destinies. We are also targeting to further strengthen technical-vocational subjects in high school, so that if a beneficiary decides not to continue to college, they will not simply become a casual worker, because they will already possess the skills to obtain a higher quality of employment. It is clear: If you are an unskilled worker and can only find casual work, your salary will certainly be low because there are many of you competing, and there is no job security. If you have skills, and there are only a few of you with that type of specialty, you will certainly be in demand.

If anyone asks where the funds from Pantawid Pamilya are going, our answer is: We are shaping youth who are ready to seize the opportunities brought about by the improving market. Because the beneficiary is qualified and has employable skills, they also contribute to the further growth of businesses. Companies will be pleased, and will be encouraged to look at the quality of our workforce, which will be the key to employing more Filipinos. In this cycle, the economy will strengthen, more jobs will be created, and the standard of living of families will improve. From any angle you look at it, it’s a win-win situation, isn’t it?

I do remember the report of TESDA Secretary Joel Villanueva, who always showcases their graduates. He said in an event recently: There was someone who aspired to be a mechanic, and this person trained at TESDA. Now, he is a mechanic in Australia, and he earns almost double the salary of the President of the Philippines. I thought to myself: Maybe, if I had just trained to be a mechanic under TESDA, I could also reach his salary, and I wouldn’t have to face the daily insults of those who seek attention. [Laughter and applause]

I would like to emphasize: Because many Filipinos are improving their quality of life with the help of the government, expect that the next generation will begin from a better state. And because their starting point is higher, they will reach even loftier dreams. This, perhaps, is the most important legacy that we in positions of leadership can leave to you.

My father once said: I can open the door of opportunity for you, but it is up to you to keep it open. My request to our graduates: Further cultivate yourselves to the best of your ability; cherish the knowledge you have gained through the opportunity and support given to you by the State; and enhance your skills so that you can also help your fellow citizens.

Let me remind you: Although we are together in the youth sector, you are much younger than me. You will inherit all that we are striving for. If we did things right, you will benefit for a longer time. But if the elders left a wrong legacy or if we lacked cooperation, surely you will suffer for a longer time. This means: You also have a duty to ensure that your leaders fulfill their promises and do everything to take advantage of the opportunities that have reached you.

This is where the role of any established government becomes clear: to serve and deliver meaningful services. And our administration, you can say, is truly fulfilling the mandate you have given us. We are fulfilling the obligation to lay the groundwork for opportunities to maximize the capabilities and knowledge of the Filipino.

A strong example is the 4.4 million households helped by our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, and the thousands of graduates before us. We have achieved so much more on the Straight Path: There is the modernization of the Armed Forces, the 1:1 police-to-pistol ratio; there is economic growth and our creation of 1.04 million jobs in just one year. There is the country's investment grade status; we also recorded the lowest unemployment rate in a decade. We are completing infrastructure that others should have done, such as the Lullutan Bridge in Isabela, the Aluling Bridge in Ilocos Sur, and the Ternate-Nasugbu Road for Cavite and Batangas. I will not list all the promises we have fulfilled. But it is clear: These were accomplished because you trusted a government ready to serve honestly.

With all of this, my question is: Can anyone say that the government did not give you a real opportunity to progress? Can anyone say that nothing has changed because of our style of governance? Can anyone say that we have not progressed in over four years on the Straight Path?

A brother, reportedly of a former Secretary – of Mr. Marcos – thanked me, of all people. He said to me, “Thank you for taking on the job that nobody in his right mind would accept. I was born in 1961, and you’re the best President I’ve ever experienced.” [Applause] When I look at all that we have achieved, and the concrete proof of this is you, the beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya who are here, I really think that all the fatigue, insults, and trampling we face as President are worth it. We are even more encouraged to work and double our enthusiasm so that Filipinos can progress even further. It is true: My conviction that “The Filipino is definitely worth fighting for” is strengthened.

And on this day, I want to thank you all for the support you have shown for our good governance agenda. There is no doubt: Bosses, you made the change and you will continue it. You will be the key to achieving a wider transformation of our country, and to bequeathing a Philippines that is a source of true opportunity for the entire nation.

Good day, and congratulations to all of you.