Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the 2015 GOCC Dividends Day

You will remember during our first SONA – about a month into office – we discussed the bonuses. There was one GOCC with a mid-year bonus, productivity bonus, anniversary bonus, year-end bonus, financial assistance. It was draining, their allowances were around P160.1 million, but they received P211 million. In other words, the bonus was substantially a lot more than what they were receiving in terms of regular pay and benefits. And the problem was, they were losing money.

As one analogy says – we can say this when we started – [in] the situation we found in the GOCCs, “They were already being milked, and they still wanted the animal butchered.” And of course, the poor cow or carabao, wouldn’t last long in that situation. So we decided to really fix the system. First, we identified the problem. Under the leadership of Cesar Purisima, we investigated what was wrong, what could be done, which led to us being given a law with the help of Senate President Drilon and Jun Abaya, who was a congressman at that time; we were given this law that would truly professionalize our GOCCs.

I won’t repeat the litany of the problems we found, maybe it would be good to just discuss the results.

In terms of dividends, from 2001 up to 2009, the National Government received an estimated P84.18 billion. During our time, from 2010 to 2015, the number increased, becoming P131.28 billion. That means, including 2016, Cesar Purisima and I are probably confident to promise you that the dividends will double from what we found in a shorter amount of time. Let’s just remember, we replaced [a] nine and a half year administration, we are only in our fifth year. So now it’s a little. If you remit P20-plus billion per year, now we have P131 billion in capital, double the P84 billion is about P160 billion more or less. It looks certain. But if you relax, my promise might fall through. So I ask you, don’t relax. Maybe we can increase our efforts.

Let’s give some other success stories. GSIS income in 2010 was at P64 billion. In 2014, it’s now P131 billion. Can we give a big hand to Bernie Vergara and the whole team. Assets, P506 billion in 2010 is now P910 billion. Claims and benefits from P46 billion, it has reached P84 billion. Then we can go on and on. But really, from the data we saw earlier, you go from success to success. So don’t worry. The last part of this speech is good news for you.

Part of the reform process also, the GOCCs that went astray. Those with only three, four, or five employees who didn’t even know what they were doing because their relevance was over. Wasn’t the GOCC established to provide service to the country that is not provided by commercial interest, to be the pioneer? There were quite a few that were established – and created reasons to stay alive – others were used as justification, helping the scandal we experienced with PDAF. These companies have also been closed. I won’t go back to their names. It’s better to forget those that really didn’t help the people.

Having said all of this, we promised at the beginning, when we assumed office – which will happen a year and a month from now – the Filipino people will see or inherit a much better Philippines than what we found.

To you, those who belong to the GOCCs, you should really applaud each other for those who truly helped in this reform, who truly showed what could have happened and should have happened from the very beginning.

My request is: Let us not stop; let us not be content with what has been achieved; let us think of ways to further improve the legacy, benefits, and services we leave to the people, who created and truly patronize and support us.

Having said all of this, I am directing now Secretary Purisima, and Mr. Villanueva, and also Butch Abad: I want a review of the bonuses that have been accruing all of the people involved in the GOCCs. Because in our interest to make you more efficient, perhaps you were the ones forgotten. You made the country happy, perhaps you were the ones made very sad.

So I expect the review to happen in about a month’s time, [applause] and we will seek to maximize the benefits accruing everybody as empowered by the pertinent laws.

I will not prolong this any further. The time I am wasting from you, while you could be in your offices and further preparing the dividends for next year [laughter], I will not exhaust. But I just noticed, there seems to be snacks prepared, on both sides of Rizal Hall. You will notice, it’s not just turon. [Laughter] I hope that’s not the only bonus we got for your very splendid work for the past year.

Again, many thanks on behalf of our people. Keep up the good work.