TRANSCRIPT: [ Read the transcript in English. ]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Closing of the 2015 Sinaglahi of the Philippine Military Academy

Good afternoon to all of you.

Before us, you have a new sports center. Perhaps the Sinaglahi Class is saying, “We saw the construction, others will benefit.” [Laughter] Beside that, there is a fire truck. Our honorable Secretary of National Defense will probably tell the future classes who will be able to use the sports center well, “In our time, even the water came from the fire truck.” [Laughter] He was telling a story last night that there was a shortage of water here at PMA, so the ration they received every day—the fire truck would arrive, and they would be given five counts to collect using their helmets. That was very important because that was for brushing their teeth, bathing, washing clothes, watering plants, and to meet again the next day. [Laughter] Perhaps that is fate: as the nation progresses, the sacrifices of the citizens should decrease.

After more than four and a half years, we can say: We have truly come a long way in treading the straight and narrow path. We have overcome many trials to further advance the interests of Filipinos, both within and outside our country. There was the tension in 2010 between North and South Korea where 50,000 of our countrymen could have been caught in the turmoil. In addition, we needed to protect Filipinos who might be caught in the conflict in the Middle East during the Arab Spring. We also continued our efforts to prevent the spread of diseases such as Ebola and MERS-Coronavirus. In 2013, our country faced a series of challenges: the earthquake in Bohol, the unrest in Zamboanga, and the devastation of Typhoon Yolanda. Currently, we are focused on the incident involving seven of our countrymen who were arrested by armed groups in Libya, along with more than 4,000 other Filipinos trapped in the conflict there. Furthermore, there are about 900 of our countrymen who need to be evacuated from Yemen. The aforementioned countries are at alert level 4. This means the situation there is extremely dangerous, so we are implementing mandatory repatriation to ensure the safety of our countrymen.

Despite these, we maintained composure and rational decision-making. We did not deviate from our pledge: To promote the interests of the majority, especially those most in need.

And it’s not about boasting, but even now, we can say that the country’s situation is better compared to what we inherited. We cleaned up the bureaucracy, pursued the corrupt, stimulated the economy, and we opened new doors of opportunity for our countrymen.

The former so-called Sick Man of Asia, for the first time, has achieved investment grade status. Recently, we received the news that 1.04 million have been added to the number of Filipinos with employment. This corresponds to a decrease in the unemployment rate to 6.6 percent this January from 7.5 percent in the same period in 2014. In addition, the advancement of our programs that deliver immediate benefits to a large number of Filipino families continues.

Now, as the end of the mandate you entrusted to me in 2010 draws near, more and more people are asking. They ask: Who will continue the good things we have started when I step down from office? Some have suggested and continue to suggest: Why not extend the term and continue the change in our leadership? Our response: First, I am not the only one who did all of this. I am with every decent Filipino in making change. Second, although we have seen that there may be benefits to continuing it, it carries a risk. Because there might come a time when, when I step down from office, the one who replaces me thinks that they could be in office for life. We don't want to repeat what happened in our history when someone ruled from 1965 until they were ousted in 1986.

Today, 172 members of the SINAGLAHI Class of 2015 will transition from being cadets to becoming officers of our Armed Forces. Each class of the PMA chooses a name that represents their aspirations for service. Your choice is very good: “Soldiers with Outstanding Skill and Strength, Ready to Defend the Country.” As you leave this academy, and as you begin a new chapter in your lives as soldiers: I expect you to stand by the introduction you have given yourselves.

I hope you will equal or surpass the performance of your upperclassman, 2nd Lieutenant Jerson Sanchez. He is a member of the SIKLAB DIWA class of 2014. We do not expect a rookie to become an expert immediately. That is why this Lt. Sanchez is impressive because less than a year after graduating, he has demonstrated exceptional strength and skill in fulfilling his duties. On February 16th, after several days of intense surveillance and strategic action, his platoon attacked more than 30 members of the NPA in Barangay Datal Anggas, Alabel, Sarangani Province. What is truly admirable here is that at the beginning, they were outnumbered compared to the enemy. But because of the better strategy, stronger weapons, and more effective use of them by Lt. Sanchez’s team, the rebels retreated and scattered. They were pursued by our forces under the leadership of Lt. Sanchez for eight hours. And when the firefight ended, seven of the rebels were killed, nine high-powered firearms were left behind, five improvised explosive devices, and other war materials. It is clear that the enemy was really cornered: We know that as much as possible they do not leave the bodies of their comrades and important supplies. But aside from that, there were reports of wounded, while 11 of the 30 they encountered surrendered in the following days after the operation.

I will emphasize: 2nd Lt. Sanchez is a rookie soldier. He is not a member of an elite unit. But in the short time he has been in service, he has already shown great courage and effective leadership. It is clear to him: While he relentlessly pursues the enemy, they will think twice about carrying out operations because they know that the soldiers on guard are of caliber. The safety of our Bosses is ensured, and their confidence in our Armed Forces is increased. Above all, we are getting closer to the long-term peace we desire. 2nd Lieutenant Jerson Sanchez, you truly deserve the Distinguished Conduct Star you received. [Applause]

I admit to you, my request was that he should also be promoted, but I was told that according to current policies, his promotion is “temporary.” I said, “What about ‘temporary’?” Apparently, after one year, he will revert to being a 2nd Lieutenant. I said, “Wait a minute, that’s not very clear.” It should be based on meritocracy. He should have performed well. It should be permanent. So, let's focus for now on the award of the Distinguished Conduct of Service.

The story of Lt. Sanchez is just a part of the larger narrative of widespread transformation in our society. During the Martial Law era, the dictator was the one served by the Armed Forces, instead of the people. Now, there are more and more like Lt. Sanchez who not only say “The Filipino is worth dying for,” but truly live it. The people see the display of excellence of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, from guarding our territory, to promoting peace, to responding during calamities. That is why the people fully support the modernization program we are implementing to further develop the capabilities of our soldiers to serve our Bosses. We don't want every operation to be a mission impossible for them.

In addition, we also protect their welfare and that of their loved ones. This includes the housing units that have been allocated and distributed to our uniformed personnel, the improvement of the pension system, and the enhancement of the benefits they receive. All of this has been provided and we continue to provide it without increasing taxes, except for what is called the Sin Tax.

Truly: The next generations of our soldiers can go further because we now have a stronger and more developed Armed Forces that is cared for by the state, which they also care for. The challenge to all of you graduates: Continue the good work started by those who came before you so that their sacrifices and concern for the country will not be in vain. With your contribution, and that of other brave members of our uniformed personnel, our message to those on the other side of our reform agenda is clear: If you are willing to talk sincerely, the state is open to a reasonable and honest dialogue. But if you continue to put the people in danger, we will not hesitate to run over you.

To the SINAGLAHI Class of 2015: You did not toil and suffer at the PMA only for it to be wasted and lost. Lt. Sanchez and his comrades proved the positive results of their excellent and faithful performance of duty. And if each of you in SINAGLAHI stands firm and uses your inherent talent and strength to equal or surpass the achievements of those who came before you, we can pass on to the next generation a country that is far better than the one we inherited.

Therefore, to those who ask who will continue our good beginnings: It is none other than the united people who show concern for one another. It is clear: Only those who pretend not to see and not to hear cannot feel the great change that our country is enjoying. This transformation came from the people who gave me the opportunity to serve truthfully; therefore, the people will continue it. In the care of the people for those who truly care for them, and in the choice of leaders who truly represent their aspirations, I am confident that all the successes we have worked for together are just the beginning of the complete improvement and organization of our society.

Earlier, our Superintendent said, “You chose the road less traveled.” I, sometimes, in 2010, would think: Would what we will do be a mission impossible? Will the path we take be one that has truly been forgotten, so much so that it is almost “not traveled?” With your help, we will make the straight path “very well-traveled.”

Good day to you. Thank you very much to all of you.