Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the 15th National Congress of the Public Employment Service

When I first attended your Congress, my term was just beginning. I shared with you then our plans to open more doors of opportunity for our countrymen. The key: good governance. I told you that we would implement programs and projects that would address what we call job-skills mismatch. We would restore the confidence of investors in our country. We would focus on initiatives that would give you greater capacity to help our countrymen. In the end, I challenged you then to give your all to accelerate the arrival of benefits to our Bosses.

Now, after more than five years of traversing the Straight Path, I am pleased to face you again. With your contribution, it is clear to our countrymen: we have kept our word. And we have even exceeded expectations. For all the efforts and sacrifices you have made, thank you very much.

If before we were called the “Sick Man of Asia,” we are now receiving praise from all sides. We have been called “Asia’s Rising Tiger,” “Asia’s Rising Star,” and “Asia’s Brightest Spot.” [Applause] This is just proof that we have restored the trust and admiration of the world in us, which has resulted in more vibrant investment in our country. Regarding the unemployment rate, the former 7.4% in 2010 has been lowered to 6.6% in 2014.

Those who don't understand percentages said: The reduction is so small, not even 2%. That's why it's important for us to sometimes explain where that percentage is multiplied to determine how much it is. Again, thank you very much. [Applause]

PESO has greatly contributed to addressing the challenges in the labor sector. According to DOLE data, 5.66 million out of 8.09 million applicants who went to PESO were helped to find jobs from July 2010 to June 2015. The placement rate also increased under the PESOs from 74% in 2010 to 83% in 2014. [Applause] Maybe you'll reach 95% in 2015, I won't be angry about that. [Laughter] You might even want to reverse the 6 in 2016 to make it 99. I think we can pass an even better law for you again after that. [Applause] Sonny Angara already said he'll take care of that because he's younger than me.

How did we do this? First, we organized the data we had. We believe that when you have the right information, your initiatives will also be in the right direction. When we arrived, only 35 cities were covered by the National Skills Registry. We immediately started updating the database. Now, it is being implemented in 1,081 municipalities and cities, with the help of PESO. [Applause]

Secondly, we expanded and improved PHIL-JobNet, the government's free online job matching and labor market information portal. The report to us at that time was that there were 200,000 job listings for 100,000 applicants. We also addressed this problem of job-skills mismatch.

Now, the PHIL-JobNet can identify jobs specifically for high school graduates, women, PWDs, senior citizens, and OFWs. Job listings can now be viewed through iOS and Android applications. We have also increased the number of job listings. Last year, the total number of job vacancies uploaded to the PHIL-JobNet was 1.23 million. And if only 2,310 companies were using the PHIL-JobNet before we took office, now 28,915 are using it. [Applause] In DOLE and LGU offices across the country, we are also providing access to labor market information through Job Search Kiosks. A total of P44 million has been allocated for 200 additional kiosks and the upgrading of the previous 110.

Third, we have increased the government's investment in developing the skills of our youth. An example of this is the Special Program for Employment, which provides financial assistance and job experience to underprivileged students. From P162.8 million in 2010, the budget for this has now reached P697.7 million in 2015. [Applause] That's why, from 353,746 beneficiaries during the previous administration, we are now helping 793,219 “poor but deserving students.”

In 2014, DOLE launched JobStart Philippines, with the help of the Asian Development Bank and the government of Canada. Its objective: to increase the placement rate of our applicants and shorten the time they spend looking for a job. This project provides three types of preparation for young people. First is eight days of what is called “life skills training.” Second is technical training of no more than three months under TESDA or in a private company. Third is an internship of no more than three months. 601 have completed the pilot run of JobStart. Of this number, 431 or 71.7% have already found employment.

Sec. Linda told me that the employers are also giving good feedback regarding our JobStarters. They say the program is a big help in their search for workers who are capable, of quality, and have good character.

As we celebrate our achievements in the labor sector today, I must also emphasize: We are not content with what we have already accomplished. Our goal: To maximize the benefits for our Bosses. We are preparing for this even during the time when I am no longer the President.

Earlier, you saw the ISO 9001:2008 Certificate recognizing the quality of 6 bureaus and 7 services of DOLE. This is in addition to the 8 attached agencies and 11 regional offices that were previously certified. I am confident that with your continued efforts, you will obtain certification for your remaining offices before the end of 2015.

PESO, meanwhile, is no longer focused solely on job placement; we have also added livelihood services. Today, for the first time, we will recognize the Best Livelihood and Best PESO in various categories. To those who received awards: May you serve as an inspiration to our fellow citizens who wish to contribute to achieving our collective aspirations.

Sec. Linda also mentioned to me: Last week, in collaboration with the International Labor Organization and the Asian Development Bank, you organized a forum attended by key resource persons from the World Association of Public Employment Service. This exchange of ideas is a great help in organizing and preparing PESOs to face the new challenges brought about by global and regional integration.

Just a while ago, you witnessed my signing of the law amending the PESO ACT of 1999. This is no longer an “unfunded” law as we found it. We actually expect that because of this, the 1,925 PESOs nationwide will be further strengthened and empowered. Under the amended PESO Act, our local governments are empowered to allocate funds from the internal revenue allotment. There will also be a position for a PESO Manager and a Labor and Employment Officer. I am hopeful that now that we have increased the capacity of LGUs to respond to unemployment, we will be able to employ more of our countrymen. Local governments know the opportunities in their area better, and they can more easily connect our Bosses with jobs.

The new law also strengthened the distribution of information regarding the labor market, as well as services that will speed up the hiring of our applicants. In short: We have modernized the capabilities of the PESOs. We are grateful to our partners in the Senate, especially Senators Sonny Angara and Cynthia Villar; as well as the House of Representatives; [applause] I believe Deputy Speaker Ali Balindong, Rep. Karlo Nograles, and other legislators who supported the amendment to the PESO Act of 1999 are here. I would also like to acknowledge the contribution of the League of Provinces of the Philippines, League of Cities of the Philippines, League of Municipalities of the Philippines because they will help fund this from their IRA. Thank you very much again. [Applause] Of course, the DOLE, PESOMAP, and all other stakeholders. In the name of our countrymen, thank you very much.

It is clear: We have addressed the shortcomings we found. We have improved the government's projects and programs in the labor sector. And we are also preparing for the upcoming new challenges.

Even now, we are reaping the fruits of the good relationships we have sown with the private sector; from employers, entrepreneurs, schools, to training institutions. The result: A higher level of ability and skills among our job applicants, which will speed up their entry into the doors of opportunity.

To our PESO managers and other partners: The service you provide through the PESO, as well as your contribution to the labor sector, is not just about providing jobs for our countrymen. You are giving them the opportunity to fulfill their dreams. There is no equivalent value to that kind of feeling.

Let me share with you the story of Jhoanna Cusio, one of our JobStarters, whom I met at the Labor Day celebration in Cebu last May. She was just an intern then, but now, she is a permanent employee working as a hair transplant assistant in a cosmetic surgery clinic, and we might meet again in the coming days. It’s growing so fast over here. [Laughter] Jhoanna said that she never imagined she would be able to step foot in an office. With the help of JobStart, she went from being a sidewalk vendor to finding a job with a higher income.

Jhoanna is just one of those we have given the opportunity for a better future. As we empower more and more people, we also gain more allies in promoting national development. This is the change brought about by the Straight Path. If before our countrymen were left to depend on the handouts of traditional politicians, now we are helping them stand on their own two feet.

My challenge to all of you: Let us further enhance our knowledge, intensify our service, and strengthen our cooperation. We have already made possible what was once considered impossible. As we continue to walk the Straight Path, we will reach even higher dreams.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.