Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, to the Filipinos in Berlin, Germany

Secretary Albert del Rosario; Ambassador Maria Cleofe “Peachy” Natividad—this ambassador of ours is very diligent [applause]. I learned, as I was going to Germany, I asked, “Is Ambassador Natividad still posted there?” I was told, “Okay. We are in safe hands.” [Laughter]

Secretary Cesar Purisima—maybe we can stand up, Cesar, for [applause—let me introduce the cabinet members so you know who to blame for various concerns, okay [laughter]; Secretary Greg Domingo, DTI; [applause] Secretary Jun Abaya, DOTC; [applause] Secretary Arci Balisacan of NEDA; [applause] Secretary Sonny Coloma, Presidential Communications Operations Office; [applause] Secretary Julia Abad of the Presidential Management Staff; [applause] Secretary Joel Villanueva of TESDA; [applause] I would like to ask for… if we could add to our applause for Dr. Gerhard Zeidler who is really quite advanced in age and not of our race [applause] but he helps us so much; [applause] leaders and members of the Filipino community in Germany; honored guests; my beloved countrymen:

Again, good evening to all of you.

To be honest, earlier, I was a bit low on battery. [Laughter] As you know, I am Kapampangan. [applause and shouts]. [The President greeted the Kapampangans] When we spend the people's money, we really need to be very frugal. If possible, it's like our birds can no longer escape our new bills now—that's how strict it is. So, I was told as I was leaving, “Sir, many schedules are already listed, but many are still requesting.” Because when these schedules were being planned, it was vacation time here in Europe. And exactly, before we left, people were returning from vacation. When they found out we were coming, they requested meetings. I said, “As long as we can manage it, go ahead. Put everything there.” So, those who asked followed my instructions, so the assignment they gave me was 86 before leaving Manila. But because our Cabinet is diligent, now, they have put 90 on the list [laughter] and they are still asking me if I want to add more [applause].

The first thing I wanted to ask you, because Secretary Almendras asked me to ask—you can see how much weight Secretary Almendras lost [laughter]—maybe you have some extra empanadas you want to throw at him [laughter], he said he wouldn't refuse. [Laughter]. Sorry, that's just what happens when you recharge, the topics increase. I hope I'm not interrupting your dinner, let's start.

It's really different when we, fellow Filipinos, are together. But please allow me to add a little more excitement to this gathering by sharing a story. There's supposedly an OFW who returned to the Philippines; and his hard-earned savings, of course, he wanted to enjoy. He bought a 4x4 vehicle. Isn't it, this kind of car usually has an emblem on the back that says “4,” then a sign that says “x,” and another “4.” He parked [park] it on the side of the road next to his house for one night, and he went to sleep. Very proud; beautiful car. The sad thing is, a child came along, a Math Champion in his school. When he saw the emblem, he said, “Hey, 4 times 4!” So the child took a stone, and rubbed it on the side, “=16.” [Laughter] In the morning, the owner, very proud of his car, went out to see his beautiful, brand new vehicle and when he arrived at the 4x4, he saw “=16.” He said, “Goodness gracious! Who did this?” [Laughter] Because he wanted to maintain the value, he took the car to the casa, had it repainted, and returned it to its original condition. He went back home, washed it, and said, “My car is fixed.” The sad thing is, the child's school was nearby, he passed by again [laughter], and he saw, “Oh, why is this just 4x4 now? Let me complete it.” [laughter] “4 x 4 = 16” again. So, the owner woke up again the next day, and said, maybe it's okay now. When he saw it again, “What is this? I'm being personalized. What will I do?” So he went back to the casa, and they said to him, “Boss, you've been coming here consecutively for two days, maybe you'll come back all week. It's a waste of money. Maybe it would be good to just attach a new stainless [steel] there. Let's formalize ‘4 x 4’ let's put ‘= 16’. [Laughter] Let's complete the emblem. I'm sure no one will scratch it anymore.” So, the owner said, “Okay, you make a good point. Let's do that.” That's it, when he got home, he had a big smile again, “Maybe this is okay now.” The sad thing is, when he woke up the next day, he went to the car, and he said, “Maybe you're content with whoever you are.” When he looked at the car, it said “4 x 4” and there was his “= 16”, but the problem was, the child added, because he saw “4 x 4 = 16” again, he put a checkmark. [Laughter and applause] But I remember, our Secretary of Education—I don't think he will send this to me—that our youth are improving in Math.

I just thank those like this story. We have companions who really care; they know the weight of what is called stress in the work we are going through. Let me give you an example: We were leaving the Philippines, the typhoon was named Luis, and it was a bit windy. When we arrived here, it was like Luis was just leaving, and Mayon was getting impatient and about to erupt. So when Mayon hadn't erupted yet and Governor Salceda evacuated the people, earlier, I received a new message. The topic was Mario. I said, “Who is Mario?” [laughter] A new typhoon has replaced Luis—to be honest, it brings a lot of rain to us. Imagine, only a few days apart, or even just hours, the problem is replaced. So my real right now is to choose which problem to address, but I have to go through all the problems. The only thing left for me is, what to prioritize and what to postpone. That's why, when we receive texts like these, it adds to stress relief. And of course, another stress reliever: Seeing my fellow countrymen here in Germany. Your warm welcome is really great, I feel like we didn't leave the Philippines. And imagine, I'll repeat, when I left, 86 meetings or interviews were conducted on this trip; but no matter how low my battery is and maybe our delegation is being charged for being overdrained, as long as I see you, no matter how crowded the schedule, I think we are fully charged again. [applause]

Secretary Almendras was even joking with me. He said the empanada wasn't included in the fully charged [laughter].

This is the fourth country we have visited here in Europe. And in every Filipino Community I encounter, we bring the same message: The Philippines is truly enjoying a very big change now.

How can we say this? The main example: The face of the government is very different now. I will admit to you, during the first three or four months in office, all of us in the administration were really eager to finish work on Fridays, and sometimes even on Saturdays. Why? Because there would be a Sunday for a timeout. Because of the many problems we discovered every day, every week, your head would really ache. That's why Sunday was sometimes the only rest, and sometimes even Sunday was taken. Now the problem is, when Monday comes, in those first three or four months, you could really expect different kinds of foolishness to be found and to surface. You would just sigh at the number of problems inherited from those who came before us.

Even we had doubts about how all of this would be solved. There were anomalous projects like the dredging of Laguna Lake, where the government would spend 18.7 billion pesos just for the result to be playing in the mud. There were Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations that were showering bonuses on their officials and employees even though they were deeply in debt. To add to that is what we discovered: the purchase of helicopters offered at brand-new prices, but were actually second hand. And also the left and right backlogs in the service of our agencies. It was like a faucet that was turned on and the flow of problems couldn't be stopped—continuous and relentless.

But the Filipino people themselves have proven that in unity, what was once thought impossible is not only possible, but is already happening. And you, my Bosses—both here and abroad—are the ones who made and continue to make this change happen, so once again, thank you all very much. [applause]

Now, there is a government that is an ally of the people. We are fighting corruption at all levels of government to expand the benefits we deliver. Those who are guilty are held accountable, whether rich or powerful. I was told that you also have a TFC here in Germany, so you know George Cariño [applause]. George, please stand up.

So, you are likely hearing about the events in the Philippines. We had a former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who did not declare 98 percent of his wealth and properties, which, according to our constitution, should be stated in what he calls a Statement of Assets, Liabilities, and Net Worth. He has now been replaced. Prominent personalities and high-ranking officials allegedly involved in the Pork Barrel scam have now been charged and are imprisoned. And the one we replaced as President has also been indicted and is currently under hospital arrest.

That is in the area of restoring a culture of justice, especially in government. And because of this justice, there is also confidence among our investors in our market and society; they know that the outcome of their investment can be relied upon, they know that those who queue and follow the law will reach their destination, while those who violate it will be held accountable.

What is the effect of this on our economy? Before, I believe many of us knew, we were labeled the “Sick Man of Asia.” Now, on the straight and narrow path, our national economy is moving forward. We even recorded an average GDP growth of 6.3 percent from 2010 to 2013. For the first time in our history, we were also elevated to investment grade status by three of the most renowned credit rating agencies in the world. It’s not to boast, but the country has achieved a total of 20 positive credit ratings actions during our term. Some may ask: What will we gain from these grades? Because we are now investment grade, the government can borrow funds at lower interest rates; what used to go to paying interest, which was higher before, is now being used for programs and services. Likewise, we are attracting more businessmen and quickly creating opportunities for Filipinos because the credit ratings agencies themselves have said that the risk with us has decreased.

We are aware: The good momentum of our economy will continue only if we empower our countrymen to contribute to it. We aspire to promote a more productive citizenry, capable of lifting themselves out of poverty. This is where our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program comes in. The program’s objective: to support the health and education of our poorest countrymen so they can keep up and contribute to the growth of the country. The process: We provide regular cash grants to the identified poorest of our countrymen; but there are conditions. What are the conditions? They must ensure that their children attend school. Children must be vaccinated. And for those who are pregnant, they must have regular check-ups with a doctor. Isn’t this a wonderful program? We are incentivizing our poor countrymen to invest in the education and health of their families, which is the key to breaking the cycle of intergenerational poverty.

In education: The culture of neglecting backlogs is over. We have addressed the 66,800 classroom shortage we inherited last year. Before this, we also filled the 2.5 million seat backlog and 61.7 million textbooks left to us in 2012. This means there will be no more classes held under trees or in the scorching sun, or students sitting on the floor in classrooms because there are no seats, or books that need to be shared by several students.

We are also ensuring that the vacant jobs in the market are filled by our graduates who have sufficient skills and training. Isn’t it true that it used to happen often that a young man or woman would enroll in a course, such as physical therapy or nursing, because they thought there were many jobs waiting, and because when they entered, it seemed like there were indeed many jobs waiting. Upon graduation, they would be shocked at the difficulty of finding a job because that was no longer what the job market needed. Through the combined efforts of DOLE, CHED, DepEd, and TESDA, this is being addressed; we are already coordinating with companies to identify their needs and increase employment. Data proves that our efforts are bearing fruit: In the latest report, 1.65 million more Filipinos have found employment from April 2013 to April 2014.

Let's look at TESDA. Before, it seemed like they only cared about the image of their former leader. They were too focused on being cute while neglecting the welfare of their students.

Let's perhaps look at Secretary Joel Villanueva. Joel, stand up for a moment. [Applause] Mrs. Villanueva said that Joel no longer needs to be cute, she says he is already handsome. [Laughter] And if that were enough, maybe he would be content, but what he is doing is this: The former leader was distributing scholarship vouchers left and right. The painful part is, there was no funding for them. No appropriation. So Joel, because he is younger than me, he inherited a P2.5 billion debt. This agency sank into debt, and now we are supposed to pay it off. And because I said the truth, they say I am insulting him. Let's ask, “Is what this person did right?”

With this kind of style, you can only expect rotten results: only 28.5 percent of TESDA scholars found jobs from 2006 to 2008. But now, because of the competence and diligence of Secretary Joel Villanueva, the number of graduates from the Training for Work Scholarship Program, for example, of TESDA in 2012 who immediately found jobs has risen to 68.5 percent from 28.5 percent. [Applause]

Let's think about it, for every scholar of TWSP, the average expense of the state is 7,155 pesos. If, for example, our scholars find jobs in the BPO sector, in the first year alone, they will pay, of course, income tax. Almost the entire 7,155 pesos paid by the state to give them an opportunity will be recovered. Now, if after graduation, he works for a year, we break even. But this person is amazing, he only worked for one year. So most likely, he will work for 30 years. Is that right? He will pay taxes for 30 years. So even if one is distributed every year, 30 will benefit from our initial investment. And those three who benefit next—they will have three more to help get their opportunity. So, in the end, it will create more opportunities for our countrymen cared for by the state, and can be sustained. Not just a one-time thing.

There are still many opportunities awaiting the Filipino people. Next year, according to a UN assessment, the Philippines will enter what economists call the “demographic sweet spot,” where the bulk of our population will be of working age. That is why we continue our initiatives to ensure they have sufficient knowledge to maximize this so-called sweet spot. The number of productive Filipinos who can contribute to the economy to continue the cycle of widespread development is increasing.

Even as we reach a stage of rapid progress, we will remain grounded in our fundamental principle: No one will be left behind in development. For example: Let's talk about the impending peace in Muslim Mindanao. In the past, when you looked for data on poverty, ARMM was always at the top as an example. A major root of this suffering was conflict. Let me add: If you look for land where the earth is fertile—it's in the ARMM because we already have an additional three million hectares. There is really a lot of corruption and many shortcomings there. And because of the intermittent gunfire, any investment we make for our countrymen there, any program or initiative, truly has its benefits interrupted.

That is why: We strived to understand the root of the misunderstanding; we restored trust; and this March, we signed the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro between the government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. Our latest update on this: Before we took this trip, we also submitted to Congress the draft law for the Bangsamoro Basic Law. Truly, with the unity of our legislators, our brothers and sisters in the ARMM who will become Bangsamoro, and the entire Philippines, and you as well; we hope for the continued advancement of peace in Bangsamoro.

We have come a long way. Despite this, I know that the so-called “negative” people will not disappear, those who have made it a habit to spread negativity in our society; those who no longer see anything right in what we do; those who will do everything to hinder our reform agenda. Honestly, I think you've heard this from me before. In my work, I am very used to criticism. My breakfast: slander. My lunch: insults. By dinner, an insult is served; and for a midnight snack, there's intrigue. [Laughter] But we do not waste our time and attention on them; we will not gain anything from those who are closed-minded. As the father of the nation, we are focused only on the welfare of the people.

This is my only request to you: Please continue to accompany me on the path of righteousness. Let us prove to those who want to return us to the old ways: The more we are, the stronger we are, the more courageous and wholehearted we are in promoting the positive transformation of the Philippines. Therefore, to those who are thinking about who will succeed us on the straight path when 2016 comes, my response is: We might be asking the wrong question. We should perhaps change the question from “who” because there is only one answer. Who will replace us? The answer to that, of course, is us. All of us who contribute to sowing change; all of us who strive and row in one direction. All of us, and not just one person or group, have the responsibility to continue what we have started.

In our four years, two months, and twenty days as President – and I’m not counting, that’s exact – this is one of the most important things I’ve learned: In every instance, just do what is right, do everything you can, and our Boss, the people, and the Almighty will take care of any shortcomings. Now, facing you, I tell you: Boss, I will exhaust every moment and time to fight for the Filipino. Our fight against corruption and poverty continues; our fight to uplift the Filipino and promote the progress of the nation continues. We continue to prove to ourselves, to our fellow citizens, and to the whole world: Truly, the Filipino is worth fighting for.

Good evening and thank you very much.

Learn more details about the President's visit to Europe.