On this day, our cadets transition towards becoming officers of our uniformed services. As leaders, they now shoulder greater responsibilities. As stated in our Constitution: “The Armed Forces of the Philippines is the protector of the people and the State. Its goal is to secure the sovereignty of the State and the integrity of the national territory.” The state has entrusted the right to possess arms only to men and women in uniform like you, which is precisely why you are expected not to abuse this right or become mere tools of violence, but to care for and protect our fellowmen and our country at all times.

I have full confidence that all members of Class Siklab-Diwa will embody these principles, and will remain true to the responsibilities you have vowed to fulfill. I am fully aware: honor is one of the bedrock principles of this institution—the honor of being in service, of wearing your uniforms, and of saluting our flag; the honor of having an Armed Forces that has won back the admiration and trust of our countrymen.

This is why you must rise to the challenge: If it is your duty to uphold the Honor Code in this institution, then you must also uphold it outside the PMA. If you are not permitted to lie—whether in class, or to your fellow cadets—then that necessarily means you must also not allow anyone, be they fellow soldiers or common citizens, to betray or manipulate their fellowmen or our Constitution. If cheating in tests is strictly prohibited, then that means you must also avoid trickery and deceit in the procurement of arms and equipment. If stealing from classmates is a punishable offense, then you must also do your part in holding to account anyone who steals the money our people have worked tirelessly for.

For four years, this institution has trained you to embody courage, integrity, and loyalty. But the true test for servicemen such as yourselves lies in wait outside the walls of Fort del Pilar. Like those who have come before you, you will reach a crossroads. Your principles will be tested by opportunists; they will try to blind you with wealth and power. As Commander-in-Chief, I hope that, as you enter the battlefield of life, you do not just carry with you the theories and tactics you have learned, but also the strength of will to remain true to your principles—to always stand on the side of right, and to always renounce that which is wrong. Because more than wealth and power, our people respect and admire people of principle and integrity. If you allow others to trample upon the rights of our countrymen—whom you have sworn to protect—then are you not condoning the trampling of your own rights?

Your government is well aware that you are an integral part of the society which you protect. The rights and needs of the common Filipino are likewise the needs of our nation’s soldiers. These needs come on top of the equipment you need to fulfill your responsibilities. As regards government’s obligation to meet all of these requirements, I only have one thing to say: We have indeed come so far from the broken system where those who are at the frontlines of protecting the nation, are the least of government’s priorities. Our goal: To give you the strength you need to ensure your development, as well as that of your families’. We continue to implement measures to ensure that you are not left behind in your training as soldiers, and in your ability to take hold of a brighter future for yourselves.

As an example, let us look at the rifles used by our soldiers—many of which are Vietnam-era equipment. The good news: We can look forward to 63,000 rifles turned over for the use of our Armed Forces in the coming months. When this is done, we can finally retire the rifles being used by Philippine soldiers even before all of you graduates were born.

Our soldiers are also already making use of the modern ships, 8 Sokol Combat Utility Helicopters, 3 Navy helicopters, and other vehicles we have turned over. On top of this, we have closed our purchase of 12 lead-in fighter trainer aircraft for territorial defense operations. We also count among our targets for 2016 an additional 8 combat utility helicopters that can provide, among others, search and rescue and disaster relief missions. The bidding for the procurement of 2 twin-engine naval anti-submarine helicopters is also set to begin.

Apart from the modernization of your ranks, government is also focused on your other needs—for instance, our housing program. At present, we have already been able to construct around 54,449 affordable housing units for our uniformed personnel. It seems like Governor Salceda’s looking for Albay’s part. We’ll get there. Through the convergence of efforts of the Department of Agriculture, Department of Agrarian Reform, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department of the Interior and Local Government, Department of National Defense, our livelihood program for our active and retired soldiers is already underway. Through this project, land in the three military camps—in Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija, in Camp Kibaritan in Bukidnon, and in Camp Peralta in Capiz—will become wellsprings of livelihood opportunities for Filipino soldiers, through plantations of bamboo, coffee, cacao, and palm oil. Indeed: as our economy continues to grow, we are given increased opportunities to repay the service of our country’s soldiers.

In the end, what brought all of us to this point is clear: the readiness to offer up our lives for the well-being of the majority. So, in each transaction you will enter into as leaders, I am confident that no temptation will be able to shake your principles. In times of crisis, or in destructive calamities, I know that you will be a source of strength and resilience for the Filipino nation. And in times where you find yourselves in danger, and far from your families, I am hopeful that it is your professionalism, courage, and faith in God that will rise above all.

Today, I call on each member of Class Siklab Diwa: Raise even higher the standard of service and integrity of our Armed Forces. I trust that in each challenge that our country is confronted with, you will be there—soldiers of a proud nation of heroes, with enduring spirit: to care for others, to serve your fellow men, and to join us, as we take even greater steps towards the lasting peace and growth to which all Filipinos aspire.

Thank you, and again, congratulations on your graduation.

Read as pronounced.