Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the anniversary of the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro.

It has been a year since the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro was signed. On March 27, 2014, we invited here to Malacañang those who worked hard to build it: Members of various government agencies, including the uniformed sector; peace advocates who had long awaited such an agreement; representatives of other countries, who joined our success; all stakeholders in the Bangsamoro, who were truly tired of conflict and violence; and of course, our brothers and sisters in the MILF, who, in their desire to end the long-running unrest, have consistently demonstrated that they are trustworthy, and share our desire for peace. Back then, we recalled the long process of forging an agreement that was fair and just. We outlined the change we wanted to bring to a system that had long been abused by a few, and recorded the dreams for the Bangsamoro. We said then:

“If we sustain the momentum for peace, by 2016, the MILF will have shed its identity as a military force, and transformed itself into a political entity, casting its stake in democracy by vying for seats in the Bangsamoro elections. The Bangsamoro shall form a perimeter of vigilance against the spread of extremism… And from this shared security, we shall enhance the era of prosperity that is dawning upon our region, and harness its energies towards creating a regime of opportunity and inclusivity where no one is left behind.”

Isn't it a great honor that we have achieved in this agreement, and something to be proud of to the whole world—that we Filipinos, scattered across many islands, with different beliefs, have a single aspiration for peace? That we can set aside our differences, and focus on what binds our race together? It is sad, however, that just a year has passed, and we seem to have forgotten the hope we felt then. Instead, it has been replaced by distrust, unreasonable doubt, and anger.

It is not easy to take the path to peace. The first thing we did: We identified the real problem, in order to lay down the right solution. Let us remember: The conflict in Mindanao originated during the time of the dictatorship because of land grabbing or disputes over land. The law was used to exploit the uneducated, and deny them their land. It’s a pity that no one thought that if the abuse of the law was the root of the problem, a reasonable and just law should solve it. Until now, we are still experiencing the effects of this neglect. But it is clear: Now, your government has a different point of view. We already have initiatives such as promoting indigenous rights and protecting ancestral domains.

The Bangsamoro Basic Law is one of the most important bills of our administration. It addresses the two most serious problems of our people: poverty and violence. It is the product of 17 years of careful study and negotiation.

However, there are those who oppose its enactment into law. They have criticisms based solely on a lack of understanding of the BBL, such as the claim that the Bangsamoro will have a separate police force once it is implemented. Should we trust those who say to stop the peace process without offering anything in return? Where will they lead us if we listen to them?

As for me: If the BBL still has shortcomings, these can be addressed if the debate on it continues. By continuing the hearings in Congress, everyone is given the opportunity to understand the bill. We believe: An initiative that comes from a good purpose can still be improved by people with good intentions for others.

I understand that the events in Mindanao, including the incident in Mamasapano, have caused doubt in the minds of our citizens. The result: The discussion has been diverted from an objective evaluation of the BBL.

To address this, I invited citizen leaders known for their knowledge and integrity to serve as independent convenors. These include Luis Antonio Cardinal Tagle, former Chief Justice Hilario Davide Jr., Jaime Augusto Zobel de Ayala, Howard Dee, and Bai Rohaniza Sumndad-Usman. They will unite other responsible and respected leaders to lead a National Peace Summit that will scrutinize and discuss the BBL. They will carefully and reasonably dissect this proposed law in a way that does not incite anger and despair. In this way, the BBL can be improved. They will create a report that will be made public for everyone to read, and help our citizens better understand it. In this way, we can promote rational decision-making regarding the Bangsamoro Basic Law.

You can also expect: As we get closer and closer to the peace we desire, the noise of those who want to destroy our trust in each other will grow louder. It is only right to prepare for them so that they do not succeed. Let us also examine their true motivations. If they truly want to serve their constituents, shouldn't they also be on the side of peace? We wonder: Are those who want to stop the BBL those who will be affected by the transformation we want to make permanent for the Bangsamoro? Perhaps their only purpose is to regain power once we return to the old system.

Some are saying that we should stop the peace process. They say an all-out war is what we need to do. My question to them is: What good do you see coming from war? Now that we are moving forward and progressing, should we now promote violence, going back down the path of poverty?

Past administrations have already tried all-out war. This all-out war was their response back in the seventies. Did they and we achieve anything? The only result was: Hundreds of thousands died, livelihoods were destroyed, and Mindanao was mired in suffering. Isn't it clear that their response was wrong? What happened? Did the conflict end? Didn't it just claim hundreds of thousands of lives? There are reports, even, that during Mr. Marcos's term, blackouts were coordinated with the arrival of body bags so that no one could see the number of casualties.

Just imagine, if the peace process is derailed again, there will be no space for proper dialogue with leaders, and with all the Moro who are willing to listen to reason, and also desire peace. Wouldn't they, too, be pushed to join those who want violence? If the unrest in Mindanao worsens, wounds will deepen and more people will feel aggrieved. Those who were previously marginalized and oppressed by the system and institutions will feel even more oppressed. Those who are not reached by government aid will suffer even more. Do you think they will be willing to talk—if all this happens—in peace talks, after being hurt, bloodshed, and further oppressed?

We know the reason why the influence of bandit groups like Abu Sayyaf has expanded. There are communities that have been deprived of government service and care for a very long time. In the absence of support from the government, Abu Sayyaf filled the void of their neglect. While they only see the government during elections or when there is a military operation, Abu Sayyaf is there, providing for the needs of their communities despite the disruption. Because of this, Abu Sayyaf gained their sympathy. There are even those who shelter Abu Sayyaf members, because they benefit from them.

The crossroads we face: Strive to forge peace now, or count the body bags in the future. To those who say that all-out war is the solution, do you think peace talks are still possible once the shooting starts, when wounds and the failure of the agreement are still fresh? Perhaps it is easy for you to incite an all-out war because the unrest is still far from Luzon and Visayas. But when the conflict intensifies, more Filipinos will be fighting fellow Filipinos, and it is not unlikely that you will find a relative or acquaintance among these body bags. If everything ends up like this, the sacrifices of those who gave their lives to achieve the peace we desire will be wasted. If you ask the soldiers and police, and other members of the uniformed services, they will be the first to oppose war, because they bear the greatest sacrifice and primary sacrifice here.

Let me clarify: This decision is not just for the remaining period of my term, but for the benefit of future generations. You, the younger ones, can you bear to live in a society where you have to face war instead of fulfilling your dreams? To the parents: Would you want to bequeath a future of violence to your children? We will not allow this to happen. We will continue to walk the path that leads us towards peace.

Now, the MILF and our government, formerly on opposite sides, are talking. But our counterparts in the MILF, Al Haj Murad and Mohagher Iqbal, are also getting older. There is no guarantee that their successors will show the same trust, and the same willingness to lay down their arms. If the advancement of the BBL fails, how will they encourage their troops and comrades to continue seeking peace? Wouldn't it be easier for the violent elements within their ranks to say, “You see, talking doesn't get you anywhere, the gun is more powerful.” Let us remember: Two generations have been wasted by conflict. Now that we are here, will we allow the next generations to suffer the same fate?

Let me reiterate: Violence cannot resolve violence; hatred cannot be ended by responding with hatred. Only compassion is the answer to violence; only love will eradicate hatred. Is it too much to ask that Filipinos show compassion and love for fellow Filipinos? No one can deny that if peace is achieved, the standard of living in Bangsamoro will improve. If one region improves, the entire country improves. It is true: Peace is the only path to the broad development that we desire.

Today, may we be reminded that we have a golden opportunity now to achieve peace, and to ensure that those who want to cause trouble will be enlightened about the good fruits of a ceasefire. May we think of the bright future that awaits us, if we strengthen and continue what we have started. Let us strengthen trust, let us strengthen hope; that will be our contribution to a orderly and prosperous society that we can be proud of and bequeath to future generations. I am not pursuing peace just to say that I have left something behind. What we are advocating for: a true peace that truly addresses the roots of the problem that caused the violence. At this point in our history, I tell you: The BBL will achieve this.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.

___________________________

Read in English