Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At “Daang Matuwid: 2bContinued”

[Translation of the speech delivered at  Club Filipino, San Juan, on October 5, 2015 ]

When we began treading the Straight and Righteous Path , we said: The Filipino people can dream again. We spoke to our bosses not just of our intentions, but of the concrete steps we would take to fulfill them.

After five years along this path, they themselves are the ones saying: Not only did we stay true to our word; we even achieved things we once thought impossible. In fact, during my trips to different provinces, I have witnessed so many of our countrymen testifying to how much their lives have changed due to projects and initiatives we undertook.

When I went to Apayao, Leslie Columbano, a sixth grader from San Isidro Norte Elementary School, told us: Back then, it was difficult to find motivation to go to school. Classrooms were overly crowded. The ceilings and walls were in tatters; this is why they could count on getting drenched whenever it rained; in fact they needed buckets to catch the water dripping from above, and the boys had to dig pathways for the water the flow.

Now, they have new classrooms. She said it is completely different from the situation where government seemed to forget about their existence. Allow me to add: Students are also having an easier time getting to school because of the new roads we have paved in far-flung areas. When they get to school, our students are welcomed by new school seats and textbook. And they do not have to bear with hunger in school because they received grants from our Conditional Cash Transfer Program.

There is also Rogelio Calmang, a Kagawad from Barangay Butao in Calanasan, Apayao: He says that, back then, there were no decent roads in their area, so whenever someone got sick, they had to carry the patients all the way to the hospital. This took two days—so more often than not, the patient would pass away in the wilderness. Now that they have roads, it has become easier for them to travel and they have better odds of saving the lives of their neighbors.

As Governor Bulut said: In the past, LGUs seemed to be competing to have the better ambulance. And I looked at him and asked: Why would they do that? He said that, back then, the ambulance would take a patient to a nearby province in the hopes of treatment. But now, patients from elsewhere are referred to their province and their hospitals.

Actually, Secretary Babes Singson of the DPWH explained to me that we have come to the point where we have reached our physical limitations for construction in the province. And given all the projects we have implemented and are implementing, we are running out of good contractors—and even carpenters, plumbers, and electricians. Now, we also have to wait for the newly opened roads to compact before paving them with a layer of concrete or asphalt. My response to this: “This is a good problem to have, as opposed to being unable to do anything or not doing anything at all.”

The story of Apayao’s transformation is also the story of the transformation of every city, municipality, and province in the Philippines. Those of you here know about the roads, hospitals, bridges, schools, and other structures in your areas that have been produced by the Straight and Righteous Path. You know of the strong political will we have exercised to pass laws such as the Responsible Parenthood Act, the Sin Tax Reform Act, and the K to 12 Act. You know how we have expanded the scope of PhilHealth and Pantawid Pamilya; of how we held accountable—and are holding accountable—the corrupt; of how we are listening to the voices of our countrymen when it comes to the projects and programs they need; of how we have ended inherited backlogs in classrooms, textbooks, and school seats; of how we have risen from being the “Sick Man of Asia” towards being “Asia’s Brightest Spot.”

As I think of all our triumphs—triumphs we achieved together, and not by myself alone—I cannot help but remember those whose sacrifices led us to this point. Back when the Filipino people resisted the dictator, my father and Mar’s father—Tito Gerry Roxas—fought for our freedom and our rights. My mother, who was a simple housewife, responded to our people’s call to restore democracy. There is also Jesse Robredo, who wholeheartedly went against criticism and those with power and influence for the well-being of his countrymen.

Earlier, Mar also spoke about sacrifice. Mar, you have never been one to toot your own horn. So let me be the one to speak about what happened in 2009, when you had to make an enormous sacrifice to ensure the coalition remained complete and strong, and to bring an end to almost a decade of suffering for our countrymen.‎ During those days, Mar had long planned and prepared for the presidency. But when we spoke, he immediately told me and Butch Abad that he had heard the people’s clamor, and that he has decided not to run as president. There were no more negotiations or lengthy debates. He did not even ask to be made the vice presidential candidate. He would really not take advantage of a situation to advance any personal ambition. He settles for what is best for our people.

As for Leni, I cannot help but compare her to my mother. They were both suddenly‎ widowed. They were both previously seen as mere housewives, but were eventually called to lead. And like my mother, Leni had no ambitions to run. But her countrymen asked her to sacrifice to solidify our leadership in Camarines Sur. She was obliged to run, and, indeed, she served with principle.

I have said this before, and I must admit it once more: one of the hardest tasks I had to fulfill as President was facing Leni and her children when we were looking for Jesse. More than 24 hours had passed since Jesse’s plane crashed, and we were of the mindset that there were “less grounds for optimism.” During those difficult times, we truly marveled at Leni’s resilience, and that of her children, and her family.

After a few years of trying to return their lives to normal, which became all the more difficult because Leni had to serve in public office, they are now asked to make an even greater sacrifice. They know the challenges they will face. They know just how complicated politics is, and just how difficult the necessary actions are to win a campaign. But Leni and her loved ones have chosen to do what is needed.

They are showing once more that it is better to experience suffering than to let go of the opportunity to affect change in the lives of so many of our countrymen. ‎We are grateful to you and to your children, Leni. I, along with the party, will do everything to make you feel that you’re not alone.

Country above self: that is what the Liberal Party stands for. All of us present tread a path set before us by those who came ahead of us, those who have worked to pass on a situation far better than the one they inherited. It is no exaggeration when I say that we did not let down those who sacrificed for us.‎ We have done and continue to do the necessary sacrifices to ensure those who will come after us will have a better start at life.

Is it not true that, at the beginning of our administration, we were left with only 6.5 percent of the budget to use? On top of that, we could not allocate it freely because some portions of it had already been committed to payments. As someone from Pampanga, it is a terrible insult to be called “extremely frugal.” Yet, every opportunity to cut on costs, we took. This is why, even when we went on official trips abroad, we had to be prudent in spending—and we still continue to do this. During our State Visit to Indonesia, one of our first trips abroad, for instance, we chose to take a commercial flight that took off very late at night. It was cheaper to fly this way than to charter our own flight. We were sitting like PMA cadets because the space was cramped. Our shoulders were really straight, as we sat. When I tried to adjust the seats, I could not find the lever. Secretary Purisima, who was next to me, told me: “Sir, they had adjusted the seat for you already.” I said: “Really? This has been adjusted? We’re like PMA cadets here.” But I remember what we told ourselves: this suffering is nothing compared to the hardships our countrymen would have to face if we fail to deliver meaningful change.

In our Cabinet, isn’t the question almost always: what else must I sacrifice? How many times have we asked for the understanding of family and friends for not coming to their celebrations, because there was work to be done? There was no discussion as to what was important. The welfare of our people should always come first. We also got used to having negative commentaries for breakfast, criticism for lunch, insults for dinner, and intrigues as midnight snacks. Sometimes I actually think that we are like Manny Pacquiao forced to fight 15 rounds day in and day out. I also sometimes ask why I do not take the opportunity to rest for around two weeks of holidays, a right of any employee. What happens now is that I get some kind of rest only on Good Friday , because people no longer travel on this day. During holidays, I need to look after our Bosses’ safety. Even during Christmastime and New Year, we need to take care of victims of firecrackers, despite our warnings. Every time there’s a storm, and most of our countrymen are not at work or school, we need to monitor our citizens who might get affected. Sometimes it happens that because we were able to address a problem, the public is unaware of what we had to undergo; one such instance was when there was the threat of MERS-COV in our shores.

Of course, we look after every Filipino, not just those living in our country. We have actually reached the point where every time an incident occurs abroad, we ask: Were Filipinos affected? When tensions in Libya heightened, when we issued alert level 4 for mandatory repatriation, we wrote to families here in the country for them to convince their loved ones working there to come home. When we were not listened to, a kidnapping incident took place, and we had to face another problem.

But if I were to be asked: if you had known about all the difficulties, would you still have accepted the challenge to lead? My response is: a resounding yes. And I know you would all stand with me—no matter how formidable the challenge, no matter how spiteful the insult, no matter how many days we have to go without sleep. Because we know just how much we can achieve when we stand shoulder to shoulder; we know just how many we can help when we stand with principle. Let me emphasize: All that we achieved could have been done in the past, if our leaders did not forget the reason for their being in power. And now that we are in the final part of our term, I can confidently say: We promised that our people are our Bosses. We did not take advantage of the mandate given to us. We maximized every opportunity to serve and deliver benefits. That’s what we mean when we say that the Liberal Party is one of principle.

At this point, I cannot help but remember the story of Juan Tamad, who waited under a tree for guavas to fall into his mouth. Is it not true that, if he did this, the fruit would be overripe or even rotten by the time it fell? This, then, is not just a story about laziness; it is about foolishness as well. The lesson is clear: If there is anything of great importance to us, then we must work hard for it. What we have started will not continue, if we do not act.

Now that our Bosses are nearing the time in which they will choose the next leaders of our country, the challenge before us is to ensure that everything we have started will continue, and, more than that, will widen and intensify. There are even some who say: to make sure that transformation isn’t cut short, it should be me again. I have already explained why that cannot be. Today, I will also add: we cannot entrust our collective future to just one person. Our time on this earth has its limits, which is why we must prepare those who will follow us—because if no one will continue what we have started, then we may return to our grim past.

Now, we already have a Mar and, might I add, a Leni too who we can be sure will continue the Straight and Righteous Path—and I am confident that they will accelerate our progress all the more. Given how strong my belief in these two, and in our coalition, I might even be more passionate about this campaign, than my own campaign in 2010. Governor Marañon will take care of me, when it comes to the point that all I’ll have for meals is “memorized.”

Let us not forget: the enemies of the Straight Path have a game plan, part of which is to diminish our successes. Others will make statements in order to take credit for everything we have worked for. Even those criticizing our traffic strategy, if they get the chance to inaugurate Skyway Stage 3 and our other projects, if they are fortunate to get elected to office to open such projects, I’m sure they will put the marker which they have readied as early as now, which reads that they accomplished the project and that they provided the solution to traffic. Those credit grabbers are the ones with the thickest skin. As Jim Paredes told me: “Those hit by this, do not get pissed.”

I ask each one of you here today: whatever lack of funds there may be—as was mentioned during the NECO meeting—let us make up for with hard work and dedication. Let us not remain silent in the face of criticism; let us not tire of spreading the good news of the dreams that we have realized and are realizing today. At stake in the coming election are the sacrifices of those who came before us. At stake in the coming election are the futures of one hundred million Filipinos.

What we have to do is not difficult. If we were to use recent surveys as our basis, our countrymen are already feeling and seeing how far we have come along the Straight Path. The testimonies of our Bosses will be like a deluge crashing down on our opponents. As the election draws nearer, it is becoming clearer to our countrymen which candidates truly possess the ability and the integrity to continue and widen what we have already started. If others have to promise the moon and stars, we hold in our hands the concrete proof of what we can do. If others want to ride on the success of our efforts, all we need to ask: what have you sacrificed for the Straight Path? If what they say is different from what they have done, then our Bosses will see their true colors.

Today, we have already introduced to the Filipino people the candidates of the Straight Path. On Friday , when we present our senate slate to our Bosses, all the more will it be clear: While others are finding it extremely difficult to piece together a coalition, our forces are whole.

I can already picture the scene, at the turnover, at the end of our successful campaign. I will have a wide smile on my face, just like that of the one who will greet me. Everyone I see will be smiling as well, because our journey along the Straight Path has been meaningful and historic. On that day, each one will hold the certainty that our progress will continue and accelerate all the more. Indeed: Through the guidance of our Almighty God, our continued solidarity, and the strength we draw from our Bosses, we will be able to realize our higher aspirations.

Before I end, there is this one blogger who appears to have taken pity on me. He wrote about the extreme heat in Metro Manila, which was at 40 degrees centigrade, and then he posted a picture of me saying: “Is this my fault too?” There was also the time when Manny Pacquiao fell on ill luck and lost his fight. Another photo of mine came out as a meme, and what was written, once again, was: “Is this my fault too?” The one time I protested was when the photo of Butch Abad came out, which had this inscription: “The hair of Butch Abad is no longer growing.” Butch Abad said the reasons for this are only a few. And as for the reasons for the problem, they made it appear that I contributed a little to them. A gentle reminder to our opponents who seem to be so used to the dirty tactics of traditional politics: Maybe as early as now, you intend to make it difficult for Leni to campaign, and you plan to drag her children into this. When Jesse passed, these kids gained so many foster fathers; I will take it personally if you bring them into this.

Partners, I am really fired up for the coming elections. I told our candidates that, while you still have time before the election period, I suggest that you eat. Come the election period, all I can share with you is “memorized.” Eating will only be a memory. But because we see our whole nation behind us, we are certain that, regardless of the hurdle put before us, we will overcome it; we will succeed.

Thank you, and good day.