VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6nVB62TFBDw&feature=relmfu[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the graduation of the Philippine Military Academy “BAGWIS” Class of 2012

[ Delivered at Fort General H. del Pilar, Baguio City, on March 18, 2012 ]

Vice President Jojo Binay; Secretary Volts Gazmin; Major General Nonato Peralta; Lieutenant General Jessie Dellosa; members of the foreign attaché’s present; Major Service Commanders, namely Vice Admiral Alexander Pama, Lieutenant Emmanuel Bautista (the upcoming champion of the next tournament ); Major General Lauro Catalino dela Cruz of the Airforce; Mayor Maurice Domogan; Congressman Bernie Vergara; Governor Nestor Fongwan; graduates of BAGWIS class of 2012; parents and family of the graduates of PMA BAGWIS class of 2012; Cadet Corps, Armed Forces of the Philippines; other local government officials; fellow workers in government; my beloved countrymen:

Good morning to all of you.

In one of the letters of General Vicente Lim to his son, he analyzed democracy in the Philippines. He said, “Our democracy in the Philippines is unilateral. It is only for the benefit, for the freedom, for the rights, comfort and happiness of each individual member of the nation… . I venture to say that 99.9 percent of our people believe in that kind of democracy. They do not know their obligations, their duties and the sacrifices that they should give to the state… .”

Clearly, this is the point of General Lim—one of the greatest soldiers who sacrificed his life for our country. The freedom we enjoy comes with a corresponding responsibility, and the progress we aspire for requires commensurate effort. This is the idea symbolized by the First Rank Insignia or “Lieutenant’s triangles” awarded to each graduating cadet, initiated by General Lim’s wife herself, Mrs. Pilar Hidalgo Lim. The challenge: will you reciprocate the blessings offered to us by democracy with kindness, loyalty, and a willingness to sacrifice?

I have faith in your ability to respond to this challenge. That is what you were taught at the Philippine Military Academy, and that is perhaps what you also learned from your parents who sacrificed their efforts and possessions to ensure your education. I even heard the story of Mang Mario Puertollano. He tirelessly worked as a carpenter so that all his children could achieve their dream of studying. This is the third to graduate now; the fourth is studying at Batangas State University.

And now, after four years, Mang Mario will breathe a little easier with the graduation of his son Nonoy, your class valedictorian. To Nonoy, and to the entire BAGWIS Class 2012: After the rigorous mental and physical trials that you have successfully overcome, I hope you won't be surprised if I say: Congratulations, your four years of vacation here at Fort del Pilar are over. The practice is over; it's time to face the real problems of your chosen field: responding to the real problems of our society. It's time for the true measure of your soldiery, your Filipino identity, and—perhaps most importantly—your character: Facing the crossroads.

Outside Fort del Pilar, you will not only be fighting armed groups in the mountains, or bad elements in the city. There is the temptation of corruption. For example: if you are assigned to remote areas and a truckload of logs passes by, what will you do? It is clear to you that this is prohibited. Will you accept an envelope and look away while they allow the logs to flow down the river? You are aware of the damage caused by the rushing of huge logs that plow through bridges, flood homes, and take the lives of our countrymen. Can you say, “I will not accept that, because in exchange for my momentary comfort is the long-term harm to my fellow human beings?”

Always remember: as the shield of our state, you should be the first to turn to and defend the people. When they feel they cannot turn to you, and they will gain nothing from asking for your help, they will run to those who pretend to be saviors. But if you fulfill your duty, the people themselves will be your most loyal allies. Do not forget that in any battle, it is always the side of the people that will prevail.

This is precisely why the Commander-in-Chief awards each class valedictorian with the Presidential Saber every year. My awarding of this is a symbol of the true source of power: from me, a civilian, to a uniformed soldier.

Our strength comes from our bosses: the Filipino people. I remember once asking my late Mother, and my question was this: What do those who exploit and steal from the people gain? When you steal, you think about where to hide it. You also cannot rest because you are afraid that what you stole will be stolen from you. What is the use of a luxurious house if the price is a lifetime of scrutiny and bad looks from our fellow citizens? You will gather millions of pesos worth, which you cannot even spend because it might lead to your imprisonment when you spend the stolen money, so you will just hide it. But those who hid it, we have still unearthed. Why would you allow your name to be tarnished if you couldn't even benefit from the money you stole from the public treasury? My question was long, my mother's answer was very simple: “We really can't understand them, because their mindset is different from ours. So don't waste your time trying to understand what cannot be understood.”

Indeed, something else beats in the heart of a true public servant: loyalty, integrity, and compassion for others. It is with these qualities that the people you have sworn to serve will measure you. And as Filipino soldiers, the peaceful future of the people rests on your shoulders. It is clear: doing what is right is the key to the stability of our country and to our collective success.

And isn't there also a corresponding care for your sacrifices? This is proven by the reforms we are laying out on the straight and narrow path that are reaching your colleagues. We know the hardship of your work, so as recognition of your fight against bad elements, responding during calamities, and maintaining peace in our country, the government has numerous programs to ensure that our soldiers and police will no longer be poor cowboys. We are focusing on your needs to ensure that you can properly fulfill your obligations to the country.

Currently, we have built 21,800 housing units for our soldiers and police in Luzon. A plan is also in place for this year, running for 15 months, including funding from the National Housing Authority, to build an additional 31,200 housing units for the second phase of our program. The scope of this program is also expanding: personnel from the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology and the Bureau of Fire Protection, who have been overlooked for a long time—including the Bureau of Corrections—will also benefit. And what's even better, it will extend to your colleagues in the Visayas and Mindanao.

Let us remember that, before we were appointed to office, it took them 15 years to reach 33 billion pesos in funding for the AFP modernization program. Fifteen years: 33 billion pesos. We did not hesitate: in just 18 months, we have raised 28 billion pesos, and 18 projects under the current modernization program have been successfully implemented. From the maiden voyage of our first Hamilton-class cutter—the BRP Gregorio del Pilar, to the brand new Combat Utility Helicopters patrolling our skies, we are really ensuring that you are provided with your needs, so that you are even more motivated in your work, and can help more Filipinos.

And to facilitate the monitoring of undesirable elements, we have also illuminated thousands of sitios. Imagine: According to data from the Department of Energy and the National Electrification Administration, almost 36,000—let me repeat—36,000 sitios were left in the dark by the previous administration. To test whether the DOE and NEA could implement their project, we allocated 1.3 billion pesos to illuminate the targeted 1,300 sitios in the last quarter of 2011. Careful planning and efficient implementation by the DOE and NEA: our target of 1,300 sitios to be illuminated became 1,520, and we completed it in just 90 days. The previous cost of one million pesos per sitio was reduced to around 700,000 pesos per sitio. This is just proof that on the straight and narrow path, we meet the needs of Filipinos, not in due time, but right away. In other words, the previously estimated one million, became 700,000. We had savings of almost half a billion, which will be added to the lighting fund this year. At least 3,000 more sitios will be connected to the national grid.

I know that the path you have taken to achieve your dreams has not been easy. Join me in making the path easier for the next generation. There will be times when temptation knocks to take advantage of others, and deviate from the straight path. But you must be guided by the thought that with every act of taking advantage, you are also causing hardship to fellow Juan and Juana dela Cruz. When you take advantage, you are guaranteed to be harming someone. And if you do something good, you are also guaranteed to receive a blessing in return, for you and for our country.

Let us remember: we can only achieve our aspirations if we are willing to fight for them. To all members of PMA Class 2012, BAGWIS: cherish, and do not forget this day. Whenever you face a crossroads, look back on this day to refresh the true reason why you chose to be part of this institution; why you chose to be a soldier of the Philippines; why you were able to overcome and succeed in all the trials at the Philippine Military Academy.

I hope that after a few decades, when you meet the new PMA cadets, you can look at them without hesitation, and say to them: “Your situation is better, and the soldiers today are more successful and more respected, because to the best of our ability, we gave our hearts and strength—not occasionally, but always—for a more comfortable future for our true Boss: the people.”

Good day to you. Thank you very much for everything.

Read the speech in English