[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zakmTuU7JTw[/youtube]

Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the conferment of the Freedom Medal upon him by the Friedrich Naumann Stiftung

[Delivered in Berlin, Germany, on September 20, 2014]

When I was a young boy my concept of freedom was it was something to defend against a foreign invader. Then when I was in grade six, Martial Law was proclaimed. I thus quickly realized that freedom is a concept that can be taken for granted by those whose freedoms are never challenged. The night that Martial Law was declared, my father, who was perceived as the presidential candidate of the Liberal Party, was at the top of the order of battle. He was—to use the euphemism of the dictatorship—detained, for seven years and seven months.

In those days, the dictator was all powerful. No one could travel outside the country without his approval. The country was subjected to a curfew. Freedom of assembly became merely a memory; while freedom of information consisted of reading the media of praise for the dictatorship.

There were numerous deaths, imprisonments, and torture perpetrated under the regime. The economy became stunted. Philippine growth was stunted. I remember one day in school, a brother belonging to the society of Jesus, who happened to be a Basque, pulled me out of class, and he told me that in a period of Martial Law, do not trust anyone. I was taken aback as a young child of about 12 years old, when this man of the cloth told me not to trust anyone. Thus began my quick maturation.

At one point during these Martial Law years, I asked my father, “If we are in the right, why are we the one’s in exile? Why are we the ones suffering?” His answer was, “How can those who cannot even  eat,  think of concepts such a freedom and dignity?”  He then said something that has stuck with me all my life; he said, “The first freedom that has to be won is the freedom from hunger. Otherwise all other freedoms are meaningless.”

Our generation, the so-called Martial Law generation, had a dictatorship as its main life-shaping event. The victory of the people’s aspirations embodied in the EDSA People Power Revolution, ended with a simple vow; and it said: “We will never allow such a situation to occur again.” When I joined the Liberal Party and became aware of the assistance of the Friedrich Naumann Stiftung, I came to realize just how important this work of solidarity is.

Perhaps this idea is most profoundly articulated in a saying attributed to pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer, which encompasses the need for solidarity in defence of freedom, and may I quote: “First they came for the communists, but I was not a communist so I did not speak out. Then they came for the socialists and the trade-unionists, but I was neither so I did not speak out. Then they came for the Jews, but I was not a Jew, so I did not speak out. And when they came for me, there was no one left to speak out for me.”

We do have to assist each other in the pursuit of all freedoms. We must begin with the freedom from hunger, so the people we serve arrive at the very first state. From there, we can work towards the diminution of tension; and the state of cooperation will allow us to achieve our communal aspirations. I accept with all humility and gratitude on behalf of our people, this distinct honor that you have bestowed upon me, and we will forever be grateful for the recognition of our efforts in advancing the cause of all humanity.

Thank you sir, and good day.