Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Graduation of the Philippine National Police Academy “Mandilaab” 2014

Good afternoon to everyone.

Today, we pay tribute to the 202 brave cadets of the Philippine National Police Academy. After you have overcome four years of challenges and trials, we can truly be proud of your success—You who were tested for strength and did not waver; whose skills and power were measured, and you excelled, so now you face the people with your heads held high to say, “Bosses, we are ready to serve you.”

As a new generation of public servants honed by the PNPA, I am confident that you will wholeheartedly face the trials that await you outside the academy. I expect you to clearly understand what is right and wrong; I expect that as enforcers of the law, you will not fail to comply with it: You will not be police officers who drive without a license or initiate extortion; you will not allow yourselves to be instruments in the escape of prisoners, or be a fire department that is slow to respond after negotiations. Instead, may you serve as a symbol of justice, integrity, and service. I hope you do not disappoint our Bosses.

What I assure you is this: if you are ready to turn away from temptation; if you are ready to pursue those who escape the law, and fearlessly face danger to protect your fellow citizens, the trust of every Filipino will be your partner in service. Remember also: Any corruption you allow within your ranks will surely bring harm to our countrymen. When you choose to turn a blind eye to the oppression of citizens' rights, expect that tomorrow, your own rights will be trampled upon.

You are also aware of the changing face of public service in our country. Leading this transformation is your leadership, under the honorable Secretary Mar Roxas of the Department of the Interior and Local Government. With good governance, we are ending the era of uncertainty due to the lack of arms and equipment.

Perhaps some of you still remember the image of the police, warden, and firefighter that we encountered. Imagine your colleagues who served without guns. Would we expect that when he shows his badge or baton to the pursued criminal, the criminal would voluntarily surrender? How could our firefighters respond quickly if our trucks are lacking and dilapidated? For a long time, your ranks have been trapped in this situation; you were given false hope, trained with “that will do,” and made to believe that “it’s probably brand new,” when in reality it was secondhand, if we were lucky. The result: poor quality of service, and your lives are put in even greater danger.

This is far from what we are doing on the straight path. We have already purchased 74,879 Glock 17 pistols for our police force. Most of these guns have been distributed to those who need them, and we are just waiting for the ballistics test to be completed for the remaining ones that have not yet been distributed. It won't be long before we achieve a 1:1 police-to-pistol ratio. The good news is that members of Class Mandilaab will also be among those who will receive the new guns.

We have allocated more than two billion pesos for the mobility, firearms, investigation, communication, and rehabilitation components of the PNP under our Operational Transformation Plan. Procurement is ongoing for 882 units of patrol jeeps, 17,680 units of assault rifles, more than 200,000 magazines for the basic assault rifle; and nearly 5,000 units of mobile radio. In addition, we have approved the strengthening of the capacity of our government arsenal to create small arms ammunition, which will meet the needs of the AFP, PNP, and our law enforcement agencies.

For our jail wardens, we have procured 4,888 units of 9mm pistols to address the nearly 41 percent shortage. In the coming months, we also expect to reach a 1:1 jail officer-to-pistol ratio. Likewise, the development of the capacity of the Bureau of Fire Protection is underway. Last year, we acquired 76 Rosenbauer fire trucks. They have higher quality engines and water pump discharge capacity, but we were still able to buy them cheaper, due to the honesty that now prevails in our procurement processes. In addition, we have allocated P3.6 billion for the purchase of an estimated 300 fire trucks, and the construction of more than 300 fire stations. Truly, what was once thought impossible, we are now realizing.

There was no magic done to buy these equipment; your leaders simply followed their sworn duties. Now, our uniformed force is more capable. We expect that just as your leadership fulfilled their duties, you will also demonstrate the same integrity as new products of the PNPA.

It is clear: There is a government that cares for and values your contribution to society. The courage you show in defending the country against crime, your dedication to saving the lives of our countrymen from fire, and your loyalty in guarding within prisons—this is precisely the spirit that will propel us forward on the straight path, directly to a future that is truly peaceful, just, and prosperous.

The challenge and my mandate to all members of Class Mandilaab—the Warriors with Honor and Minds Dedicated to the Country—wherever you are assigned, whatever luxury or temptation tests the strength of your principles; always side with what is right, and what is best for your fellow citizens. May you live and uphold the vow of every Mandilaab cadet: the meaning of your lives as warriors lies in dedicating it to others.

The permanent transformation of our society is within reach. We are opening a new chapter in the history of our country where those who work hard are rewarded with progress. May you be agents of positive change to continue the development we are enjoying. With the guidance and help of God, and with the cooperation of the people, let us further strengthen our ranks walking on the straight path, straight to a future that is truly peaceful, just, and prosperous.

Thank you very much, and congratulations to all of you on your graduation.