[youtube]https://youtu.be/uY6UkeMC5Uw[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During his meeting with Filipinos in Chicago, Illinois

You all seem very lively today, ah. Just right. [Applause] You can see, we both are, very lively as well. Because, I was told, I was looking at these members of the cabinet. I said, “Why do your eyes seem so narrow now?” [Laughter] I said to them, “Didn’t you all sleep on Tuesday? We left on Wednesday, it’s only Wednesday now. You should all be fully rested.” [Laughter]

I’ll just share with you two things I remembered. Let’s talk about our countrymen who leave the country. There was one of our countrymen, going to America. He said, “Friend, I don’t know much English. Help me.” He said, “What kind of help do you need?” “Help me with how to eat there. I don’t know how to order, where to order, things like that.” “Ah, that’s easy. You’ll look for a place, usually the name is ‘diner’. Spelling D-I-N-E-R.” “What will I do there?” “When you go in there, you order. Go to the counter for faster service.” “What will I order?” “Well, the easiest: coffee and donuts please.” “What is that?” “Well, coffee and a donut.” “Ah, okay. That sounds good.” “And if you have a problem, we’ll meet there,” his friend said.

Well, he ran for a month before his friend who had been in America for a long time caught up. They met again. He said, “Buddy, I’m glad you arrived.” He said, “Why is that?” “Because for breakfast, lunch, and dinner, it was just coffee and donuts. [Laughter] I was purging myself. Teach me something else, if you can.” The person said, “Buddy, that’s all there is to it. It’s easy. Tomorrow when you go back to the diner, just say ‘ham and eggs please’.” “What is that?” “Ham and eggs.” That person, even the night before, was already dreaming about ham and eggs. If you’ve been eating coffee and donuts for a month, ham and eggs are really something else.

He woke up early to have a different breakfast. He went to his favorite diner. He sat at the counter again. He saw the waiter he always ordered from. “Ham and eggs please.” He was answered, “Fine, how would you like your eggs?” [Laughter] He replied, “Pardon?” [Laughter] “You know, boiled, scrambled, fried, sunny side up, over easy.” Everything, even Benedict, was mentioned. The person said, “Okay, coffee and donuts please.” [Laughter and applause]

There’s one more. Filipinos are really brave. If they can’t do something, they’ll force themselves to learn. Back in the day when there were American bases in our country, there were visitors to Tarlac. Someone had their hair cut by us in Tarlac. When the haircut was finished—of course the barber still needs to shave the sideburns—when it was done, he sharpened the razor again. He thought, how do I tell him it’s finished? Ah, I know. The person said, “Hey, Joe. This is your the end.” But the razor was being sharpened, like that. [Laughter] Our American friend ran. [Laughter] I’m just making sure you’re all awake. Don’t worry, this speech is short. They made thirteen pages. [Laughter] This is my first time here, and maybe my last. [Laughter] Of course, we only have one year and one month left, more or less.

Consul said that Rizal visited here. I just thought: May is also when he visited. Well, we’re the same, May. Jose Rizal ended up in Luneta. [Laughter] In our family, my grandfather’s knee was a Katipunero. He was imprisoned in Fort Santiago. My grandfather was also imprisoned, wasn’t he left by Quezon there, imprisoned in Fort Santiago as well. My father, the third one, every generation has someone from our family imprisoned. [Laughter] My father, Fort Bonifacio. It took him seven years and seven months. And I’m the only politician in our generation, maybe I’ll be next. [Laughter] And if I do get imprisoned, I’m asking if I can be in The Fort instead. [Laughter] You know, we’ve been compared to Jose Rizal… My father was released somehow. It’s nice, perhaps there really is some fortuitous circumstance that brought me here in May. Now we’re on the formal part. Don’t worry, I’ll speed this up so it looks like it’s only six pages.

This is actually my first time to visit Chicago. So when I learned that our working visit here was confirmed, I was really excited. I said, this is my chance to fulfill one of my somewhat modest dreams: To taste your deep dish pizza. [Applause] When we were in Boston, we were introduced to deep dish pizza ‘83, just before we left. So I saw the advertisement, but I didn’t get to see the pizza itself. Thankfully, I can still eat pizza, I made it to Chicago, home of the deep dish. And I was able to try it earlier. It really is delicious. Of course, tasting that is secondary to what we truly look forward to; number one on our list is to check on you, our Bosses here, our Filipino compatriots. And I see that you are all vibrant, so my visit to you is truly worth it. [Applause] Chicago is known as the “Windy City,” but with the warmth of your welcome, I feel like I haven’t left Manila. So from our entire delegation: Thank you very much to all of you.

I remember, last year—just last year, I received a courtesy call from the Philippine Medical Association of Chicago at Malacañang. I personally thanked them for their annual return to the Philippines to conduct medical missions and provide care to our countrymen in need. During their visit to communities devastated by Typhoon Yolanda, many were cared for and the return to normal life was accelerated.

I also remember: During the Martial Law period and when our family was exiled to Boston, our professional compatriots in other places or different places, like here in Chicago, also showed concern. Even while abroad, you remained focused on promoting the welfare of our Motherland. So again, to those of you here now, to the more than 90,000 Filipinos residing here in Chicago, and to everyone who cares for the country from then until now: I sincerely thank you, on behalf of the nation, to all of you. [Applause] Of course, I will also not forget: During the last Presidential elections, I won—I guess that’s why I’m in front of you, right? And to be honest, the absentee votes were overwhelming. ‘Overwhelming’ doesn’t mean just two votes for me, one for the opponent. No. Our lead was huge. And until today, you are truly a part of this change. Again, thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

Back in 2010, the Filipino people chose to take the Straight Path. Our Bosses said: Stop corruption and the crooked system of governance; let us begin to promote a government that truly serves the country, and empowers our countrymen to rise from poverty. Now, the question is: How far have we come in walking the Straight Path?

I would like to give you an idea of our origins, where we are now, and what else we can do. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to report directly to you on the changes we are enjoying today; especially in this time when sharing good news still doesn't seem to sell, and isn't trending. So my request to you is, what I will mention, as if on Facebook, please don't just like it. Please share it as well. [Applause]

But that's true. When we talk to other members of the media, I said, “Why do you only release negative news?” They replied to me, “That’s our job.” “Isn’t positive news included in the news?” He said, “No. That’s how it has to be done. That’s normal.” And if you still lack… You remember the saying, “If a politician asks for ten things from you, they give you nine, they will forget the nine they gave you, and only remember the tenth.” I said, those ten things you asked for, the eleven, twelve, thirteen things you will ask for are what you complain about. So please, just share it.

Let's start with the issue of corruption. We all know that this has long been an obstacle to the development of the Philippines. Our first step upon assuming office: We appointed upright and trustworthy leaders. At the same time, we cleaned and continue to clean the bureaucracy and society as a whole. In total, we have filed 637 cases under various programs with the following names: Revenue Integrity Protection Service or RIPS of the Department of Finance, which monitors those who collect our taxes, the corrupt are prosecuted; the Run After the Smugglers or RATS program of the Bureau of Customs; and the Run After Tax Evaders (RATE) of the Bureau of Internal Revenue. You may have heard that: Prominent politicians who were once considered “untouchable” in government are now in their respective prisons, and if not, are under hospital arrest. [Laughter and applause] Agencies that were once notorious for corruption are now models of good governance. Just one example is the Department of Public Works and Highways, which, due to good management, according to the latest data as of March of the current year, has reached savings of P39 billion. Likewise, our ranking in the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index has improved; from 130th country in 2010, we are now the 85th least corrupt. [Applause]

Our basic principle is: Good governance equals good economics, equals good quality inclusive growth. So in terms of the economy, let's forget the label of Sick Man of Asia; other countries now see us as the Darling of Asia. Positive recognition from around the world continues: We are now investment grade; we have moved up 33 spots in the Global Competitiveness Report of the World Economic Forum; a 49-spot increase in the Ease of Doing Business Report of the World Bank; and according to Bloomberg, the Philippines is expected to be the world’s 2nd fastest growing economy this year. [Applause]

Truly, these achievements are historic: From 2010 to 2014, we recorded an average GDP growth of 6.3 percent. This is the fastest growth of our economy in the past 40 years. [Applause] Our target: 7 to 8 percent GDP growth this 2015. According to our economic managers, if we reach this, the resulting 6-year average will be the fastest growth of our economy since 1955, or in the past 60 years. [Applause] I have a little more faith that this will happen. Because in 1955, my parents got married, so that’s when I was planted. But I wasn’t born in 1955, I have two older siblings. [Laughter]

When it comes to foreign direct investments: When we took office in 2010, it was only $1.07 billion; in 2014, it reached $6.2 billion, which is a 479.28 percent increase. [Applause]

My writers are proud. They told me to just remind you of this. This is not a dream. This is not wishful thinking. These are real data that you are hearing. Despite this, we will not be content yet. We know that this is just the beginning and we still have a lot of changes to make.

Look: When the economy is strong, investor confidence in investing in the country will increase. More new businesses will emerge; more jobs will also be created. Result: More opportunities for advancement for more Filipinos. And with this, of course, the taxes collected by your government will also grow. This means that we will have more infrastructure to build, and social services will be strengthened. These social services will result in more educated, healthier, and safer Filipinos; our countrymen will be able to focus their energy on reaching their potential, rather than worrying about their basic needs. They will know more and become better at their jobs, which will further drive our economy. This is called a “virtuous cycle,” which is one of the keys to long-term and permanent change in our country.

That is why, to ensure that our countrymen can maximize the opportunities that are opening up, we continue to pour funds into our human development agenda. The budget for social services has all increased. Since 2010, the budget of the Department of Education has almost doubled; the DOH or Department of Health, has increased by more than triple; the DSWD, increased by 606 percent. We were able to do this without increasing taxes, except for what is called the Sin Tax or the tax imposed on tobacco and alcohol that was enacted to keep our countrymen away from vices and illness.

The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program is primarily among our initiatives. During the previous administration, 800,000 households were listed as beneficiaries. Now, 4.43 million households are benefiting from it. You know, even during my mother's time, in 1988, there was a free high school education program in the country. Secondary education became free, but the problem of out-of-school youth in our country also became clear. How can you go to school if you have no fare, if you need to help your parents earn a living, or if you are sick and weak? This Pantawid Pamilya program is what we saw as a response to this, where beneficiaries will be given financial assistance. And the condition is, ensure that the children go to school. A win-win situation, right?

In the health sector, our goal is universal healthcare, so we are expanding the coverage of the PhilHealth program. The data shows the difference: In 2010, the coverage of the program was 47.07 million individuals. In 2014, we increased this to 86.22 million individuals. Almost double.

In education: When you say “inheritance,” it doesn’t automatically mean that what is inherited is good. For example: what was inherited from the previous administration’s lack of classrooms: 66,800. In 2013, we filled all the shortages of our classrooms. The same thing happened with the backlog of 61.7 million textbooks and 2.5 million school seats that we inherited, which we closed the backlog in 2012. Of course, we also increased the budget for the needs of our upcoming K to 12 Basic Education Program, adding two years to our basic education program. We also allocated a budget of P45.62 billion for 2014 and 2015 to build 29,800 classrooms, and P560 million for 800,000 seats for these schools.

Good news also comes from our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority or TESDA. Since we took office, they have recorded more than 7.4 million graduates in various courses, under their technical and vocational education and training program. Just recently, I spoke with Secretary Joel Villanueva. He told me a story: There was a trainee who was apparently ridiculed by his friends when he said he wanted to be a mechanic. And with the help of TESDA, he did become a mechanic. Those who ridiculed him were even laughing at him. Now that he’s finished, he’s working in Australia. And how much does he earn? It’s like this: His salary is double that of the President of the Republic of the Philippines. [Laughter] It gave us an idea of a possible alternative career when I step down from office in 2016. [Laughter]

Our focus on the economy, coupled with strengthening our human development agenda, is truly bearing positive results. Regarding job generation: We recorded the lowest unemployment rate in ten years in October 2014. Let me clarify this: Our employment rate is real; there’s no hocus-pocus in the numbers. It’s not like working for just one week as a street sweeper means you’re employed. That’s not the kind of job we’re talking about here; it should be permanent and long-term. This is a real job and not just about making the data look good to impress the public.

I spoke with Secretary Baldoz—she’s upstairs—of our Department of Labor and Employment. According to their latest JobsFit Report, nationwide vacancy postings in the country average 150,000 per month. This report also states that from 2013 to 2020, we have many in-demand and hard-to-fill occupations. These include accountants or accounting staff, as well as computer programmers. And it’s true: When I went to Bicol State University, I spoke with their President and we talked about Accounting. When I was young, there were many Bachelor of Science, Major in Accounting, Bachelor of Commerce degrees. There seemed to be so many of those degrees.

The president of Bicol State University said that they teach the accountancy program, or they have an accountancy program. They produce many accountants and their program is good. But their own Accounting Department cannot be filled. The reason: They say that their students are being taken or recruited by well-known accounting and auditing firms as early as their third year. We all know that Accounting is a four-year course, with one year for review before the board exams. They are being recruited in their third year. That’s why even the school that teaches it cannot fill its own accountants. This is also the story when I spoke with Secretary Joel Villanueva of TESDA. They are also having difficulty filling positions for electricians, plumbers, refrigeration and air-conditioning technicians, heavy equipment trainers and operators.

I was thinking – and sometimes I wonder, am I really that old? [Laughter]

Back in the day, if you went home, didn't you often see signs posted on buildings saying, “No Vacancy”? Now, the signs you see everywhere are, “For Immediate Hiring.” Some companies even have their own gimmicks to entice people to apply with them. For example, there’s a call center. Their billboard says, have an interview with them and after your interview, they’ll pay for your breakfast. [Laughter] Apparently at McDonalds. Another company says that after your interview and if they hire you – don’t we usually have a celebration when we get a new job? – they’ll also cover the celebration for your family, your celebratory dinner. Apply with them and get accepted.

My point is: Did you ever think we would reach a point where our problem is how to train our countrymen to get into jobs, rather than graduates graduating and not being able to find work? [Applause]

To solve this, DOLE – DOLE has been coordinating with TESDA for a long time – is coordinating with industries to make in-demand and hard-to-fill occupations more accessible. They have nationwide job fairs, the strengthened Philjobnet which lists job vacancies on their website, and the Jobstart Philippines program, which aims to speed up the job search of our applicants through career guidance services, life skills and technical training, and an internship program. Because of initiatives like these, we are now filling the vacant jobs in the market.

Regarding infrastructure, the Philippines is truly changing. Projects that had been stalled for a long time; plans that had just remained as promises, we are now building and concretizing one by one. I remember: Just recently, we went to the province of Isabela; there was supposedly an inauguration of a bridge, called the Lullutan Bridge. [Laughter] I asked, why is it named that way? Is its full name Lulutang and Lulubog Bridge? [Laughter] We discovered: In the past, there was actually a bridge there that was a spillway bridge. So, it really would submerge when the water was high; float when the water was low. The problem was, it was designed so that if the water overflowed, it could withstand the overflow. That's why when the weather turned bad in 1995, many logs cut by illegal loggers and debris rushed through this river, destroying this Lullutan Bridge. And it completely floated and sank. What's painful is: that happened in 1995. Shouldn't it have been built much faster if the study of the area had been completed? We were the ones who built it, and it was completed this year, and it was completed within four years, it should have been three, but there were just complications with the land where the foundation comes from.

Now, let me add this: Every project we undertake is part of a comprehensive plan; it's not haphazard just to say that we've done something. We won't build a road and then just whisper to the wind, “Hopefully someone will pass here. [Laughter] Hopefully it will connect to the other town. Hopefully many will invest in this area.” We don't rely on “hopefully”; when we build something, we strive to make the accompanying needs complete: there are business investors, an emerging industry, jobs that will be created. Everything is included in the plan.

You know, when our diligent local government officials in Isabela and their congressman were there, they inaugurated the bridge; it cost P700 million. They told us, we still need a second bridge. And when Secretary Singson of DPWH said, it's in the budget and the Senate knows, it will surely be included next year. “If that's the case, we need a third bridge.” [Laughter] I said, okay. Isn't it, you get one, thank you; you get two, you are very lucky; you get a third, you might be the son of God. [Laughter] But think about it, we will probably build that third one too because the funds that should go to these projects are not being pocketed. [Applause]

What I mentioned to you are just a preview of the changes we are truly enjoying. There's a saying – actually a song – that came from America: You ain’t seen nothing yet. [Laughter] Let Noel sing it because I'm a little hoarse. We have a six-year term; we didn't say we would solve all of the Philippines' problems within the time given to us. But look, we are already reaping the positive fruits of the reforms we have planted in the country. The next administrations will surely harvest what we have worked for. This is if we don't lose our way, and if like in 2010, you will re-examine our next leaders.

As 2016 draws nearer, those who oppose us are becoming increasingly vocal. I even spoke to someone who told me: There are truly groups whose job is to criticize you and find fault in every move you make. And if they can’t find any, they’ll just create some. If a strong typhoon hits, it’s your fault. [Laughter] If there’s traffic on EDSA, it’s your fault. [Laughter] They even say that I had something to do with Manny Pacquiao’s defeat. [Laughter] I can’t just say, “Why couldn’t Pacquiao and I team up against Floyd Mayweather?”

Honestly, many are wondering why I’m not getting annoyed. I said, if that’s really their job—if they’re earning a living by insulting me—then maybe they should be added to our employment statistics. [Laughter] We can just tolerate them. [Applause]

Despite this, I believe: The Filipino people will not be deceived no matter how many days they lie, minute by minute they lie. We will not surrender all the changes we are enjoying, and allow us to return to the past. Like any plant, we need to water this change; it needs to be watched over and nurtured, to ensure its continued growth. We cannot simply be content with what we have achieved now; we cannot just leave it and watch events unfold. As always, the fate of the Philippines is in the hands of the Filipino people.

I am confident: Just like in 1986 on EDSA, in 2010, and as 2016 approaches, you will still be there to ensure that what we have started will continue. Our desire: To never return to the corrupt system; rather, to continue the good transformation of the country. And there is no other way to achieve this but through the cooperation of all Filipinos, wherever they may be in the world.

Therefore, as you work hard at your respective jobs or businesses, here is your government, fulfilling the mandate you have given us: to serve diligently and truthfully to the true Bosses, none other than the Filipino people. This is precisely the reason for our visit here in America, and in the coming days, or tomorrow, in Canada. This is the justification for our continued promotion of good governance and the delivery of appropriate social services to every Filipino. This is the essence of our pursuit of peace, order, and progress in Mindanao and throughout the country. Every moment of service, we maximize the opportunity to deliver more opportunities to Filipinos, so that they may control their own destiny.

So Bosses, let us continue to move forward along the Straight Path; let us continue to improve the country we love. Let us continue to reach for the Filipino dream: A Philippines that is abundant, not only in vitality, enthusiasm, and kindness, but also in the opportunity to develop oneself, the country, and contribute to the progress of the whole world.

Good evening to all of you. Thank you very much.