VIDEO:

[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=84rvygtYPDU&[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT:

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During his meeting with Filipinos in Spain

[Delivered in Madrid, Spain, on September 14, 2014]

Thank you very much. Let us all be seated, especially those holding posters, you might give that to me as a souvenir later. [Laughter] I thank you in advance.

Secretary Albert del Rosario; Brother Manuel Flores, the Vice Director of Colegio de las Maravillas; Ambassador Carlos Salinas and Mrs. Isabelita Salinas; then these are the people you should approach for solutions to your problems, I will start with Secretary Proceso Alcala, Secretary of Agriculture; [applause] Secretary of Trade and Industry, Greg Domingo; [applause] Secretary of Transportation and Communications, Jun Abaya; [applause] the one who created “It’s more fun in the Philippines”, Mon Jimenez; [applause] Secretary Sonny Coloma of Communications; [applause] Secretary Julia Abad of the Presidential Management Staff; [applause] and if you have a problem that is not covered by the names I mentioned, Rene Almendras is also here, he covers the jobs not mentioned; [applause] fellow workers in government; my beloved countrymen:

Good afternoon to all of you.

Perhaps let's start with this—when I entered this building, I was told that it was a school run by the Christian Brothers. As we all know, the Christian Brothers run La Salle in the Philippines. And we can see on the podium, it says “La Salle.” That’s why I feel right at home here. [Laughter] I come from Ateneo, you see. [Laughter and applause] But notice, the color of La Salle is green; the color of Ateneo, isn’t it, is blue. Here at La Salle, it’s blue. [Laughter] Perhaps that’s a sign that whether you’re from La Salle or Ateneo, we’re together for the good of the Philippines. So thank you. [Applause] That looks like a good sign.

'It's not obvious that we only slept for an hour since yesterday. We left Manila around 10 o'clock. We arrived earlier at 7 in the morning. Then, my colleagues were kind to me, they said, “Rest for an hour. Then, this is what you’ll study.” We have about 86 meetings and various engagements here and in America over the next thirteen days, if I’m not mistaken. So, you are one of the first people I spoke with. Like a cellphone battery, we are now fully charged.

Our first stop is España for our 13-day trip; we will go around Europe before heading to the United States. Since we are in España, we have a little Spanish with us. [Laughter] Spanish is the language, okay? Don’t say “Española,” just a little Spanish—which I hope my Spanish professors at Ateneo won’t mind. You know, before I say it, our recollection, all my Spanish professors at Ateneo were students of my grandmother. Because of their great admiration for my grandmother, they said I should be as good as my grandmother. So when I arrived, on the first day, I already had a quiz and an exam. I said: Wait a minute. Teach me first before you test me. Anyway, this is what I remember: Gracias a todos por vuestra hospitalidad y soporta. That Spanish is close to Kapampangan. [Laughter] Mon Jimenez said: It’s more fun with Filipinos. If we have time, Secretary Alcala will give his version of “Estoria de un Amor.” [Laughter] Procy, you have a contemporary here. Four people know that song “Estoria de un Amor.” Maybe Secretary Almendras knows “La Vida Loca.” But let’s be serious now.

Although our trip here is long and our schedule is packed, our visit is worthwhile. Because in gatherings like these, I have the opportunity to check on you, and to convey to you the gratitude of the nation for your contributions and sacrifices.

It just so happens that the FIBA World Cup finals coincide with our arrival here in España. It’s heartwarming to know that among those who came to España for the FIBA are some of our countrymen, or many countrymen, to support Gilas Pilipinas. But what’s even more heartwarming: our players did not disappoint us. It’s true, we didn’t win the championship, but many were really surprised by the skill shown by the Filipinos [applause]. For a game where being tall is a big advantage, you saw: Even though our team isn’t very tall, we really weren’t easily defeated by these countries with a huge height advantage, and are considered powerhouses in the field of basketball. No one can say that the Filipinos lacked effort, skill, and heart. So of course, we are proud of that.

Of course, you here, you show that same passion in your daily endeavors. We receive reports full of praise about Filipinos here and in other countries we have visited. You further prove to the world: Give a Filipino the right opportunity, and he will surely demonstrate extraordinary enthusiasm and skill. Thank you for your contribution.

And we, we are intensifying that enthusiasm, so that opportunities that were previously only available in other countries, will also open up in the Philippines. The news is, for example, with Secretary Linda Baldoz of DOLE, there are those who trained to be teachers but because of the lack of opportunities in the Philippines, were forced to work as domestic workers abroad; now, more than 150 of them are finishing their contracts, and will return to practice what they trained for. That is teaching, and that is just the beginning for our returning countrymen because there are opportunities in our Motherland. They will be closer to their loved ones, and our country will benefit from the field they trained in. We hope that their numbers will increase as the country’s economy continues to rise, and our education system is further strengthened.

Let’s talk about the economy. Many of you were forced to temporarily leave the Philippines to try your luck here in España. I can’t blame you. For a long time, the Philippines was known as the “Sick Man of Asia”—limited opportunities, low confidence in the economy, and only a few benefited from the little progress. But didn’t we prove to the world that by walking the straight path together, by uniting against the corrupt and exploitative, and with strong faith in God, we can change our destiny? This is the Philippine economy now: Asia’s rising tiger, bright spot, and all sorts of praise attached to our name.

Who would have thought that within three years, we would be designated investment grade status by three of the most renowned credit ratings agencies in the world? One of them wasn't even satisfied, and just this May, they gave us another upgrade to our credit ratings. The growth of our Gross Domestic Product for the year 2013 was recorded as one of the highest in Asia—even with us facing a series of calamities and tragedies. In 2013, we had the earthquake in Bohol, the Zamboanga siege, and Yolanda; even a typhoon named Santi intervened. Look at the achievements we’ve made: Since we assumed office, our country has received 20 positive credit ratings actions, and we have indeed been given investment grade by the most renowned ratings agencies.

We continue to strive to further accelerate our economy and the larger society. This effort is being rewarded with positive results, and for the second quarter of the current year, our economy grew by 6.4 percent—higher than Thailand and Indonesia, and equal to Malaysia. [Applause] This September, based on the Global Competitiveness Report of the World Economic Forum, we jumped 32 spots within four years; this is the highest leap of any country since 2010.

In tourism, our famous and very popular tourism campaign, “It’s more fun in the Philippines,” has been truly successful. This campaign recently won at the Warc-100 awards. It was said to be one of the best ad campaigns in the world. We ranked third worldwide, and number one in Asia. Our tourism campaign has greatly contributed to the increasing number of tourists visiting the Philippines.

My father used to say, “The first freedom is freedom from hunger.” So our goal is to empower our countrymen; prepare them to truly take advantage of the expanding opportunities brought about by our rising economy. The tourism sector contributes greatly to this. We all know that our countrymen don’t need to study extensively to benefit from this growing sector. That’s why many are immediately given jobs in various initiatives to introduce the beautiful scenery and pleasant qualities of our country to the world. The good news is: When we started, the number of our international tourists was 3.52 million per year; it has risen to 4.68 million in 2013. And of course, if the disasters that struck us hadn’t happened, I believe we would have reached five million. From January to June of the current year, 2.43 million have already visited—and we hope to reach 5 million this year. And with the enthusiasm shown by Secretary Mon Jimenez and his colleagues at the DOT, it is not far-fetched that we will reach our target of ten million annual tourist arrivals in 2016. Upgrades and positive steps in our aviation industry also contribute to this. Now, Philippine carriers can fly directly to London again. So many who want to visit the Philippines can now travel more easily.

Perhaps you also heard: In 2013, the ICAO removed the Significant Safety Concerns it had imposed on the country—that’s what we inherited. We inherited the problem, and we were left to solve it. This was followed by the EU allowing Philippine Airlines to fly to Europe again. In 2014, Cebu Pacific followed, along with the U.S. Federal Aviation Authority upgrading us back to category 1 status. Expect more routes to Europe and the United States from the Philippines. This means: We will have more flights, and more visitors to the country—a sign of the emergence of more opportunities for our citizens. This is good news for those attending APEC 2015, which will be held in our country next year, and for those attending the first Madrid Fusion Gastronomic Festival in Southeast Asia, which will also be held in Manila.

Our invitation to the world: We are not just more open for business, it’s more fun in our country. To those who haven’t been home in a long time, perhaps when you return, you will be surprised by the magnitude of the change. There are so many new buildings and the skyline is really different—not just in Metro Manila—but also in Metro Cebu, Davao, and other places. I will admit to you: Except when we were exiled in Boston, I have not lived in another country. But now, I myself feel lost because of the magnitude of the changes we are experiencing in the field of infrastructure. And sometimes I also feel my age. When we are told, “Let’s meet at Greenbelt or Glorietta,” my peers mean Quad. [Laughter] Fort Bonifacio, back in the day, I used to visit my father there. And I think there was only one road that traversed the entire Fort Bonifacio. Now, when you enter, you can exit to C5, or to Buendia, or to McKinley. In short, if you don’t plan your route, you might not get out of Fort—[laughter and applause] and there’s a lot to do there. [Applause]

Even in the field of traffic, things have changed. Our traffic is actually worse now. [Laughter] Our Business Processing Outsourcing sector, has reached 500,000 direct employees, this BPO sector of ours. And I’ve heard that three companies selling vehicles are reaching around half a million pesos. The amortization, they say, is P5,000 per month. So it’s easy to buy. So the road takes years to build, while buying a car might take only weeks. So we are doing a lot in public transportation as well. So when you come home and get stuck in traffic, just remember, these people are going somewhere. They’re not just driving around for fun. And that is also a sign of the vibrancy of our economy.

In various parts of the country, we are concretizing dreams that have been stalled or delayed for a long time due to neglect and mismanagement. Examples include: The Aluling Bridge in Ilocos Sur. It was built quickly, but it was planned 35 years ago. Now, it is open to the public. Another example is the Ternate-Nasugbu Road. It is only six kilometers long, but it took 20 years to build; it was started in 1994, and we also finished it.

If you haven’t been home for a long time, surely you’ll be surprised by the many new highways that have been opened. For example, the TPLEX, or Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway. You can now travel on it up to Carmen, Rosales in Pangasinan. If you remember, during the time of Mr. Marcos, a highway was promised to us: the North Luzon Highway up to Carmen, Rosales in Pangasinan; and the South Luzon Highway up to Lucena in Quezon. This TPLEX will fulfill that promise. It will reach Urdaneta in Pangasinan this year and will be completed in Rosario, La Union, next year.

If you travel north from Manila, you can now take direct, large roads. Maybe the last time you came home, only McArthur Highway was there. Now we have NLEX, which connects to SCTEX, leading to TPLEX. That means “LEX is your anxiety.” [Laughter and applause] That’s why traveling to the northern part of Luzon is now faster and more convenient. Those who initiated this are already submitting a plan to extend this highway, like the NLEX, all the way to Laoag, Ilocos Norte, but that plan has not yet been approved. Going south, the South Luzon Expressway will be extended to Lucena, Quezon. These expressways and their interconnection have been ambitions for decades; these expressways were promised to us as early as the 70s. Luckily, I haven’t reached 70 yet when this came about. [Laughter] Others, we are the ones finishing them—it is expected that next year, the entire TPLEX will be passable.

There are many other projects that have been approved and are now being implemented: Our Laoag City Bypass Link Road Project. There is also an improvement in public transportation, called the Cebu Bus Rapid Transit Project. The buses will be made to look like trains, but they will be easier to build and more beneficial to our countrymen in Cebu City. The LRT Line 1 South Extension—this is towards Cavite for the LRT—and the Line 2 Extension Project, which will go to Masinag. The upgrade of Busuanga Airport in Palawan, the improvement of various airports and ports, as well as the construction of Clark Green City, which will be a larger Bonifacio Global City in Central Luzon. The list of our infrastructure projects and programs is long. If we were to list them all, they say we might reach the Fiesta Nacional de España. [Laughter] But we only have one night here. [Laughter]

The point here is: Wasn’t it that simple, bumpy roads took so long to build? For those who haven’t been home for a long time, you probably remember that you had to count years just to complete one project. It’s very different now. Wherever you look, you can see transformation. This is part of our broad strategy to speed up the flow of services, boost commerce, and create opportunities and jobs for our countrymen.

I’ll just add this: We are achieving these new infrastructures without the government funds ending up in kickbacks and commissions.

(If you look on the internet later, the discussion about this speech will probably only be about coughing.) [Laughter]

DPWH, in the past, wasn’t it the poster child of corruption? Now, it’s a model of professionalism and efficient management. In fact, from July 2010 to May 2014, the agency, under the leadership of Secretary Singson, has saved more than P27 billion due to good and honest management. What is P27 billion? You know our soldiers and police officers, the lowest salary, right? It’s like 18,000 pesos a month. The rent they pay in places like the National Capital Region or NCR reaches between three to five thousand. So, with a salary of 18,000, five thousand goes to rent immediately. Then the rest, of course, is used to feed your family, to clothe them. And at the end of that, if anything is left—and we ask them: Oh, don’t be corrupt, behave yourselves. So what did we do? We have a housing program for our soldiers and police officers. They pay P200 a month, which will increase after 26 years, becoming 1,000 pesos. [The President coughed]

There might be someone casting a spell on us in the Philippines. [Laughter and applause] Sorry about that, while you’re praying for me, it won’t affect them. [Laughter] Anyway, think about this, now they pay three to five thousand pesos in rent, when the time comes, right, there’s something called a balloon payment, 26 years after, they will only be charged 1,000 pesos. In other words, we didn’t increase their salary, but we increased their disposable income because only P200 will be spent on housing.

There are now, if my memory serves me right, about 50 thousand housing units that have been completed in August. The point is, at first they didn't believe it would happen, but when the houses were being built, they rushed to finish them. But that's okay. So the point is, imagine, the cost of the first 20 thousand houses was about four and a half billion. With the P27 billion saved by the DPWH, how many houses can be built if we're talking about housing? How does the DPWH do it? If you happen to be in the area, go through Quezon Avenue then there's an intersection with Araneta Avenue, there's now an underpass there so there are no more stoplights for continuous traffic flow. Our initial estimate for that was P690 million to build. The DPWH reduced it, they thought it was too expensive, it became a little over P500 million. When we bid it out, because there was no 'tongpats' and kickbacks, the P690 million became P430 million. Imagine, in the past, about one third of the price was just pocketed. That's where the honest administration of Secretary Babes Singson and other members of the Cabinet began.

We are confident: With good governance, progress will benefit many, if not all. Our enthusiasm for the economy and commerce is connected to our broad strategy for social services. We are no longer waiting for what is called trickle-down economics. The benefits for Filipinos should reach them. As my younger brother, Kris, says, “Now na!”

For example: In our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, 4.1 million of the poorest families have been saved from hunger and despair. We have expanded it to include families with children up to 18 years old. Before, it was only up to grade school, now it's up to high school. Why did we extend it to high school? Because a study by the Philippine Institute of Development Studies under NEDA estimates that those who graduate from high school earn 40 percent more than those who only finish elementary school. The goal is: Increase the government's contribution, so that it generates greater benefits for the families benefiting from the program. Let me repeat: The program is simple; you will be given a stipend from the government. The condition is, keep your child in school. Now, keep them not just in grade school but finish high school where they earn 40 percent more. That's what we call empowering our people.

In education, DepEd really showed excellence. When we took office, the backlog in classrooms we needed to build was: 66,800 classrooms. The estimated price per classroom was almost P800 thousand. That shortage has now been eliminated. That was one of the last achievements of Secretary Armin Luistro, after he completed—oh, by the way, Bro. Armin is, of course, a Christian Brother, from La Salle; that's how it is when an Atenista and a Lasalista work together. So, the 66,800 classrooms are finished. He also completed the 61.7 million books that were lacking, and lowered the price of the books—we now pay only 60 percent of the old price. And with a textbook, with a classroom, it was also accompanied by two and a half million chairs for public schools. Now we are focused, and DepEd especially, on newer needs, and on the continued implementation of our K to 12 Basic Education Program which will ensure the quality of our youth's education. There are also meaningful programs from TESDA. Imagine: In just one program called Training for Work Scholarship Program, more than 632,000 have already graduated. Let me just remind you: When we were not yet in office, the percentage of TESDA graduates who find employment was 28.5 percent. Less than one third. It's very different now. According to the latest study, we have reached 68.5 percent of TESDA graduates in 2012 who have jobs. The rest, of course [applause] are being helped by TESDA to find employment. In fact, in specific fields such as semiconductors and electronics, 91 percent of TESDA graduates are employed; 91 percent is the placement rate. We are still using the strategy here: The government invests in the skills of Filipinos; now, TESDA graduates are also contributing to the economy, and paying taxes which we will reallocate to services that their fellow citizens will benefit from.

In health, we continue to expand the coverage of PhilHealth. We have also extended the service for what are called catastrophic diseases. We continue to build and renovate hospitals and medical facilities, so that more Filipinos can be reached and cared for by the state.

In the DOST, Department of Science and Technology, before, all we could measure was the strength of the wind and sometimes we were even misled about where the typhoon was going. Because we know that lives depend on proper preparation, we became diligent in upgrading our equipment and capabilities. Now, we are not just talking about the strength of the wind when a typhoon arrives; we now have a color code for the strength of the rain, and how much water will fall, has also been identified and studied; the areas that are more at risk of being hit by disasters have been identified. Because of this and all their efforts, our people receive warnings earlier and are given the opportunity to evacuate to safer places. Of course, our goal is for no one to live in what are called danger areas. But that is a big process.

These are just a few of the sectors that truly represent the changes being enjoyed by our society. The list is long: For those who have relatives in the police and military, as I mentioned, their housing, modernization of their uniformed ranks; they have new and calibrated weapons, along with benefits such as housing that I mentioned, and other equipment to really become experts in solving crimes and protecting our welfare. For those who used to live in ARMM: Peace in your region is imminent. And for all of us who are angry at corruption, you are the witness: Truly now, from those in the highest positions to the frontliners of our bureaucracy, whether rich or powerful, if you are corrupt, you will really be held accountable. You have probably seen the photos of those in jail. In fact, some are already imprisoned and undergoing trial. Our promise is, it will go through the proper process and no one will be imprisoned who should not be, but those who should be imprisoned will be ensured to be imprisoned. [Applause]

To my beloved Bosses, this is the reform: the system is being organized; the economy is being developed and accelerated, to forge a society full of opportunities.

Whenever I face our Filipino brothers and sisters, OFWs, I am truly amazed by what a Filipino can do. The Filipino is courageous. We have seen this in our peacekeepers in Golan Heights who performed their duties with courage and dignity. We also see this in our soldiers guarding Ayungin. The Filipino is compassionate. We have measured this in the face of successive disasters that have struck our country—this was seen in every volunteer, government employee, social worker, and OFW who worked together to lift their fellowmen from tragedy. Above all, the Filipino has conviction. He or she fights for what is right, just, and beneficial to others. We saw this in 2010, and it continues to be lived out by every Filipino who is our partner in the path of true reform.

I know, many of you have prospered here; all of you have gone through various experiences to improve yourselves and your families, here or in our beloved Philippines. No one can say that your success came from talent that suddenly appeared when you came here. What happened was that you found yourselves in a situation where you could truly show your skills and dedication. Our ambition: Whatever you have achieved here, may also be achieved by Filipinos in the Philippines. Whatever diligence Filipinos show, may be matched by sufficient opportunities and state support; we desire a system where integrity and perseverance beget comfort and progress. And the best thing about that, I can tell you, and our entire delegation can say now: The Philippines is heading in that direction.

Now, on this trip, we are showcasing the transformation that is happening to us. The continuation of our progress is not due to luck: We are talking to industries and businessmen, to find out their needs, not just now, but also in the future. We are identifying which sectors will bring broader opportunities and livelihoods to Filipinos, and that is what we are really focusing on and strengthening. And our counterparts recognize the changes happening in the Philippines. Imagine: They say it used to be difficult to find people to meet with on trips like these. Now, as I mentioned earlier, we have 86 engagements on this trip, and we are trying to accommodate everyone who wants to talk to us. The summer vacation here is just ending, but when we said we were going here and to other countries, many people really expressed their desire to talk to us, to take advantage of the opportunity.

As we tell them, I will also emphasize to those of you here: All the changes we are enjoying are due to the restoration of people's trust in the government and in themselves; it is due to a fairer system; it is due to good governance.

We—we Filipinos, wherever we are in the world—made the change. We will also continue it. I will always emphasize: You are my Boss, and you are still my strength. Boss, it is an honor to serve you. It is an honor to be the leader of a great race—a race that makes the impossible possible, a race that is ready to overcome challenges and continues to excel. You prove that, truly, the Filipino is worth fighting for. [Applause]

Bosses, it is not impossible to achieve our collective aspirations. We have seen what we can achieve in just four short years. Let us now hold on to the extraordinary opportunity to pass on to the next generation a Philippines that we can truly be proud of—a country that you will one day return to and serve as a haven in your old age; a society that is a source of opportunity for every Filipino; a Philippines where no one is left behind.

Good afternoon, and thank you very much.

Learn more details of President Aquino's visit in September 2014.