Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During a meeting with two business clusters in Japan

[Delivered in Tokyo, Japan, on June 4, 2015]

Let me first say how pleased I am to see many of you again, here in Japan. More often than not, our meetings have been in the Philippines, where I have attended your inaugurations, expansions, and groundbreaking ceremonies—all of which were already welcome signs of your confidence in my country. Your presence today shows me that you are pleased with the success of our partnership, and that you want to deepen this further. Indeed, it goes without saying that we have been able to work together towards ensuring our mutual advantage. Thus, whether your facilities are yet to be constructed, undergoing construction, or already in full operation, we thank you for your decision to bet on the Philippines.

Those of you present during my address earlier would have taken note of the promising growth that Philippine manufacturing has posted from 2011 to first quarter of 2015: 7.1 percent, to be exact. You also know of our drive to enhance the state of infrastructure in the country by increasing our infrastructure budget to at least 5 percent of our GDP by next year, and by undertaking public-private partnerships. The potential for further growth is high, and we intend to do everything we can to make sure that our business environment continues to help our economy—and your enterprises—thrive.

That is why, for example, we have pursued training programs in partnership with the private sector, specifically to ensure that Filipinos find employment in manufacturing. In 2014 alone, 26,233 graduates benefited from trainings in machine operation and consumer electronics, among many others. We have also worked on setting up various research and development facilities. The Advanced Device and Materials Testing Laboratory (ADMATEL) has been operational since 2013, to provide testing services in failure analysis and materials characterization. That same year, the Philippine Institute for Integrated Circuits started its training program for our engineers. We have other things to look forward to: this month, for example, is the launch of the Electronics Product Development Center.

Those who wish to partake in Public-Private Partnerships, will be pleased to know that we have implemented mechanisms to ensure that your businesses are protected from risk. The Contingent Liability Fund is one example: from this, funds will be drawn in case government breaches its obligations under PPP contracts. With 28 more projects in the pipeline for development, we want to do everything we can to attract the right investors.

I spoke about these initiatives in order to give you an example of what you can look forward to, in the next few years. The bottom line is that we in government are doing everything in our power to show you that your decision to choose the Philippines was the best you could have made. As for my countrymen—I believe you have already seen that, given their loyalty, creativity, and dedication, Filipino workers are some of the best around. Why else would you have entrusted them with the success of your businesses? The signings we are witnessing today are indeed a concrete vote of confidence in my countrymen. As their representative, I can tell you: they will not let you down.

Thank you, and good day.