Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines On the anniversary of Araw ng Kagitingan (Day of Valor)

Almost three generations have passed since Bataan fell. After intense fighting, the combined forces of Filipino and American soldiers were forced to surrender to the Japanese. On this day, we gather once more to pay tribute to the collective valor of those who fought during these times. Along with remembering their heroism, we stand, together with our former allies and adversaries, as united nations in promoting widespread peace and development in the world.

In connection with our commemoration of Araw ng Kagitingan is the celebration of Philippine Veterans’ Week. To our veterans: The Filipino nation salutes the courage you demonstrated in defending freedom and promoting a better future. It is only right that you, who have shown concern for your fellowmen and country, should be cared for and your rights upheld.

Through good governance, we further improve and expand the benefits you receive. We are primarily focusing on the cleaning and streamlining of the list of veterans receiving aid, under the Pensioner’s Revalidation Program. Of course, it is only just that only legitimate veterans receive benefits, and no ineligible individuals partake. That is why we are pleased with the intensified implementation of the Philippine Veterans Affairs Office of our Validation Program, through formal agreements with partner banks, financial institutions, local civil registrars, and other government agencies. The good news is: The records of our veterans are now digital, and are no longer manually listed. Because of these initiatives, the validity rate of our pensioner accounts list in 2014 was 99.95 percent. The money allocated for you now goes directly to you. As of March 2015, the PVAO manages 198,169 pension accounts of living veterans and dependents of deceased or disabled veterans.

Led by the Veterans Memorial Medical Center and 601 other public hospitals nationwide, we ensure that the health of our veterans is given focus. This includes the provision of daily medical subsidy when confined in a hospital. There is also financial assistance for medical operations such as cataract surgery, coronary angiogram, angioplasty, cardiac bypass, and chemotherapeutic agents. Since July 2010, 8,760 veterans and their dependents have benefited from these services amounting to P81.6 million. We also provide subsidies for medical products such as orthopedic implants and prostheses, hearing aids, and dentures.

Since July 2010, 15,571 dependents of our veterans have been supported by the state in their education. Under the PVAO’s Educational Benefits Program, we have financial assistance of up to P36,000 per year for each qualified student. The funds we have allocated for this since we assumed office: P305.2 million.

We are now seeing: The sacrifice of our veterans is being reciprocated by the state. This is coupled with the continued care for our active soldiers and police. Within and outside our country, they demonstrate the unwavering excellence of our uniformed personnel. They face dangers beyond what is expected or agreed upon. On behalf of the nation, we salute the courage demonstrated by our uniformed personnel, and all Filipinos who are willing to stand firm, whatever trials they face.

As we commemorate Araw ng Kagitingan (Day of Valor), we look back at the lessons of the past so that past mistakes will not be repeated, and we can finally reach our intended destination. Almost three generations later, the reasons that led to the world wars are clear to us. It is said that at the end of World War I, the victors overly humbled the defeated. They carried out traditional punishment, not only on leaders, but also on ordinary citizens. Because of the hardship of life, they lost hope, and there was room for the rise of fascism and national socialism. This led to World War II.

What exactly did we gain from World War II? As we always emphasize, we suffered immense damage from this war. More than a million Filipinos perished during that time. This is a huge number, especially since during those times, the population in the Philippines was only over 16 million. According to reports, Manila ranked second to Warsaw, Poland, on the list of Allied capitals that suffered the most damage during the war.

Therefore, we admire the generation of our veterans and leaders during World War II. After the war, instead of insisting on continuing the fight, they decided to choose the promotion of peace. They held the leaders of the defeated countries accountable through trials, and helped society recover.

The world stood firm: The tragedy that happened should never happen again, especially since there are really no winners in any war. We know that even those who survived and prevailed in the battle also need to rise from the ashes of war. Because of their decision, former opposing forces were given the opportunity to become allies. You can see, the countries that were helped to recover, such as Germany and Japan, are now helping to promote world peace and development.

On our side: The Philippines has overcome so many trials, especially with the strong support of the United States and Japan, and other countries. When we are hit by a severe calamity, aren't they always there to help and address our needs? To be honest, we no longer need to ask if aid will come from them. The frequent question is just: “When or how quickly will this reach us?” An example of this is the immediate response of the United States and Japan when we were hit by Typhoon Yolanda in 2013. Their governments deployed thousands of personnel, as well as ships and aircraft to deliver relief goods, and evacuate our affected countrymen. In addition, they provided financial assistance for the rehabilitation of affected communities. Of course, when they needed support, we did not hesitate to help to the best of our ability.

Clearly: Progress is impossible with disunity. Violence will only bring more suffering and misunderstanding, while unity yields development. This lesson further compels us to promote lasting peace in Mindanao and advance the Bangsamoro Basic Law.

Think about this: Those who were once our enemies are now our partners in achieving a just peace for all. By uniting to promote order in Mindanao, we can further expand opportunities for our people. Through this, no one will be tempted to side with radicals, terrorists, and those who promote self-serving agendas. Two generations have already suffered because violence prevailed in Mindanao. Now that we are here, we will not allow future generations to suffer the same fate. No matter how difficult it is, whatever pain we face, we will uphold peace because it is the way to achieve justice for all.

We are aware: The challenges we face, even now, are no joke. These include the dangers posed by pandemics, the damage caused by climate change, and the sowing of fear and violence by terrorists. If we fail to unite, many opportunities will be wasted, lives will be claimed by turmoil, and livelihoods will be destroyed by misunderstanding. The challenge to us: further strengthen our unity and move in one direction towards the realization of our collective aspirations.

Let us just remember: Even if we have differences, we still live in the same world. The legitimate problem of one is the problem of all of us. Therefore, the crossroads we face: will we help solve problems while they are still small, or will we remain silent and face bigger problems in the future? I remember my father saying that when you allow the rights of your fellow man to be trampled upon, you allow your own rights to be trampled upon.

Now that we are treading the straight and narrow path, we are gradually seeing a future where, even if problems arise, we have the capacity to address them, and we will no longer pass them on to those who come after us. This is also the spirit of joining hands and walking the same path as different nations towards achieving a collective goal.

Let me emphasize: It is the duty of this generation to maintain peace and continue to move towards broad development. The Philippines pledges to fulfill this, not only for the victims of past wars and violence, but for the present, and for future generations of Filipinos and our brothers and sisters around the world.

Good day to all of you. Thank you very much.

___________________________

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Magandang araw po sa inyong lahat. Maraming salamat po.