I am smiling because in just seven days, I will be stepping down from my position. And in this gathering for the anniversary of our Department of Foreign Affairs, I cannot help but look back on our accomplishments, and reflect on what we have gone through in the past six years.

Let me give you an example. You know, one of the heaviest trials we faced was the Arab Spring in 2011. At that time, the tension in Libya was severe, and the situation was very dangerous. The challenge for us: To ensure the safety of our countrymen there, and evacuate them to a safe place. The sad thing is, when I called and spoke to our ambassador at that time, he couldn't answer any of my questions with certainty. He always said, “mukha ho,” “Tila,” “Sabi nila.”

Following this, came the day of the oath-taking of the undersecretaries of the DFA—I don’t think there’s anyone present here from that time—and I was really hesitant to administer the oath to them that day. Before they took their oath, they gave me a briefing on the situation in Libya. They said: “Sir, we have lost contact with our embassy in Libya.” I asked why. They said the phones were shut down, and even the internet was closed by the providers.

At that point, you could see on their faces that they had nothing more to do about the situation. Inside, I thought: I am facing senior officials of the DFA; to become a senior official, you have been in the bureaucracy for a long time, you have gone through a lot, and you have extensive experience. So it is natural for them to be able to suggest a solution to the situation. But their briefing stopped at: “We have lost contact.”

My response is: In the Himalayas, there is technology used, it’s called a “satellite phone.” Go to the Himalayas, there’s no telco there, but you can communicate using a satellite phone. This satphone can be bought in many places, including the Middle East. How difficult is it to think that if we have no contact with the main person taking care of Filipinos in Libya, there are other ways to have communication there?

I revisit this not to mock anyone, but to remind us where we started. It’s probably not right that they left the problem and just left me to find the solution. I think it’s reasonable if you experts advise and present the response to those who need to decide.

To be honest, if this is the caliber of people who will help me manage our foreign relations, I was really worried. This might be what exhausts my strength and energy. What was my experience in foreign affairs during that time—me who doesn’t like to travel outside the Philippines?

All these fears were alleviated with the entry of Albert del Rosario as Secretary of DFA. As you know, just a few days after taking his oath, Albert immediately went to Libya.

I actually remember when I called him then, my question was: “Albert, the line is kinda bad, where exactly are you?” His answer: “I’m in Libya, Sir.” Of course, I was a little surprised, but that’s just how our good secretary is. That was the mark of Albert del Rosario, truly “lead from the front.”

In Libya, there were an estimated 26,000 Filipinos in 2011. About 20,000 of them were immediately evacuated to a safe place. As you know, there were really some who didn’t want to leave despite the danger. We can’t really blame them because they said they were hesitant to leave because of double or triple the salary, and they were worried about not finding work when they returned to the Philippines during those times. Despite this, we went back to them repeatedly and convinced them to come with us. Of course, as the situation in Libya worsened, it became more and more difficult, and the cost of getting vehicles to evacuate them became more and more expensive. For the last batch, we even used a ship. In fact, there were even foreigners who hitched a ride with us. You see: we weren’t just asking for help then, we were also helping others.

This display of excellence from our DFA didn’t just happen in Libya. Despite our limited capabilities and equipment, we pushed what we had to serve our countrymen. From monitoring and assisting our countrymen trapped during the tension in the Korean Peninsula, in Ukraine and in the Middle East, to promoting the integrity of our territory, to strengthening our relations with other countries, wherever in the world, you prove that you are Filipinos serving the welfare of Filipinos. Despite the doubts and dangers of the job, you remain steadfast; your dedication to care for our Bosses, the people, always prevails.

It’s true: when the helmsman is good, the agency he guides also becomes excellent. Albert wasn’t one to pass on problems; he was one to respond to problems, and sometimes even exceeded expectations. He didn’t need to be told, because he immediately acted and was truly focused on the welfare of our countrymen.

I said it before, I never had a problem motivating Albert; and if he ever caused me stress, it was because of my trying to stop him from going to the most dangerous place in the world. Despite the sacrifices and his illness, Albert still poured all his strength and ability into serving our Bosses. So to Albert: Thank you very much, many, many times over.

We also thank our awardees this year, for their tireless hard work and dedication in fulfilling your duties. We are fortunate to have role models like you in service; it truly eases my heart to know that you and our embassies work together to deliver the proper service and benefits to our countrymen. To all of you, thank you very much for representing us and for demonstrating the good qualities of the Filipino people to the world.

It is clear: Under the excellent leadership of Secretary Albert del Rosario, now continued by the equally capable Secretary Rene Almendras, through the service of the dependable personnel of the DFA, as well as the cooperation of other sectors and our Bosses, our good image in the world has been restored; above all, we have regained our national dignity. If before, we were the disregarded member of the international community, now, we are one of the respected nations. If before, only negative news about the Philippines made headlines, now, we are one of those consistently praised; wherever we visit, we always bring back good news for the Filipino people.

They say there is a belief that everyone who enters the DFA wants to work abroad. Some are even hesitant to show off their skills here in administrative work, fearing they will just end up stuck in the Philippines. My challenge and call to all of you, whether here or abroad, is to always maximize the opportunity to serve our Bosses. Let us continue to move forward, act, and decide, with one voice and one purpose. Let us emulate people like Secretary Albert del Rosario, who, at his no longer young age, did not hesitate to endure hardships and sacrifices to fulfill his pledge to the nation. Let us emulate our awardees, who, despite the trials, still chose to do what is right and just for our beloved Motherland.

Just one week left, and my term will be over. My appeal: Let us further strengthen our unity, and may we continue to promote the ambition: to leave the country in a far better condition than we found it. Until the very end, it is a great honor for me to serve the Filipino people and the Philippines.

Thank you very much, good morning to all of you.