[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mfVXq_JrkaA[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT:

My father once said: There is only one university in the Philippines—UP only, nothing else.

When my siblings and I were still young, that was already the constant refrain of my father. Here's a story:

My father asked our eldest, Ballsy: “Where do you want to study, my child?” when she was about to enter college.

The answer was, “Dad, I want to follow in your footsteps. I want to go to UP.”

My father replied: “That’s good.” And then, after my sister left the room, my father immediately spoke to my mother: “Enroll her in Assumption.”

To be honest, I was still quite young during those times. I was probably watching cartoons, glanced at my talking parents and wondered: What was that dialogue about?

I wouldn't blame my father if he had doubts before. It's natural for a father to worry about his child, especially since the University of the Philippines has long been associated with its image as a haven and refuge for free thinkers. This university wouldn't be what it is without a culture of active observation and vigilance over the rights of the people. The success of UP stems not only from the high quality of education, but also from the freedom that the Scholars of the Nation have to express their opinions and perspectives on the society they live in.

How many times has UP exposed the flawed decisions of the previous administration? If you recall, the UP Law Center in 2005 dissected the questionable contract of the Northrail project. They investigated and studied it, and thanks to their help, we were given the opportunity to re-examine the Northrail contract. We share the same view when it comes to copying or using any work without permission or proper acknowledgment of its true owner. Just because you're in a position of power doesn't mean you can distort and claim the work of others.

I don't think anyone here would doubt that UP is the most expert in many fields. At this point, I would also like to thank UP for awarding me the Doctor of Laws degree. It would take us a long time to list all your successful alumni. For example, Supreme Court Justice Meilou Sereno, and new Commission on Audit Chairperson Grace Tan, both from the College of Law, and Heidi Mendoza, a proud alumna of NCPAG [National College of Public Administration and Governance]. They are there to correct the crooked, right the wrong, and help us achieve the future we desire: A future where if you have a dream, you can work towards fulfilling it. A society where, when you turn on a light, there is electricity; when you turn on a faucet, there is flowing water; when you open your wallet, it contains money earned with honor, and you don't have to compromise your principles to achieve it.

Today, you, including your summa cum laude, John Gabriel Pelias, are now among the Iskos who will have the opportunity to change the system from within. To John: You have proven that you can overcome any challenge. I am confident that you will achieve many more successes, especially now that we are working to change the situation faced by Filipinos.

Many things are happening, so I am sometimes dismayed that good news doesn't reach you. Please don't be offended if I use this opportunity to reduce the negativity.

There are acacia trees everywhere here, so let's start the good news with our environment. I only recently understood why, despite the long existence of the Clean Air Act, the situation regarding pollution remains the same. Those majoring in science probably know this: air pollution is measured in total suspended particulates. Is that correct? The UN standard is 90 micrograms per cubic meter of air. When we entered, the measurement here in the Philippines was 166. Why? This is what happened. Each machine in the emissions testing center can only test a hundred vehicles per day. But the LTO itself says that testing centers issue certificates to three hundred to six hundred vehicles per day. In other words, hundreds of certificates are being done under the table, resulting in many vehicles emitting black smoke running on the streets.

What did we do? With the help of the DENR and LTO, we closed the testing centers that were complicit in the scheme. So, in the latest news, our suspended particulates in the air this February have dropped to 120 micrograms per cubic meter. The solution is simple. We won't wait for a tree to grow, because that will take a long time. But we will close the corrupt ones. We didn't call Captain Planet to solve this.

Isn't it true that when people see roads being repaired, they immediately think that those in government agencies are profiting from it? Fortunately, DPWH Secretary Babes Singson is also a product of UP. Your order to him, Bosses, is to fix the system. Babes opened all the contracts, and those with irregularities, he re-bid. The result: 1.3 billion pesos have been saved from certain theft, which could reach six to seven billion pesos for the whole year. He is now focusing this on services that our Bosses will truly benefit from.

In education, knowing that foundational ideas that shape students are formed in elementary school, we increased the budget for basic education, from 175 billion last year to 207.3 billion pesos this 2011.

Because of the many of our countrymen who are impoverished, we poured funds into the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program. Last year, one million families benefited from it. Our commitment is that before the end of this year, that number will increase to 2.3 million families. Here’s the good news: of the 1.3 million additional families for 2011, we have already added 500,000. We are ahead of schedule here, thanks also to the leadership of DSWD Secretary Dinky Soliman, who is also a proud UP alumna.

Let me clarify that the condition of the CCT is not “vote for so-and-so in the next election.” The conditions are: send your child to school; have pregnant mothers get check-ups; and have infants vaccinated. There are no losers here, right?

I remember a child I met in Baseco. You could really see the sorrow painted on his face. How could you not, he was only sixteen years old and already had two children. How will he feed the children, how will he send them to school, when he and his wife have no jobs?

Who failed? Who pushed them into this situation? How did this responsibility fall on their shoulders? And the most important question: What can I do?

I am fully committed to enacting the principle of Responsible Parenthood.

I am aware that there are those who oppose this. But as a leader, it is my obligation to reach out to all sectors, to talk to them and explain to them calmly—even if others say I should be excommunicated. We need to listen even to people who, in the view of many, have closed minds. But in the end, I need to make a decision. I still need to follow my conscience. I need to do what is right.

When it comes to taking a stand, UP is not lacking. That’s why, even as a senator, I already voted to amend the UP Charter. This gave you the authority to retain your income, including income from your idle lot in Commonwealth. If it used to be overgrown with cogon grass, now, in addition to adding income to your university, it also provides jobs for many Filipinos. I thank Senator Angara, Senator Escudero, and many UP graduates who reminded me to help UP.

It is difficult to introduce reform, because the filth of the old system is buried deeper than the roots of the trees in the Sunken Garden. But who wouldn't get upset if those who should be protecting the common people are just preying on what the powerful have stolen? You probably know who I'm referring to, so let's not dwell on this issue any longer. A simple “OMG” is our collective sigh here.

It's simple, isn't it? We are focused on our mandate to deliver justice to all, and everything will be subject to a fair and transparent process. There will be no sides, no factions in front of blind justice. Now, if others think we are only focusing on them with our efforts and time, maybe they are just paranoid. I believe the only thing chasing them is their conscience, which has finally awakened.

I admit: it's not easy to face you, especially since the Republic of Diliman seems to have a tradition of giving visiting government officials a warm and complex welcome. I accept that: Sometimes, we really come from different places. But I hope we all want to reach the same destination.

This is the process within a democracy, in my opinion: I have what I think is a good idea. Others also have ideas, which they also think are good, but contrary to mine. That's why I always say: Come here, let's sit down, let's talk, because when we agree, the result will surely be an even better idea that we will all implement together.

Let's be honest: There are issues hindering the growth of our society, and I don't blame everyone who is upset about this. But I hope you understand: Whatever path my administration takes, we are not thinking of ourselves. Our job is difficult, but we do it with open hearts and minds. We do it without stealing. We are only concerned with how to leave a Philippines where the problems we found are no longer as big, the obstacles, to lasting progress.

I didn't study here. But I clearly remember what my father told me: UP helped shape his principles, how he thought, and how he gained the courage to stand up. The Filipino people were suffering during those times. He could have just kept quiet in Boston. But he said, and I quote, “I hear my motherland crying.” He didn't come home because of a desire for power; he came home because he wanted to be part of the solution.

It's hard to accept that a person with such pure intentions was treated like meat thrown onto the tarmac and thrown into an AVSECOM van. It's even harder to accept that, despite his sacrifice and that of many others like him, nothing will change. Every day, since my father was murdered, I've been thinking: If I don't become part of the solution, my life might as well be meaningless.

Here we are now, perhaps because of fate, but more importantly because of the decisions we've made in life. You, the graduates today, have the opportunity to decide where we want to go as a country. We can choose to inherit a society comparable to a UP Ikot Jeep—just going around in the same old route while its passengers only end up at the familiar corner of suffering. Or we can choose to repair the rusting mechanism of the society we inherited; decide to deviate from the back-and-forth system of suffering, so that together we can move towards progress. I encourage everyone: Let's be part of the solution. Join us, so we can reach our desired destination faster.

I humbly ask all of you, Isko and Iska: As we act and take steps to repair the government, I hope you also live up to your obligations as Scholars of the Nation. Much is expected from you. May you greatly reciprocate the investment made in you by the people.

The question now is: when you are in high positions, will you remember the slogans you shouted while boycotting classes? If you can get your brother, sister, or organization mate who is truly guilty off the hook, will you? If you are already earning a lot of money abroad, can you still think of coming home? Will your hearts remain a bastion of honor, especially if there are those offering under-the-table deals to you, and if you are chasing the quota of the companies you work for?

Let us always remember that, like us in the government, you are here because of the people—for the people. You owe the Filipino people the honor of studying and graduating from the University of the Philippines. One day, you will face many whispers and temptations. On that day, I hope you remember the challenge of an older Atenean standing before you. Continue to carry the name of your university, the University of the Philippines, with pride.

To the Isko and Iska who were nurtured and molded by UP: congratulations. Your nation is waiting for you.

Thank you for listening, and good day to all of you.

Read the English translation