[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JMjRmwahlzI[/youtube]

Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the closing ceremony of the 40th Philippine Business Conference and Expo

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, Manila on October 24, 2014]

Good morning.

Just a couple of days ago, I presided over a small ceremony in Malacañang involving the heads of various government departments and agencies. It was an event where we concretized our commitment to redouble our efforts in the so-called last two minutes of our term: towards maximizing our service to the public, which, of course, includes business and industry. I thought it might interest you to know this; since they have signed their contracts, the members of my Cabinet are now duty-bound to be even more receptive to all of you. Thus, please feel free to call them anytime.

I believe that the past four years and three months have shown you the sincerity and, more importantly, the results of our commitment to turn the tide in the Philippines. Reforms in key systems and processes have led to leaks being plugged and resources being maximized; more contractors and investors are not only registering interest in infrastructure projects, but are competing to build what we need. The Philippines is ranked investment grade and continues to climb global competitiveness rankings. Our economy remains strong, with growth at 6.4 percent in the second quarter of this year. Even more good news, the first half of 2014 attracted net foreign direct investments of $3.57 billion, almost 80 percent higher than the FDI recorded in the same period in 2013. Manufacturing has rebounded, with 8.8 percent growth in the first half of 2014, and exports are up. All our successes reaffirm these basic truths: Integrity works, reform works, and the Philippines works.

Today, the “Philippine brand” has recaptured the attention of the world. I say this, recognizing full well that the private sector has played an invaluable role in the resurgence of the Philippines. Without the innovation it takes to nurture the growth of businesses, without your support for our reform agenda, and without your confidence in the Filipino people, we certainly would not have been able to come so far along the straight path to progress. I know we can make even greater strides, as long as we are able to create deeper, more dynamic, more impactful synergies between industries and government.

The resolutions that you turn over to us at every Philippine Business Conference are a good example of this; in a sense, they represent your sector’s vision of building a more progressive nation. We appreciate this. In communicating to us your concerns and advocacies, you are helping to pinpoint areas that can be improved, so that we can sooner achieve our goal of inclusive growth. In fact, I managed to read through the resolutions from this year’s conference. Let me be the first to say that we are in agreement with your concerns; this is not the first time we have heard about these matters, and I can assure you that practically all aspects of your resolutions are already being addressed by government. Perhaps you will allow me to clarify the issues surrounding two of your proposals.

First, on the formulation of an integrated and sustainable energy and power development roadmap: the efforts to reform the power industry, as embodied in EPIRA, are still a work in progress, and this is understandable, given the fact that our power industry is really a unique industry. For instance, even before groundbreaking, plants have typically sold all of their output. I know of no other business or industry that has already sold its goods, that have yet to be produced in a facility that has yet to be constructed. That, of course, is not an ideal situation.

Just-in-time supplies of energy do not engender more investments. Therefore, there is a need to change the business model, and that is also a work in progress. The work will be infinitely faster and more efficient with the cooperation of the business sector. There are around three major entities in power today who are putting their money where their mouth is and in their trust in the Filipino people, and are investing in the sector, even without long term power purchase agreements or power supply contracts. These kinds of plants are what our Department of Energy calls merchant power producers; and we hope that more investors will follow suit and will seek ways and means to encourage more in following their track.

As regards another one of your resolutions: the issue of port congestion has been a paramount concern since the truck ban; we know just how much it has affected, and can affect, the conduct of business in the country. This is why Cabinet Secretary Rene Almendras, other government agencies, and members of the private sector have been working hard to address the issue. One of your resolutions on the matter involves the utilization of the Subic and Batangas ports by shifting container traffic. This is a significant part of the strategy we have implemented, with the help of all concerned. Executive Order No. 172 , for example, designates these ports as temporary extensions of the Port of Manila, in times of congestion and other emergencies. Costs were lowered, to incentivize importers to shift to those ports. I understand a 90 percent discount has been given in terms of port charges so that these two ports are more attractive to shippers. The Philippine National Police has likewise ramped up their operations against hijackers, to ensure the safe passage of cargo. On the ground, the police have intensified their presence along our roads and highways, especially in areas identified to be prone to hijacking and carnapping, and this has not been done just recently, but even as far back as about two years ago. The implementation of a pass card system will also allow official personnel at Anti-Hijacking Control Points along major truck routes to ensure that drivers and their deliveries of cargo are legitimate, and that they reach their destinations safely. These are only some of the things we are doing to ensure greater efficiency and safety in the conduct of trade.

We have already seen some improvement: for the Port of Batangas alone, for instance, utilization is up to 94 percent this October. Compare this to its previous utilization rate of only 20 to 25 percent before we encouraged importers and exporters to shift to the Batangas port. Ship calls at Batangas have likewise increased from two to five ships per week.

In light of this, some might say that we can cross that off the to-do list, but in reality, the situation is far more complex. Diverting traffic to Subic and Batangas is only a short-term solution; high utilization rates for both may mean that we run the risk of transferring the problem we encountered in the Port of Manila to those very ports. Right now, the more effective solution in addressing the issue of congestion is to continue operations through the weekend. In support of this, the Bureau of Customs and the port operators, among others, are open on Saturdays and Sundays to facilitate the movement of cargo. Data from the Philippine Ports Authority, however, show that there are very few individuals and organizations taking advantage of this. Only an average of 1,100 containers are moved on Sundays, which represent less than a third of the average number of containers moved on other days of the week. Government can only do so much: our main purpose is to be an enabler. That being the case, solutions require the enabled, in this case the private sector, to reciprocate through active participation.

This is true for other concerns as well. From overcoming the rest of the challenges facing the power sector, to preparing for the ASEAN Economic Community, to enhancing the state of infrastructure across the Philippines, and ushering in peace and stability in Mindanao, amongst many others: government is implementing measures not only as a reaction to current and pressing events, but more importantly, we are strategizing for the future. In each and every endeavor, however, the private sector must likewise do its part.

We are doing all this because we want those present today, and the many other businesses across the country, to succeed. Your growth redounds to increased livelihood opportunities for our people, which in turn redound to an empowered consumer base and a productive citizenry able to take part in spurring the growth of our economy and of our region. Make no mistake: you do play a vital role and you have a vital role also in the progress of the Philippines and of each Filipino.

So, I invite you to join us in building on our already-strong partnership and in redoubling our collective efforts to surpass the challenges that remain. In this manner, we will not only sustain, but speed up progress for the country: progress that promises success not only for you, but for each and every one of our countrymen.

Thank you. Good day.