Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the celebration of Women's Month of the TESDA-Coke Sari-sari Store Training and Access to Resources (STAR) Program

Good morning once again to all of you.

Joel told me that because of you, he was able to perform at the Arena. [Laughter and applause] What he was telling us earlier, about the vendor selling jewelry, seems to have been edited. When I heard that, there was a vendor. He said, “Come closer. I’m selling genuine jewelry. If you have doubts, soak it in vinegar.” The buyer soaked it in vinegar, and it turned pale. He went back to the vendor, “You said it was genuine, why did it turn pale?” The vendor replied, “You know, ma’am, my jewelry is genuine. Your vinegar is fake.” [Laughter and applause] It wasn’t bought from you, you see.

When I saw that this gathering of TESDA and Coca-Cola was part of the Women’s Month Celebration, I remembered what our colleagues used to say when we were still in Congress: Why is there a special day for women, if they are treated as special by their wives every day? Of course, I have no experience with what they are saying, [laughter] so I will just move on to the real point of our event this morning. [Laughter]

Perhaps you have forgotten: I’m Noynoy Aquino. I’m single, and have no children. But in just 460 days, I will have a fight on my hands. [Laughter]

It is often said that the Philippines is a “young democracy,” and as President, it is my duty to protect and strengthen our democratic institutions and processes. In fulfilling this mandate, I recall the lessons of my parents, who truly faced the most difficult problems of our society during their time.

There was what my father said, “The first freedom is the freedom from hunger.” And it is true: How can we fully appreciate other kinds of freedom if our stomachs are rumbling, and it is uncertain if there will be food on the table? My mother, our “first woman President,” inherited the reins of leadership in the opposition from my father. She was like Gabriela Silang, who succeeded her husband Diego Silang when he died, and eventually led the revolution against the colonizers. During my mother’s administration, she really pushed for “affirmative action” for women, in terms of governance, and even in our police force and Armed Forces. As a woman and as a leader of the country, my mother knew that Filipina women could greatly contribute to shaping the destiny of the nation.

This is precisely the point of the TESDA-Coke Sari-Sari Store Training and Access to Resources Program or STAR: to empower and provide opportunities for thousands of women microentrepreneurs to contribute to the further development of their communities; to deliver greater comfort to their families; and to promote meaningful transformation of our economy. That is the goal of STAR: the so-called “economic emancipation” of more Filipinas.

The strategy of this sari-sari store program of TESDA and Coca-Cola is truly different: Aside from providing beneficiaries with access to additional capital and other alternative financial services, they are also guided in effective business planning and management, and in promoting gender sensitivity within the home and community. There is also peer mentoring, as well as linking our women entrepreneurs to business networks. Let us just imagine the great potential of this mechanism for our sari-sari stores. We are aware that every business, large or small, is a significant contribution to the growth of our economy. In these sari-sari stores, the vibrancy of trade is seen; here also do relationships sprout that serve as bridges for the further flourishing of business.

Currently, there are 34,000 beneficiaries of STAR. I heard that: During the first semester of 2015, 10,000 more women microentrepreneurs supported by the program will be added. [Applause] This is part of Coca-Cola's extensive effort to reach 200,000 Filipina retailers by 2020. Of course, we will not fault Coca-Cola if they increase this target. [Applause]

TESDA, under the energetic leadership of Secretary Joel Villanueva, continues to collaborate with various sectors to open doors of opportunity for more Filipinos. There is the Training for Work Scholarship Program, which provides knowledge and skills development to its graduates for what are called “hot jobs,” or jobs that are current and truly in-demand. For example, this is the IT-BPM, where we have allocated P1.3 billion for the training of approximately 185,000 graduates, since 2010.

If you think about it, of the more than 7.15 million graduates of TESDA's tech-voc programs from 2010 to 2014, almost 3.63 million of them are members of the women's sector. Among TESDA scholars, 710,848 out of a total of 1.42 million are also women. What do we want to emphasize here? The government is truly focused on providing opportunities for everyone. And if you look at it, slightly more women are being helped and reached by the government through TESDA. We are not dividing; women are in the majority. [Applause]

I believe my mother would be happy too, because I would like to add: Now, the TESDA training for women includes tasks previously associated only with men, such as welding, automotive servicing, and electronics.

For the Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises sector, which includes our sari-sari stores, we have full support. For example: The government has an initiative called the ASENSO Program, or Access of Small Enterprises to Sound Lending Opportunities; we are also opening “Go Negosyo” business centers in various parts of the Philippines for more efficient business registration, training and seminars, and strengthening market linkages between SMEs and potential consumers.

Today, we are here because TESDA and Coca-Cola are helping many women microentrepreneurs across the country, and we thank Coca-Cola for their continued support and belief in the Filipino people.

Because of the cooperation of the private sector, government agencies, small businesses, NGOs and LGUs: our women entrepreneurs are no longer just the light of the home or simply a partner to men in earning a living. They themselves serve as beacons of progress and hope for their communities. [Applause] It is true, because of our collaboration: Women win; the market and local commerce win; the Filipino people win.

Right now, with the world having such high confidence in us, now that we are investment grade, and with the praise our country is receiving from all sides, and now that opportunities are piling up from a growing economy, we are truly more motivated to strive to improve the quality of life for every Filipino. In our remaining one year and three months in office, we will double our efforts and further nurture the seeds of opportunity that we have sown.

Now, some are asking us: What will happen to all that we have achieved on the straight and narrow path when I step down from office in 2016? Who will continue what we have started? I have only one answer to this: You, the women entrepreneurs, and our millions of countrymen will continue all of this. You will steer our country towards even greater success. [Applause]

I am confident that the Filipino will always side with what is right and reasonable; that every Juan and Juana dela Cruz will continue to strive for their fellowmen and country. With our continued contribution and bayanihan (community spirit), and with the guidance of God Almighty, we will truly achieve a more prosperous and just society, a Philippines that is truly a source of comfort for our citizens. [Applause]

Thank you very much. Good day to all of you.