Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the Inauguration of the Lullutan Bridge

Imagine, we were studying – that was in the 70’s. Actually, that’s true, we were classmates. But [Rodito Albano] was one year ahead of me. You figure out why we were in the same class. [Laughter] And he was a bully back then. At 6:30 in the morning, someone would shout at you, “Hey, Aquino, number five!” I’d say, “What is this now? You should study.” [Laughter]

I’ve been with you in Congress for several terms, I think two, right? Two terms in Congress. When there was a debate and he was cornered, he would open the Bible and quote from it. Of course, no one wanted to debate when the Bible was used against them. [Laughter] When we got to the lounge, you’d just be having a snack, and there he was boating again. He would say to me, “Just eat here.” I said, “Are you really going to do that for three hours?” A three-hour speech, it would take me a week to recover and regain my concentration. He goes to so many places.

You know, when I was told we were visiting Isabela – of course, I was excited – until I heard we were inaugurating the Lullutan Bridge. It was just mentioned to me, I didn’t really read it. I said, “What was the name again? Lulutang?” Because in Tagalog, when something ‘lulutang’ (floats), something ‘lulubog’ (sinks). [Laughter] Is that right? The teachers here say it together, right, “Lulutang. Lulubog.” There’s even a poem about it in Tagalog. It was explained to me – the word “lullutan” is apparently Ivatan – and of course, I assume nothing will sink here at the end.

I also don't believe that our good Secretary Babes Singson would build a bridge that is just “good enough,” or “let’s just see.” It’s not like the old spillway bridge, right? When those reached you in the past, like Rodito, 1995—you were likely of age then—[laughter] when it rained, the spillway bridge really sank, overflow bridge. The problem was, when the water rushed, it carried logs, and it swept away the spillway bridge as well. [Laughter] But I know that no one is logging here anymore.

The story is this: it was in 1995 when the logs and debris carried by Typhoon Rosing destroyed the old bridge connecting the barangays of Calamagui 1st and Lullutan. When this happened, of course, you faced a terrible hardship: you had to go around through Gamu or Tumauini. It would take you one and a half to two hours to travel when this bridge wasn’t there. Of course, products needed to be loaded onto barges or boats. It took nine hours to cross, and it was an added expense for the traders and those crossing this river. Now that we have restored the bridge, your travel time is now estimated to be only five minutes from the previous one and a half to two hours. Your ordeal is over. [Applause] Aside from your travel being more comfortable and cheaper, you can sell your products in the market while they are still fresher.

I can’t get it out of my mind: Why were our countrymen here made to suffer for 20 years? Now, if it’s up to me, just ask those who came before me why it took 20 years [Spoke to Secretary Babes Singson: Babes, we started here in 2011, right?]. Of course, an explanation was given as to why it was delayed. It’s not something we’ll ask my mother, because Typhoon Rosing was in 1995, and my mother finished her term in 1992. It’s a pity because if the value of this project had been given immediate attention, how many hundreds of thousands of our countrymen could have improved their livelihoods and travel long ago? It’s also not an exaggeration to say that the cost would have been much lower if it had been built back in 1995. It’s clear: on the straight path, we promote what is called justice, and not “just-endure.”

This Lullutan bridge is one of the concrete proofs that we are not neglecting Isabela. Because Rodito didn’t support me then, I was only number 2. [Laughter] But you are number 1 to me. [Laughter and applause] He said he would support me when I run. I know I’m already term-limited. [Laughter] I couldn’t bear to let your suffering continue, so we built this new bridge.

The report to us states that at least four municipalities, or more than 200 barangays, will benefit from the new Lullutan bridge. Under the leadership of Secretary Babes and the DPWH, we ensured that the quality of this bridge is excellent and durable. As always, we pushed for what is called the 5Rs for this: right project, right quality, right people, right time, and the right cost. [Applause]

It was no small feat to build this half-kilometer bridge. The funds allocated: P772.92 million. Think about this: only 6.5 percent of the National Budget was left when we assumed office on June 30, 2010, to run the country for the remaining six months of the year. But as you can see, by June 9, 2011, less than a year into our term, we had already accumulated some funds and gained momentum, so we immediately began the construction of the Lullutan Bridge.

You know, your situation here in Lullutan is not unique: initiatives that were supposed to ease the lives of our citizens were left with just empty promises, or what is called “sweet talk.” We inherited many projects that took decades from planning to implementation. For example, there’s the Ternate-Nasugbu Road in Cavite, Batangas. This road is only six kilometers long, but it took almost 20 years to complete. We opened it in 2013. There’s also the Aluling Bridge in Ilocos Sur, which was planned as early as 1978; we also finished that. There’s also the SLEX Toll Road 4 Project that we will soon begin – this will connect the Southern Luzon Expressway to Lucena. This project was promised during the time of Mr. Marcos, approved during the administration of former President Ramos, and we started or will start it during our term. [Applause]

The Lullutan bridge is just a part of our extensive initiative to develop infrastructure in Isabela and throughout the country. Since 2011, the funds we have allocated for infrastructure in your province, from the DPWH, National Irrigation, and others: is more than P11.96 billion. That’s just for your province. Manny is here from Cagayan, he might calculate how much went to Cagayan. [Laughter] Construction is ongoing – we will soon reach Cabagan – of the Cabagan-Sta. Maria bridge which will connect Isabela to other towns in the Cordillera Administrative Region. This project will speed up travel in your province. I’m excited for it to be finished, so I can also taste real Pancit Cabagan. [Applause] During the campaign, we visited Cabagan, and for about a week, they kept telling us, “Once you taste Pancit Cabagan, you’ll keep coming back.” We arrived in the area unexpectedly, and we were about three hours late. When the pancit arrived, it was very dry. But it was very flavorful. It took me about six months to discover that Pancit Cabagan actually has sauce. [Laughter] I asked if it was from Rodito Albano. I said, the Pancit Cabagan is dry. Apparently, it was repeatedly reheated because we were late, so the sauce had dried up. [Laughter] We’ll go back to the drying later.

We are also improving and expanding the Maharlika Highway, National Road 1 or Asian Highway 26. The construction of the road connecting the Maharlika Highway and the Santiago-Tuguegarao Road in Santiago City is also ongoing.

Included in our initiatives are 59.56 kilometers of farm-to-market roads that we have built and repaired throughout Isabela. Once we complete an additional 15.91 kilometers of farm-to-market roads here with you, it will reach almost 20,000 farmer beneficiaries in the province. Of course, for the drought, we have a solution: there are 161 irrigation projects that we have already completed in your province. [Applause] In addition, we have 32 irrigation projects that we are targeting to finish, and once completed, it will provide water to 146,625 hectares. This will help more than 90,950 farmers throughout Isabela. Add to that the Pasa Small Reservoir Irrigation Project that we started. Once completed in 2016, it is expected to increase the annual rice production of Ilagan from 555 metric tons to 9,996 metric tons. That is the report from NIA. [Applause] Imagine, 500 will become almost 10,000. I don't know why the report is like that: 9,996 – short by four tons. But with the competence of our mayor, I think he will take care of those four tons. [Laughter]

If we are talking about infrastructure in the entire Cagayan Valley, we are laying out approximately 25.4 kilometers of initial sections of an alternative route for Dalton Pass, along with the continued identification of the alignment of its remaining “tunnel” section. [Applause] We know that Dalton Pass is vulnerable to landslides and earthquakes. Secretary Babes also told us that if there is a problem and the road is closed, it will take more than 18 hours to reach Manila, because we will have to go around through Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, and other towns. We are also studying the possible extension of the North-South Railway Project, which will pass through Isabela towards the North. [Applause] You are my bosses, so I can only start that. I cannot finish it. But that's it, the first part is Malolos to Calamba. Of course, I said, don't forget that I'm from Central Luzon, maybe you can extend it beyond Bulacan. And since you're already there, let's go beyond, let's go to Region 1 and Region 2 – let's include the Cordillera. [Applause] But many know that during our visits here in Isabela in Cagayan, when the planting season is at its peak, it is really green and the Cagayan River is really full. But I have also visited you when there is El Niño and everything is brown and the river is just a memory. Then, our farmers, whoever can travel here to this distant place and offer a price, dictates the price. So if we have a train, we can increase the number of roads, increase the number of markets, and the farmers will definitely be better off. [Applause]

And I think even the consumers, there will be more places to buy. Competition will also improve the prices.

These are the projects we have completed and are finishing under good governance. You can rest assured that in the remaining time of our term, we will be able to accomplish more infrastructure projects because we will pour more funds into this sector. Currently, because our economy is very good, the budget for infrastructure is four percent of our GDP; next year, we are targeting to allocate five percent of our expected larger GDP for infrastructure spending.

Because the people chose the straight and narrow path, the dreams that were once abandoned are now being realized one by one. From being the Sick Man of Asia, our country is now “Asia’s Rising Tiger.” [Applause] Because of a more developed economy, we are now more capable of addressing the needs of other sectors. We have eliminated the backlog of 66,800 classrooms that we inherited, and we have also addressed the shortage of books and chairs that we inherited. We are now addressing the new needs resulting from our reform of our basic education system, or the K-12 system.

If in 2010, only about 800,000 households were covered by the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program; now, we are helping more than four million households. [Applause] They told us, here in Isabela, just this February, the number of households covered by the Pantawid Pamilya Pilipino Program reached more than 47,800. [Applause] Because your governor is good, our target for assistance was 44,844. So, we exceeded the target, and the number of households we are helping became 47,000. [Applause]

Our coverage for Philhealth nationwide is now at 87 percent, and more than 1.24 million of those benefiting from the PhilHealth program are from Isabela. This was a collaborative effort between Governor and Vice Governor Tonypet. Next, they are with us on the tarpaulin. [Laughter] No, they approved it in the budget. [Laughter]

You can't blame me if I end up in this district, "What time are we leaving?"

Indeed, the list of our accomplishments is long due to our collective efforts. If we were to list them one by one, we might still be here during your province's festival. [Laughter] And Rodito might give us dry Pancit Cabagan again. [Laughter] But it's flavorful, even without sauce. [Laughter] Sorry, I only tasted about five noodles of the pancit because my companions eat a lot. Someone brought out a watermelon, it was beautiful, in a bowl, full. As I was about to get a fork for the watermelon, someone approached, "Can I have a picture with you?" Of course, we were still campaigning, so I said "Sure!" [Laughter] One became two, became three, until everyone in that area asked for a photo. When I got to the watermelon, only one piece was left. [Laughter] But the one who gave it to me said, "This is for you." It's my favorite, you know. Those who went before me were embarrassed, they really left one for me—it was as if I was included in the meal. [Laughter]

However, you know the watermelon, it seemed like the white part was cut too much. So half white, half red. [Laughter] They asked me, "How was the watermelon?" "Well, it's crunchy!" [Laughter] But the green part, I would refuse—if the green part were given to me. [Laughter]

I have a lot of memories here, but we are getting off topic.

Let me ask you to consider this: If before, the common question was, “What can we expect from the government?” Now, can anyone say that your government has not delivered, even in a single place in the Philippines?

It is clear that our style of governance follows the straight and narrow path: to serve all our countrymen. We were able to accomplish all the infrastructure development and expand the benefits of our social services without increasing taxes, except for the Sin Tax. [Applause] Whether they are with our party or not, as long as it is reasonable, we address their needs. We even have leaders, who are not with LP, expressing their gratitude for the services delivered to their respective districts and provinces, like Ana Go. Ana, I read before, thank you very much. [Applause]

You know, sometimes I hear my critics, it’s like I haven’t done anything right. So even we, those who are not with your party, when you praise us, of course it’s somewhat redeeming. Now, as long as I see Rodito, I won’t expect the noodles to be fixed and the watermelon. [Laughter] It’s easy to reach our aspirations.

Let me emphasize this: Of course, you are my Bosses; you are the Filipino people whom I serve; [applause] you made the change happen. You are the key to the transformation we are now enjoying. You gave me a mandate, and together we are seeing the positive results of all our efforts. Mine, Boss: If you like the change you are seeing, isn’t it only reasonable to continue supporting honest governance?

And I will return to the question always asked of me: Who will continue all of this when we are gone? I told them, Bosses, I admire you. You will continue this, and I know you won't be fooled by those who presented themselves as allies, but are clearly two-faced. [Applause] I trust that Filipinos know how to look back at the past, so that the mistakes of the past are not repeated, and thus we can reach where we want to go. If we can bequeath a much better situation to the coming generations of Filipinos, then our efforts, and all the insults, intrigues, and trampling we faced as President, will truly be worth it.

450 days remain in our administration. But my conviction is growing stronger: As my [mother] said, “The Filipino is worth living for.” So I say, “the Filipino is not only worth living for and worth dying for,” but truly “the Filipino is worth fighting for.” [Applause] As your President, it is a true privilege for me to serve the people. With the guidance and love of the Lord, and with your strong support, I am sure that we can overcome any challenge.

Again, thank you all very much.