[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLUzf5C-6Ls&[/youtube]

Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the two-kilometer portion of the Senator Benigno S. Aquino Jr. Avenue road widening project

Senate President Frank Drilon; Secretary Mar Roxas; Secretary Babes Singson: NHA General Manager Chito Cruz; of course, our idol, Iloilo City Mayor Jed Patrick Mabilog and “original idol” Manong Art Defensor, Governor of the Province of Iloilo; Congressman Richard Garin, Congressman Arcadio Gorriceta, who passed on to me through Boboy Syjuco; Congressman Arthur Defensor; Congressman Jun Biron; and of course Congressman Jun Tupas; Congresswoman Sharon Garin; local government officials of Iloilo; fellow workers of the government; honored guests; my beloved fellow Ilonggos:

I need to practice speaking Ilonggo now, because when I return to Tarlac, they might say, “In Iloilo, there’s a ten-lane road. In Tarlac, even dreaming of a ten-lane road is impossible.” They might even say, “Maybe you’re courting an Ilongga.” There was a time when that almost happened. I’m already inviting people to my silver anniversary, but I can’t give the date because the countdown hasn’t started yet.

I remember, when I went to Iloilo in 2011, I left you with an invitation: Let us continue to walk the straight path towards the fulfillment of our dreams. Jerry Treñas will attest to the correctness of his guidance to me. And since then, every time I return here to Iloilo, and every time I see the transformation happening here, what I want to say to you is: Thank you very much. From the very beginning, you have had complete trust and support: even in the 2010 elections, we were number 1 here, both Secretary Mar Roxas and I. It’s clear that the people of Iloilo know who will truly promote meaningful and lasting change. Again, thank you very much. […] Anyway, now, because of your contribution, based on the evaluation of the DILG, the City of Iloilo is the third best-performing and the second most competitive city, as well as the most efficient local government in the Philippines. Congratulations. I also heard from Secretary Babes that your LGU [local government unit] greatly helped in the implementation of the projects we are inaugurating today. It’s very clear: The Ilonggos and Ilonggas are truly partners in our journey along the straight path towards progress.

We prove this once again today. We are now opening to the public this two-kilometer portion of what will be called the Senator Benigno S. Aquino Jr. Avenue. The former six-lane road in this section is now eight lanes, and there are probably two service lanes as well. In addition to these are the added walk lanes, service road, sidewalk and drainage system. This is also the first major road with a lane specifically designed for cyclists. In short: We not only widened the road for the 30,000 motorists who pass through here every day, we also made it safer for citizens and more durable against floods. When our projects on SBA Avenue are completed, the trip from Iloilo Esplanade to International Airport, which used to take 45 minutes, will only take 25 minutes. It is a great honor that your esteemed Representative Arcadio Gorriceta suggested naming this road after my father; if he were alive today, he would probably think, “This is what I dreamed of for our country.” And if he also saw the renovation of the Iloilo Bridge 1, he would be even happier. In addition to doubling the number of lanes there, we have further strengthened it to ensure that it can be used, even during typhoons and earthquakes.

These projects will speed up and facilitate travel not only for the Ilonggos and Ilonggas, but also for tourists visiting and businessmen investing in Iloilo. There is now a wider road leading to Iloilo International Airport, and it is now easier to reach the developing Business Park and Convention Center there. The city of Iloilo is also more connected to other towns in your province. I am fully confident that these changes will bring meaningful opportunities, and provide greater capacity to build a prosperous future not only for the people of Iloilo, but also for other provinces in Panay. I also need to emphasize: all of this was made possible because of your continued trust and cooperation with our local and national government. You brought progress to Iloilo.

I assure you: we will continue to implement reforms to make the progress we are enjoying more sustainable. We are vigorously implementing honest and good governance in our institutions; so that it does not become an instrument of the corrupt for personal interests. A clear example of this is the DPWH under the leadership of Secretary Singson. Think about it: The DPWH has saved P26.38 billion from July 2010 to March 2014 due to streamlining the bidding process. We are also continuing to increase the amount allocated for infrastructure development. If in 2011 we allocated 200.3 billion pesos, this year we will spend P404.3 billion on building roads, bridges, buildings and other projects that promote the ability and welfare of Filipinos. It’s clear: the time when only a few benefited from the public treasury is over; the government is no longer implementing beautification projects only.

The DPWH is also collaborating with the Department of Tourism to improve roads, bridges, and other infrastructure that will boost our tourism. Under the Tourism Convergence Program, the DPWH is constructing, repairing, and upgrading 202 roads leading to priority tourist destinations across the country. Here in Iloilo, the rehabilitation of the Iloilo City-Jaro Road has been completed, and the expansion of the Iloilo City-Tacas Road and Iloilo Coastal Road leading to Dumangas Port is ongoing, while two more tourism road projects are nearing completion. Truly: through better coordination of agencies, we can identify projects that deserve prioritization to better serve our citizens.

The detailed engineering and design for Stage 2 of the Jalaur River Multi-Purpose Project will also be completed this August. This is one of the government's major irrigation projects, and once completed, it will be the first large-scale reservoir dam outside of Luzon. All of this is part of our broad strategy to ensure that every Filipino, especially those in rural areas, keeps pace with the changes we are experiencing.

The concrete transformations we have achieved will create opportunities for our citizens. More businesses will emerge, creating jobs; the arrival of tourists from within and outside the country will accelerate; we will ensure that our farmers have sufficient irrigation for their crops; and the transport of harvests from farms to markets to the dining tables of every Filipino will be easier. Frankly, these should have been done a long time ago if we hadn't made the wrong choices in leadership. Now, after only four years, look at how Iloilo, and indeed the entire country, has changed. All of this happened because you chose the righteous path. Only two years remain, and we will need to choose again who will continue what we have started. Let us not stray again. If we become fragmented, we will not fully achieve our collective aspirations.

Our position is clear: in our journey, no Filipino will be left behind. Everyone has something to contribute; everyone will benefit. You, the people of Iloilo, are one of the most vivid proofs of this. Every bridge, road, port, airport, dam, and building here in your province will show future generations what a people united in their trust in reform, without hesitation to join hands, and ready to fulfill their dreams can achieve.

Please excuse me if I sound like a broken record, I will repeat it: Whenever I receive praise, I always say that I did not do this alone. The people gave me an opportunity, and look at the results. That is the only formula: let us choose what is right, and we will go where we should be. Let us choose those who will truly serve us and not lord over us.

Good day. Thank you all very much.