VIDEO:

[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QxZvl6pn5X8[/youtube]

FULL SPEECH:

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During his visit to Guiuan, Eastern Samar

[Delivered in Guiuan, Eastern Samar, on November 7, 2014]

Secretary Ping Lacson; Secretary Dinky Soliman; Secretary Mar Roxas; Secretary Volts Gazmin; Secretary Armin Luistro; Secretary Babes Singson; Secretary Jun Abaya; Secretary Francis Tolentino; General Manager Chito Cruz–Chito, stand up. This is for the NHA, if you have a problem with your house, join me in shaving off the rest of our hair [laughter]; Mayor Christopher Sheen Gonzales [applause]–earlier, I didn't recognize the Mayor because the last time I saw him, he had a lot of problems, his arm was in a sling. So I looked twice–Wow, this is what Guiuan looks like now! It has really changed a lot. [Applause]

Our Executive Director of the NDRRMC, Usec. Alexander Pama; of course, our honorable members of the House of Representatives led by Ben Evardone. [Applause] He is, of course, from here, we won't ask Ben for anything. But those others who will approve our budget are here, like Miro Quimbo [applause]–we need to whisper to them to please approve the budget as soon as possible; Albee Benitez [applause] and Sherwin Tugna. [Applause] It was reportedly approved on third reading in the House. We are just waiting for the bicameral conference committee.

Of course, our good colleague Ben Noel who is really helping a lot here in the entire region; [applause] Mr. Bernard Kerblat of the UN CHR; [applause] Mr. Marco Boasso of the IOM; [applause] Ms. Lotta Sylwander of UNICEF; [applause] the Kindernothilfe German Organization; [applause] beneficiaries of the Bahay-Kubo Transitional Shelter units; other local government officials of Eastern Samar, fellow workers in government, honored guests:

Good afternoon to you all. [Applause]

Sometimes, I just need to be reminded because sometimes, “maayo” becomes “maupay,” [laughter] becomes “marhay.” In our place–let's not use “sa ‘min.” It will just make the conversation more confusing if we include Kapampangan. [Laughter]

Typhoon Yolanda is said to be the strongest typhoon in history. This strong typhoon came while we were still lifting the city of Zamboanga from the crisis it went through, as well as Cebu and Bohol from the recent earthquake. Forty-four of our 81 provinces were hit by Yolanda, and six regions were severely devastated by Yolanda; from here in Guiuan to Coron, it covered its wrath.

More than 1.47 million is the number of most affected families; and about 1.17 million houses were damaged. The recorded number of our countrymen who passed away: 6,300. The number of injured reached more than 28,000, and about 1,000 are still missing. The amount of damage caused by Yolanda is also staggering.

You all know: We are not a wealthy country. The questions that seemed to surround the mind at that time: Where will we get the funds for all the buildings that need to be built? How will we fund all those who need to be cared for and fed, and all the needs of a new livelihood after it was swept away by the disaster? How can we rise from such a strong devastation and a series of trials?

You yourselves here witnessed the extent and severity of the damage caused by Typhoon Yolanda. In the days and weeks after it struck, it was clear to us that there were things that needed to be prioritized so that the problem would not worsen. Almost all of our first responders were affected, including their equipment, so we had to bring in the ranks of police, soldiers, firefighters, doctors, and medical professionals from different places. I remember, this Mayor Sheen led us in evacuating homes and going to higher ground like some mountains and hills, and he just endured the rain instead of the storm surge. Is that what I remembered correctly? Good thing. We're not losing our minds yet. [Laughter] Communication was needed. Of course, communication needs electricity. The geothermal plant in Leyte was severely damaged so we also had to bring generator sets. The generator sets, of course, need fuel. The fuel needs to be brought here, and it is not easy to transport because the roads were not passable. You know that. There was a lot of debris. Including electric wires, posts and others. To get people, fuel, and above all, relief goods for the immediate assistance of those affected, the roads, ports, and airports had to be cleared.

As my writers said when they were making this speech, they remembered everything. “What should we prioritize with so many things to do? Fuel or food, the truck to carry it, the responders?” And of course, our Air Force really gave their all, but in the end, we only have three C-130s to take care of the entire region.

It is not an exaggeration to say that the immediate needs were immediately addressed. The full force of the government, along with our partners in the private sector, poured everything they could for the affected areas. Our agencies quickly mobilized for clearing operations, and to restore basic needs such as electricity, water, and food as much as we could. From November 2013 to July 2014, for example, the government provided a total of 12.2 million family food packs.

After eight months, we have moved from what is called the relief stage to early recovery, towards rehabilitation. Our assistance continues, and we are pouring aid, especially food for our needy countrymen.

The DSWD led this, in cooperation with other agencies, organizations, and volunteers at our repacking sites. The challenge we faced then and are facing now is really huge.

Imagine, in terms of relief goods: When you feed in your house, let's say a family of five members–the mother can prepare for her husband and children–your relatives suddenly arrive; it suddenly became ten people to feed. That's still manageable. We'll just double these recipes. Then your neighbors heard that you have food, so they joined in. It became 15 to 20 people to feed. So of course, a point will come, it gets harder and harder. “Can I feed all of these?” Imagine, you put yourself in the government. A person must be really good if they can make everyone who comes to their home happy and full.

So how many families did we need to feed simultaneously with food and immediate needs? Let me repeat: 1.47 million families. So, that's more than five million people who need to eat every day. Of course, while you feed them, you also make sure they don't get sick, and other needs.

Here's another example: In the field of livelihood, 16 million coconut trees were completely damaged by Yolanda. All of this needs to be cleaned up and removed. At the beginning, we used chainsaws that could clear 20 trees a day. At the beginning, we had 1,200 chainsaws; another 1,500 just arrived to speed up the clearing of trees. Let's not let the chainsaws and the operators rest; in the 365 days of each year, our initial 1,200 chainsaws can clear about 8.76 million trees. I think it's clear to everyone that clearing these logs is no joke; so we can replant, so we can plant what we call intercrops.

It's like a patient, after the disaster, the most affected areas are really like in the ICU, right? The operation is over but we can't say it's cured yet. And when we've done everything to stabilize it, it became clear that there is still a lot to do to ensure that they can be discharged from the hospital in better condition.

That is the goal of our agenda called Build Back Better: We will not allow ourselves to be trapped in a cycle of what is called “destruction, then reconstruction, then destruction again, then reconstruction again.” Perhaps that telenovela should be repeated, maybe we would be happy. A disaster that happens repeatedly that can be avoided, no one would be happy to experience the same thing, right? If a severe disaster strikes again, the suffering of our people should not be repeated. They should be given strength and knowledge as a shield against the pain they have gone through. We must use what we have learned to prevent such a heavy tragedy from happening again.

You know, earlier, when I looked at the houses–and you know, these houses are transitional houses, right? These are not yet permanent. But even if it's transitional, if you enter–I think the owners of these houses will agree–the more than a hundred who have not yet received a certificate, your certificate is there. The 20 we had earlier was just a ceremony. Now, show the house, look at how the roofing is attached to the wood, it wasn't just nailed or maybe just vulcasealed. The attachment there is really strong. And the other buildings I saw, the edges of the roofing are folded so that the wind cannot get in. That is what Build Back Better means. If we do what we used to do, a strong wind will blow away the roof again, and when I return to you, tarpaulins will be attached again, right? Here, it's a little stronger.

But of course, we cannot challenge nature. If we can handle 250, maybe what was sent to us is 340. If we can handle 340, maybe there will be 450. The important thing is, unlike before. That's what we're aiming for.

For example: Just last Wednesday, we spoke with Secretary Babes at the cabinet meeting. He showed us what is called hazard mapping based on storm surge. When this kind of rain comes and there is a storm surge or a typhoon, how high is the wave, what areas will be flooded–from parts of Leyte to here in Samar. It showed the extent and severity of the flooding that could occur, for example, in Tacloban, Palo, Tanauan, when a strong typhoon strikes again. The damage will really be severe, especially since many people live near the coast.

Do we have, Babes, the–it's just on the iPad–we can't see it. It's on bond paper but maybe you can see the color. Or this one. [Showed the map] Basically, all the colored areas will be flooded. And if you notice this height, the darker the color, the worse the flood. The top is where the airport is. So, before all this is flooded, that's the first to be flooded. But the airport is where the C-130 lands. That's what will bring the fuel, the people, and so on. If we first save the route to safety, it seems we can't leave it here, right? So we need the airport–let me go back to the airport, sorry. I hope I have a lot to say to you, I'm getting rushed.

What should we do? One thing being studied—and actually, a solution has been approved, I just need to sign it. I'm just waiting for Babes' memo of approval. One solution is what's called the Tacloban-Palo-Tanauan Road Dike Project of the DPWH. There's already a road there. The concept is: to build roads elevated about four meters above sea level—it's not four meters the road itself. Four meters above sea level. So it will naturally be, like, a wall, a dike, this road that, in case of flooding, will serve as protection. There's a part where some well-off people live, they have beach resorts, they're there on the beach. They're on the side that won't be protected by this dike. But the majority, we will relocate them to behind this dike.

When the rain pours, these roads will serve as a dike, and will prevent the rush of water and widespread flooding in the community. Simply put, if you're on the coast, there's no protection, you'll be flooded, you'll evacuate to the evacuation center, we'll build a house there in the same place, the next flood will destroy the house again, evacuation center, then we'll build a house again, nothing happens to us. But if we can relocate to a safer place, so we don't repeat this. That's what they call destruction, reconstruction, destruction, reconstruction. Not anymore. Let's do it right once and for long-term benefit.

Once built, approximately 27 square kilometers will be protected, equivalent to 29,000 homes and structures. Of course, this also involves additional initiatives, such as planting mangroves along the coastline. This dike project I mentioned, in the initial study of a multilateral organization, it might take two years to start before. But Babes is quick, so he kept pushing the multilateral organization to give us the plan. And Secretary Singson wisely decided that the government itself would focus on this to implement it as soon as possible. [Applause]

Babes, just to be sure. Promise me here, 2015? [Applause] No, it will start, 2015. So first quarter—it's a long way, 27 square kilometers, not just the length, then you'll raise everything at least four meters above sea level. So Babes is promising that he doesn't fail. So when he says first quarter, I think, it won't reach that. Because I'm already preparing the praise for him now, “You did ahead of schedule.” [Applause]

Of course, there will also be areas where we will prohibit people from living or establishing businesses. Truly, if we are sure that the area is dangerous, will we still keep people there in danger? That's like saying, “You'll be part of the statistics of misfortune when the time comes.” Because severe flooding in these areas is inevitable. There is also the need—I mentioned it earlier—to relocate the Tacloban Airport away from the sea.

As early as 2008, there was a study saying that this airport is flooded. Isn't it that before planes take off and land here, they have to wait for the flood to subside and clean the surroundings of the airport? What's worse, the floodwater also dissolves the asphalt which is the pavement of the airport. Consequently, the road is damaged, and you can see the disruption it causes.

When Yolanda hit, the Air Force arrived the next day in the morning to clean the airport. And in the afternoon, the first C130s had already landed. Of course, we would prefer that there's no need to clean. Ready. The storm subsides, it's there, our relief is landing.

We know that after a disaster, the airport is one of the things that must continuously operate. So it needs to be far from any danger. The good news is, we have identified a place where the new Tacloban Airport can be built, or a new airport that will take care of your needs. We need a more thorough study to implement this. If it's just a guess, this place looks okay. But you'll test the soil—there are many more, like the orientation of the runway, etc. These are formalities, if you think about it, but science is needed. We can't just say “it's okay.”

What we admire is to improve the service of this airport for our countrymen no matter what happens. Every step we take needs to be studied, planned, and prepared. But despite this initiative, I have a strong feeling that tomorrow, someone will say: I'm neglecting Tacloban. You yourselves will recognize who those who will say that are. We also received information that someone said: Just give ₱40,000 to each family instead of doing these long-term solutions.

My question to you: Should I just try to look good? Just give cash to all families. The money we'll spend on all these projects, “Here's cash, you're on your own.” What will happen? Of course, after the forty thousand, we won't be responsible for anything. How long will forty thousand last for feeding, education, all the expenses of a family? And after that, when a storm comes, nothing has changed; of course the result will not change either. So we're back to no long-term solution.

But of course, some people, they encourage our countrymen, they say, “He's stingy, he's cheap. Just give it to us. Let's leave. It's faster, etc.” It's up to you to deal with them in the coming election, that those who deceive you might even be given another chance.

So, again, if we give each family ₱40,000, 1.47 million homes, each family given, it will amount to ₱58.8 billion in funds needed. In truth, it's easier for the government to raise 58.8 than the 85. About 85 billion we need to raise for 2015 to complete everything we need to do. If I—just to say I did something—let's make this 58. It's easier to reach that than 80. But in the end, when a storm comes, I have a conscience. You've been damaged again, which could have been avoided, I can't face myself. I can't face my parents either. So here, go ahead and insult me, criticize me, but I think what we should do is right. I can't bear to leave you to repeat the tragedy and say my job is done. You are my Bosses, I will never do that. In every instance of our decision-making, conscience, obligation, and true service still prevail. For those who continue to criticize our every move, I will just pray for them. Perhaps one day, they will be given additional knowledge and kindness by God to become sensible. [Applause]

Like you, I'm also impatient. But we need to emphasize: We can't rush our Build Back Better; buildings and houses can't be built or roads laid in one night. What's frustrating is that some people say that as long as the infrastructure is placed where they see space, it's okay. As if that's all that needs to be understood. The important thing is that we have clear targets, a clear plan to reach these targets.

Let's move on to the livelihood programs we offer for our livelihood assistance from DOLE. Of their target of 44,778 people, 33,338 have been given assistance, while 11,440 of them are currently being helped. From November 2013 to September 2014, we recorded 90,226 beneficiaries of the Cash for Work Program of DSWD.

In TESDA, our target is 24,535 people to be covered by Vocational Educational Technical Skills Training and Capacity Development. This year, 12,843 have completed it while only 2,692 are currently training.

In 2015, we aim to conduct new training for 24,465 people, and 26,915 in 2016. In total, 75,915 of our countrymen, after their training, will have enough ability to support themselves and their families.

For the agricultural sector, for our farmers, our support continues, from distributing thousands of seeds, fertilizers, farm tools, to providing them with more knowledge and training. The government is working doubly hard to increase their yields and income.

There is also our help to our fishermen. With a target of 33,432 boats to be replaced or built, 30,186 have been completed, and the processing of the remaining 3,246 boats is also ongoing. Here in Guiuan, I asked Mayor Sheen earlier, 2,500 new boats have been included. Is that right? [Applause]

Because if that's not right, I'll go back to Procy Alcala this afternoon. I'll look for those boats. [Laughter] 'They were sent,' it seems.

Besides the identified people who need livelihood, we have issued a warning not to add more boats here to avoid overfishing. You know, someone said, “You didn't help, according to my critic.” The one who was helped said, “That's enough of the replaced boat. It's too much. The fish might run out.” Several areas have been told that. I said, “Wait a minute, the agreement is to restore livelihoods. Why did many partners suddenly appear?” The coconuts that sprouted, they're also fishing now. That's how it is, I said.

Likewise, we are promoting the establishment here in Guiuan of a blast-freezer and cold-storage facility, to prolong the freshness of the fish and maximize income in the market. [Applause]

Just recently, I asked Bro. Armin, Secretary of DepEd about the situation of education in the areas hit by Yolanda. With our target of building 2,313 classrooms, 101 have been completed, and 1,095 are currently being built. This is only in the government, not including the number from our partners, such as [Kindernothilfe]… I was being pointed to Secretary Abaya earlier, “sauerkraut.” [Laughter] It doesn't match, I guess.

Anyway, according to Bro. Armin, the design of the schools we are building has been changed and they are really ensuring that the location where they will be built is safer. Of course, the communities we will relocate, their schools will not be included. They will be left behind. A new school is needed. That's what's being done or will be done.

The good news is: All classrooms funded by the government will be completed by June of next year, 2015. [Applause] But Bro. Armin, I assure you: No one of our countrymen will be angry if it's earlier than June 2015. [Laughter and applause]

The number of textbooks we aim to add for students: 6,470,984. Production and delivery are ongoing, and we aim to reach them before the end of the year. The year we are talking about: 2014. CHED also has assistance and scholarship grants for our students in college. This year, there are 45,045 students who need help to finance their studies in higher education. The report to us is that they are all able to enter because of the support provided by CHED. The total number of scholarships we aim to give until 2016 will not be less than 135,000.

We continue to care for the health of affected communities, especially mothers and youth. We are currently constructing and renovating an additional 280 government health facilities, including government hospitals, rural health units, and barangay health stations.

Our DILG also showed off in the construction of municipalities, civic centers, and markets, to speed up and revitalize the flow of commerce and services in communities. [Applause]

Apparently, Secretary Roxas has an 88 percent accomplishment rate, and there are still two months left. [Laughter] No, actually, one month and three weeks. I think Secretary Roxas only needs three weeks for that. [Applause]

The support and unity shown by the private sector for our fellow countrymen affected by the disaster is also undeniable. According to records, in all affected communities: the private sector has completed 480 homes. More than 7,000 are currently being built. In terms of livelihood: more than 1 million individuals have been given business loan assistance, and an estimated 190,000 have also received livelihood kits. I am sure that many students were encouraged by the 375 classrooms that have been built and the 462 classrooms that have been repaired. These are just a few on a long list. In total, the private sector has contributed P12.98 billion to infrastructure, social services, housing, and livelihood programs. Therefore, on behalf of every citizen who has been helped by companies and industries: Thank you very much. [Applause] You make us feel that we are truly not alone in promoting the entire country.

To make the path we will take clear, we created what we call the Yolanda Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan. Its contents: a detailed plan for the implementation of short-term and long-term projects and programs from 2014 to 2016. It focuses on several priority aspects: First, of course, infrastructure, which will ensure the continued growth of the economy in affected communities. Second, housing that is not only complete with basic needs, but most importantly, is also far from danger. Third, livelihood, commerce, and business. Finally, empowering communities to be more prepared and resilient to any disaster that comes.

We are aware that full implementation of this will not be easy. The first step here is the initial study of the local government on the extent and scope of the project in their area to effectively implement the plan. Sheen mentioned earlier, whoever is ready first with their plans will be helped first. [Applause] This mayor is ready, and I thought I was lost earlier because I didn't recognize Guiuan. This Guiuan is very different from the Guiuan I first visited, you know. [Applause] Isn't it? The houses with roofs were all tarpaulins. And the tarpaulin was only half of it. But now, your galvanized iron sheets are shiny. Maybe you just installed them yesterday. [Laughter]

Now, the problem is not everyone is as good as our good mayor. Not all municipal engineers are qualified structural engineers. But these are structures, he will create the plan, but he can't handle it. So we sent, first we looked for, we sent. More than the personnel of the DPWH, they also looked for additional structural engineers, just to start and help complete the plans. And it is also needed so that we can access calamity funds and others.

This plan was developed with thorough consultation and consensus with our LGUs. In the calculation, more than P167 billion in additional funds will be needed to achieve our goals under the CRRP.

Despite our plans, it is still clear that one of the most important ingredients is the contribution of our countrymen, including the victims themselves.

Here in Guiuan, we have seen how LGUs, citizens, communities, CSOs, and the private sector participated to effectively deliver support from the province and the national government to those in need, as well as our partners from around the world. Thank you all. [Applause]

Whatever we have achieved today has truly been achieved because of the concern and participation of so many people and institutions. That is why our good Mayor Sheen is grateful. As Mar said, “It’s not us, it’s you.” [Applause] But there is also a song, “You, me, all of us, are siblings.” So we should really help each other. Don't make me sing because the weather is nice now. [Laughter] What a shame.

We are grateful for the recognition we are receiving for the rehabilitation work we are doing. Let me give you some examples. According to Peter Agnew, a senior official of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization in Tacloban, “If this had happened in some other countries in the region, the recovery would certainly not be like this.” For Honorable Stephen Groff, ADB Vice President on East Asia, Southeast Asia and the Pacific, “Despite challenges, rehabilitation efforts in Eastern Visayas were even ‘moving faster’ than what was seen during the earthquake and tsunami that struck Aceh in Indonesia, ten years ago.”

According to Luiza Carvalho, outgoing UN Resident Humanitarian Coordinator, “So comparing to other experiences, we can say that the Philippines is on a satisfactory, very positive path. Considering the size of the event, the path of the response is very satisfactory.”

Given the significant contribution of our partners from around the world to reach this level of recovery, it is only right that we improve and carefully document our strategies and processes. We all know the dangers facing humanity due to what is called global climate change. It is only right that whatever we have learned is carefully recorded, so that if a similar disaster strikes elsewhere, we can share our knowledge.

Our list of accomplishments is long, but there is still much to be done. With so much to do, I feel that every step we take forward is like not getting closer to the horizon. Every time I get an update about Yolanda, any project or program we complete, it feels like our to-do list doesn't get any shorter. In addition, there seems to be no end to the critics, who don't even bother to check if their news is accurate.

But during these times when I visit areas affected by the disaster; when I look back at where we came from and see what we have achieved, it really becomes clearer to me: Change is happening. Recovery is happening.

Despite every challenge we need to face, we have proven that the best thing to do is to start what needs to be started, put your left foot in front of your right, and just keep moving forward. In this way, we were able to help each other overcome the trials brought by Yolanda.

And I am sure that as long as we continue to support each other, as long as we continue to walk this straight path, and as long as we continue to have strong faith in God, we will not only achieve our dreams, we will surpass them.

Good afternoon and thank you all very much.

__________________________________

Read in English