Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines Meeting with the Filipino Community of Chicago

[This is a translation of the speech delivered on May 6, 2015, in Chicago, Illinois]

You all seem lively today, how very fitting. [Applause] As you can see, we, too, are as lively. As I observed the members of the Cabinet, I noticed something “Why are you all sloe-eyed today?” I asked. [Laughter] I told them, “Didn’t you have a good night’s sleep last Tuesday? Our flight was on Wednesday. It’s still Wednesday today. You should have a full night of sleep. [Laughter]

Let me share with you two stories that have been relayed to me. First, let’s talk about our fellow Filipinos who leave the country. One of them is bound for the United States. He said, “Pare [1] , I am not very fluent in English. Can you please help me?” His friend replied, “What can I do for you?” “I don’t know how to order, where to order, that sort of thing.” “Oh, that’s easy. You need to look for a place, it’s usually called a diner. Spelled D-I-N-E-R.” “What will I do there?” “Once you enter, you should order. Proceed to the counter to speed up the process.” “What should I order?” “The simplest: coffee and donuts please.” “What is that?” “What else, coffee and donuts.” “Oh, okay. That’s sounds good.” “Then, if you have a problem, let’s just meet up there,” his friend said.

But it took a month for his US based friend to meet up with him at the diner. He said, “Pare, I am glad that you came.” His friend replied, “How come?” “It’s just that, I have been eating coffee and donuts for breakfast, lunch, and dinner.” [Laughter] “I am sick and tired of coffee and donuts. Please teach me how to order another dish, if that’s okay with you.”, “That’s easy. Tomorrow, when you go back to the diner, tell them you want ‘ham and eggs.” “And what is that?” “Ham and eggs.” That very night, he dreamed of ham and eggs. After a month ofcoffee and donuts alone for a month, ham and eggs are really a big deal.

He woke up earlier than usual so he could order for a different breakfast at his favorite dining place. He sat by the counter and saw his usual order: coffee and donuts. “Ham and eggs, please.” “Fine, how would you like your eggs?” the waiter answered. [Laughter] He replied, “Pardon?” [Laughter] “You know, boiled, scrambled, fried, sunny, side up, over easy.” All options were mentioned, even eggs benedict. The man said, “Okay, coffee and donuts please.” [Laughter and applause.]

There’s one more. Filipinos are really brave. If they don’t know what to do, they will strive hard to learn. Back in the days when the Americans still had bases in the Philippines, there were some servicemen who used to visit Tarlac [2] . One American had his hair cut in a barbershop in my town. You all know that once a barber is done trimming your hair, he will finish the session by shaving your sideburns. As the barber whetted his razor, he wondered, “How do I tell this American guy that we are done. [Laughter] “Hey, Joe,” the barber said, “This is your the end.” Upon hearing that and seeing the razor, our American friend ran away. [Laughter] I am just making sure you are all awake. Don’t worry, my speech is just short. My speechwriters prepared a 13-page script. [Laughs] It is my first time here, and I think it will also be the last. [Laughs] I only have one year and one month remaining in my term, more or less.

Our Consul remarked that Rizal once visited Chicago. It got me thinking: He went here in May. Wow, I also visited on the same month. Jose Rizal was shot in Luneta Park. [Laughter] My great grandfather was a Katipunero [3] and was jailed in Fort Santiago. My grandfather was imprisoned in Fort Santiago, too. My Dad was the third—in every generation, there is someone in our family who gets incarcerated. [Laughter] He was also detained in Fort Santiago, for seven years and seven months. I am the only political figure in my generation, I may be the next. [Laughs] And if ever I go to jail, my one request is, if they will permit, to be locked up at The Fort [4] . [Laughter] You know, I have been compared to Jose Rizal… My father was released from imprisonment, somehow. It’s nice, perhaps there really is some fortuitous circumstance that brought me here in May. Let’s shift to the formal and serious part. Don’t worry, I will make this quick, as if I were reading just six pages.

This is my first visit to Chicago. This is why, when I heard that this working visit was pushing through, I became very excited. I said to myself, this is my chance to fulfill one of my more humble aspirations: to try your deep dish pizza. [Applause] The deep dish pizza was introduced back in ’83, right when we were about to leave Boston, so I saw the advertisement, but I was never able to see the actual pizza. Fortunately, I am in Chicago now—home of the deep dish—at an age where I can still afford to eat pizza. And I tried it just moments ago. It really is delicious. But of course, trying the pizza is not the primary reason for my excitement; number one on my list is meeting you, our Bosses who live here, our fellow Filipinos. Seeing just how lively you are, I can say that visiting you was well worth it. [Applause] Chicago is known as the “Windy City,” but given the warmth of your reception, it’s as if I never even left Manila. Thus, from our entire delegation: Thank you very, very much to all of you.

I remember sometime last year, I received the Philippine Medical Association of Chicago in a courtesy call in Malacañang. I thanked them personally for returning to the Philippines every year to conduct medical missions and to care for our countrymen in need. Through their visits to the communities affected by Typhoon Yolanda, they have truly helped many of our countrymen along the path to recovery.

I likewise remembered: During Martial Law, when my family was living in exile in Boston, among those who showed us the greatest compassion were Filipino professionals living in different places, including Chicago. Though you may live overseas, you remain focused on ensuring the wellbeing of our motherland. So again, to those of you here today, to the more or less 90,000 Filipinos here in Chicago, and to each and every person—then and now—who has shown love for country: I extend my wholehearted gratitude on behalf of the Filipino people. [Applause] Of course, I can never forget: During the past Presidential elections, which I won—well, I wouldn’t be standing here if I didn’t, would I? To tell you the truth, the absentee votes cast for me back then were overwhelming. By overwhelming, I do not mean that I received two votes for each one my opponents received. My lead was extremely large, and it shows that all of you are a part of the positive transformation of our country. Again, thank you to all of you.

Back in 2010, the Filipino people chose to tread the straight path. Our Bosses’ orders: put an end to corruption and to the crooked systems of governance, and start to push for a government that will truly serve the country, and that will empower our countrymen to overcome poverty. Now, the question is: What have we achieved by treading the straight path?

I wish to give you an idea of how we were before, where we are now, and what else we can do moving forward. I am thankful that I have this opportunity to speak to all of you personally about our transformation, especially during times like these, when it seems that good news still does not sell, and still does not trend. Perhaps I may couch my request to all of you today in Facebook lingo: I hope that you don’t just “like” the good news I am about to tell you about, but that you also “share” it. [Applause]

But it is true. When we speak with some members of the media, I ask: “Why do you always release negative news?” Their answer: “It’s our job.” “Is positive news not considered news?” Their answer: “No. That’s your job. That’s how it normally works.” And if that is not enough… Do you remember the saying: “If you’re a politician, many things are asked of you. Fulfill nine out of ten things, and they will forget the nine things you achieved, and only remember the lone unfulfilled request. From where I stand, it feels like I fulfilled all ten requests, and some are complaining about the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth requests. This is why I am asking: Please share the good news.

Let us begin by talking about corruption. We all know that it has long been a hindrance to the Philippines’ progress. Our first step upon taking office: We appointed honest and trustworthy leaders. We also cleaned up the bureaucracy and greater society. We have filed a total 637 cases under different programs: Revenue Integrity Protection Service or RIPS under the Department of Finance, which watches over tax collectors, and prosecutes those found to be corrupt; and the programs called Run After the Smugglers or RATS under the Bureau of Customs; and Run After Tax Evaders, or RATE, under the Bureau of Internal Revenue. You may have also heard that politicians who have formerly thought to be “untouchable” are now in prison or under hospital arrest. [Laughter and applause] Agencies that used to be notorious for being corrupt have become models of good governance. An example is the Department of Public Works and Highways, which, through good governance, has a savings of 39 billion pesos as of March this year. Likewise, our rank in the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index has risen; from the 130th country in 2010, we are now the 85th least corrupt. [Applause]

Our guiding principle: Good governance equals good economics, equals good quality inclusive growth. That is why when we talk economics, we can forget about being labeled the label Sick Man of Asia; we are now known as the Darling of Asia. Our image in the international sphere has consistently been positive: We have reached investment grade status; we have risen 33 spots in the Global Competitiveness Report of the World Economic Forum; marked a 49 spot increase in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Report; and according to Bloomberg, the Philippines is slated to become the 2nd fastest growing economy in the world this year. [Applause]

Our achievements are truly historical: We experienced a GDP growth of 6.3 percent from 2010 to 2014. This is the fastest economic growth we have seen in the last 40 years. [Applause] Our current target: 7 to 8 percent GDP growth this 2015. Our economic managers have said that if we reach this goal, the resulting 6 year average will be the fastest economic growth we will have experienced since 1955, or within 60 years. [Applause]

When it comes to foreign investments: When this administration took office in 2010, said investments only amounted to $1.07 billion; this 2014, it has reached $6.2 billion, a 479.28 percent increase. [Applause]

My writers are proud. They recommended that I remind you about this. This is not a dream. This is not wishful thinking. What you are hearing is real data. But despite the good news, we are not content. We know that this is but the start of more positive change.

Just look at how a dynamic economy raises the willingness of investors to bet in our country. New businesses will flourish, as will the creation of jobs. The result: Greater opportunities for more Filipinos to improve their lives. Consequently, of course, more taxes will be collected by the government. This means that we will be able to build more infrastructure and improve social services. These social services will result in more educated, healthier, and more secure Filipinos; our countrymen will be better able to focus their energies on reaching their full potential, instead of using it to worry about their daily needs. Their knowledge of, and skill at, work will grow, which will collectively push our economy forward. This is called a “virtuous cycle,” and it is one of the keys to lasting and permanent change in our country.

That is why, to be sure that our countrymen can maximize these burgeoning opportunities, we continue to uphold our human development agenda. Our budgets for social services have all increased. Since 2010, the Department of Education’s budget has almost doubled; the Department of Health has almost tripled its budget; the Department of Social Welfare and Development’s budget increased by 606 percent. We achieved this without raising taxes, except for the establishment of the Sin Tax, or the tax levied on tobacco and alcohol that was enforced to help keep our citizenry away from illness and vice.

The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino [5] Program is one of our primary initiatives. During the last administration, only 800,000 households were listed as beneficiaries. Today, about 4.43 million households benefit from this program. You know, it was during my mother’s time, in 1988, that a free high school education program was implemented in the country. True, secondary education became free, however, it also became clear that there was a growing out-of-school youth problem in our country. How were you supposed to go to school if you did not have money for transportation, if you still had to help your parents earn a living, or if you were weak and sickly? This Pantawid Pamilya program was our solution, where financial aid would be given to our beneficiaries. And the condition was to ensure that kids would go to school. Is this not a win-win situation?

As for the health sector, our objective is to establish universal health care, which is why we are broadening the coverage of the PhilHealth program. We can see the difference in the data: In 2010, the program covered 47.7 million individuals. This past 2014, we were able to raise this to 86.22 million individuals. Almost double.

As for education: When we say “inherit,” it isn’t automatic that what we inherit is desirable. For example: the lack of classrooms that we inherited from the previous administration: 66,800. In 2013, we were able to completely provide all the necessary classrooms that were lacking. This was also what happened to the backlog of 61.7 million textbooks and 2.5 million school seats we inherited, which we were able to complete in 2012. Of course, we are addressing even the needs of our upcoming K to 12 Basic Education Program, wherein we added two years to basic education program. We already got started for 2014 and 2015; we have already set aside a budget of 45.62 billion pesos so that we can build 29,800 classrooms, and 560 million pesos for 800,000 chairs for our schools.

Our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority or TESDA also brings good news. Since we took office, they have recorded more than 7.4 million graduates from their various courses, under their technical and vocational education and training program. I recently spoke to Secretary Joel Villanueva. He told me: They had one trainee who was being teased by his friends when he told them he wanted to be a mechanic. With the help of TESDA, he really did become a mechanic. Those who teased him laughed at him, and now that he’s completed his training, he works in Australia. And how much does he earn? Let us put it this way: His salary is twice that of the President of the Republic of the Philippines. [Laughter] He’s given me an idea for an alternative career for when I step down in 2016. [Laughter]

We have put as much focus on the economy as we have intensifying our human development agenda, which has truly borne good fruit. Regarding job generation: We recorded the lowest unemployment rate in ten years in October 2014. Let me be clear about this: Our employment rate is true; there is no hocus pocus with the numbers. We are not talking about the kind of job where you merely sweep the streets for one week and consider that a job. This is not the kind of job we are talking about here, it must be permanent and long-term. We are talking about real jobs and not just those that will make the numbers look good for the public.

I spoke with Secretary Baldoz—she is here somewhere—of our Department of Labor and Employment. According to their last JobsFit Report, they get an average of 150,000 nationwide vacancy postings around the country per month. Also according to this report, from 2013 to 2020, we will have many in-demand and hard-to-fill occupations. Among these positions will be accountants or accounting staff, even computer programmers. And it’s true: When I went to Bicol State University, I spoke with their President and we talked about Accounting. You see, when I was young, there were still many Bachelors of Science, Majors in Accounting, Bachelors of Commerce. There were so many degrees like that.

The president of Bicol State (University) said that they teach accountancy and they have an accountancy program. They produce many accountants, their program is good, but as for their Accounting Department, they cannot even fill it up. The reason: On their third year, the students are already being recruited by famous accounting and auditing firms. We all know that Accounting is a four year course, with another year on top of that to review for the board exams. Yet they get recruited in their third year. That is why even the school is not able to hire the accountants they themselves train. This is the same story Joel Villanueva of TESDA told me when we spoke. They have also been having a difficult time filling up positions for electricians, plumbers, refrigeration and air conditioning technicians, and heavy equipment trainers and operators.

I thought to myself—and sometimes I still think, am I really that old? [Laughter] Back in the day, when you would go home, you’d see “No Vacancy” signs posted all over buildings. These days those same signs have been replaced with “For Immediate Hiring.” Other companies have come up with their own gimmicks to entice new applicants. For example, there’s this one call center where you would be interviewed and then they would buy you breakfast. [Laughter]  If I remember correctly, they would take you to a McDonald’s. At another company, if you get hired after your interview – it’s usual for us to throw a party after we get a new job, right? – they would also finance the celebration dinner for your family. This is if you apply and get accepted.

My point being: Did you ever think we would ever reach this point, where our main problem is how to train our countrymen to get accepted at more jobs, instead of an endless parade of graduates without any available jobs? [Applause]

To solve this, DOLE has touched base and is coordinating with various industries to make in-demand and hard-to-fill occupations more accessible. Please note that DOLE and TESDA have long been in close collaboration. Their inter-agency cooperation has produced nationwide job fairs, an enhanced PhilJobNet website that lists job vacancies, and the JobStart Philippines program which aims to speed up job searching for applicants via career guidance services, life skills and technical training, and internship programs. Initiatives like this have enabled us to fill vacant job positions in the market.

Even when we talk about infrastructure, the Philippines is truly in the midst of change. Those projects that have been left shelved for so long; those plans that have amounted to empty promises—we are now going through them one by one for implementation and concretization. Let me recollect: Recently, we went to the province of Isabela; they were holding the inauguration of a new bridge, the Lullutan Bridge. [Laughter] But why was it called that? Could it be that it’s real name was Lulutang at Lulubog [6] Bridge? [Laughter] We later found out that there really was a structure on the spillway bridge. When the waters were high, the bridge would disappear, when the waters were low it would float on the surface. The problem is, it really was designed to take the spill when the waters overflowed. When bad weather came down in 1995, the lumber and wood left by the illegal loggers became debris which rocketed down the river and destroyed the Lullutan Bridge. This is how it became the bridge that disappears and reappears. The painful lesson, though: This happened in 1995, but if surveys and studies on the place had been done on time, couldn’t it have been finished sooner? We finished construction on it this year, or within four years of being sworn into office; we were aiming for three, but there were unforeseen complications with the land where the foundation was acquired.

Let me add: Each of our projects is part of a more comprehensive plan; these are acts done by design, and not just so that we can claim to be doing something. We will not build roads and then whisper to the wind “Hopefully, someone drives through here. [Laughter] Hopefully, this reaches the next town. Hopefully, investors will come in.” We do not put our faith in “hopefully”; when we build something we also strive to complete the requisites that go with it: There will be merchants to pour capital into it, there will be industries to finance businesses, there will be jobs available. Everything is included in the plan.

Did you know that the industrious government officials from Isabela and their congressman were at that bridge inauguration, and they said the project cost 700 million pesos? They also told us that they needed a second bridge. Secretary Singson of the DPWH was ready with an answer and told them that it had already been written into the budget, and that it would surely be ready for issuance by next year. “Oh, okay” they said, “in that case we’ll also need a third bridge.” [Laughter] So, I replied, okay. But isn’t it, for us, you get one, you say: Thank you; you get two, you are very lucky; you get three, well aren’t you truly blessed by God? [Laughter] If you think about it, though, we will likely be able to get that third bridge built because the project funds are not being misdirected into someone’s pockets. [Applause]

All these are but a preview of further changes, some of which we are already experiencing. There is a saying – actually, a song – that came from America: You ain’t seen nothing yet. [Laughter] Noel [7] will sing it for us since I do believe I’m losing my singing voice. We have six years in our term; we cannot say we will be able to solve everything that ails the Philippines within this span. But you yourselves are witnessing that even now we are seeing the positive fruits of the reforms we have sown. The administration that succeeds us will, surely, also benefit from our endeavors. This is if we do not stray and, like in 2010, if you closely examine the next leader of our nation.

With 2016 drawing even closer, all those who oppose us are getting even noisier. I even spoke to someone who told me that there are some camps that have only one job: to criticize us and find fault in everything that we do. And if they cannot find any fault, then they’ll just make something up. When a strong storm rains down on the country, it’s our fault. [Laughter] When there’s traffic in EDSA, it’s our fault. [Laughter] They say I even had something to do with Manny Pacquiao’s defeat. [Laughter] As if I can respond, “Why, can Pacquiao and I gang up on Floyd Mayweather?”

In truth, there are many who wonder why I do not get frustrated. I tell them, well, if that is their profession—if they do make money from criticizing me—then perhaps they are contributing to our employment statistics. [Laughter] If so, then I guess I can bear with them. [Applause]

In spite of all this, I firmly believe: the Filipino people will not be deceived, even if these noisy few repeat their lies every day or every m inute. We will not surrender all the change we are experiencing today, and allow the country to return to the ways of the past. As with any crop, we need to water this change; we need to watch over it and nourish it, to ensure that it continues to flourish. We cannot be content with what we have achieved so far; we cannot stand idly by and become bystanders, watching whatever happens. As it has always been, the fate of the Philippines lies in the hands of Filipinos.

I am confident: Like what happened on EDSA in 1986, like what happened in 2010, and even when 2016 comes, you will be there to ensure that we will continue what we have started. Our goal: to keep from returning to the broken system, and instead, continue the positive change sweeping the country. And there is no other way for us to realize this other than the cooperation of all Filipinos, whatever part of the world they are from.

That is why, as you continue to work hard in your jobs and businesses, your government is here, fulfilling the mandate you entrusted to it: to render full and honest service to its true Bosses, none other than the Filipino people. This is the very reason for our visit to America, and in the following days or in fact, tomorrow, to Canada. This is the principle behind our continued push for good governance and for our determination to deliver the necessary social services to each Filipino. This is the spirit of our pursuit of peace, order, and progress in Mindanao and the entire country. In each moment of service, we are making the most of each chance to create even more opportunities for Filipinos, so that they can take hold of their destinies.

That is why, Bosses, let us continue to take even greater strides along the straight path; let us continue to improve the country we love most. Let us continue to reach for the Filipino dream: a Philippines filled—not only with passion, dedication, and good will—but with opportunities to uplift ourselves, our country, and consequently, contribute to the advancement of the entire world.

Good evening to all of you. Thank you.

[1] A term of endearment for a close male friend.

[2] The President’s home province.

[3] A revolutionary who fought against Spanish colonial rule.

[4] Now a sprawling development with high-end malls, condominiums, etc.

[5] Formal Filipino name of the conditional cash transfer program.

[6] Literally, to float and to sink.

[7] Noel Cabangon, a folk singer present during the gathering.