Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the launching of the 420-megawatt Pagbilao III Power Plant project

[Delivered at Raffles & Fairmont, Makati City, on September 11, 2014]

Good morning.

This is certainly one of the most unique events I have ever attended. As President, I have joined countless groundbreaking and launching ceremonies on-site. In this instance, however, we launched Pagbilao III—the third unit of Pagbilao Power Plant—by pressing a button, more than a hundred miles away from the site itself. [Laughter] This begins the more-than-three-year countdown until the project is completed in November of 2017.

Pagbilao III is a strategic investment—not only in infrastructure and equipment, but also and more importantly in the future of the Filipino people and our country. The 400 megawatts that this project will bring, once it begins operations, represents a significant addition in the form of baseload power. This is absolutely necessary to ensure a steady supply of the power that Filipinos need day in, and day out, even as we seek to diversify the energy mix by bringing in other power sources.

But the additional production capacity is just one among the things that our country can look forward to because of this project. I am told that, during the construction of this project, you will be creating jobs for 2,000 men and women, which will naturally have a significant multiplier effect on the local community. So, to TeaM Energy Corporation and Aboitiz Power Corporation, thank you for your continuing confidence in the Philippines.

I make it a point to attend these kinds of events precisely to underscore the importance that my administration has always given to reforming the country’s energy sector—which, as we all know, has faced a series of problems for quite some time.Growing demand is only one of the challenges that our energy sector must contend with. This increase in demand is due, in part, for instance, to the change in personal lifestyle that progress brings.I can still remember a time when, to entertain ourselves, people like Monchu and Tony would just need a guitar, lamplight or even moonlight, and each other’s companionship to entertain themselves. Rey Umali remembers that time also. [Laughter] Over time, however, karaoke machines were developed, and now, there are media players that can be connected through Bluetooth speakers, and can download any song on demand. In my younger days, television only had a limited number of channels—all of which signed off rather early in the late evening portion. Now, we have cable TV, with hundreds of channels from all over the world that anyone can surf through 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.And of course, nowadays, everyone seems to be attached to their smartphones, tablets, and laptops—where you can stream events and movies, or even place video calls to people half a world away. All of these gadgets naturally require power.

Of course, the increase in demand for power is also brought about by the Philippines’ economic resurgence. The simple fact is that the economy grew under our watch. For example, from 2006 to 2009, average growth was pegged at 4.3 percent. From 2010-2013, the average went up to 6.3 percent. The Business Process Management sector remains one of our strongest-growing sectors—and, given their facilities and equipment needs, they are also a strong consumer of energy. Manufacturing has bounced back, growing by 10.3 percent in 2013, and by 10.8 percent in the second quarter of 2014. Employment has steadily increased, with 1.06 million net employment generated from July 2013 to July 2014.

On top of all these positive developments: the Philippines is set to hit a demographic sweet spot by next year, which means that the majority of our population will be of working age. And this I understand will persist for something like 30 years. Add to that the fact that more and more investors are coming to the Philippines and setting up shop here. Indeed, the economy will continue growing—and so too will the demand for power grow.

The energy sector must be up to the task. The good news is:We have already made gains in this regard. From July 2010 to June 2014, 1,799.52 megawatts from new and recommissioned plants were added to the supply—allowing for a total dependable capacity of 15,466 megawatts as of June. Peak demand in 2014 is estimated at 11,943 megawatts.

At a casual glance, it might seem as if we are in a good position. However, as those of you—or most of you—here may know, the entire power situation is exponentially more complicated. Forced power-plant outages have been observed to rise especially in the summer months, coinciding with the periods of peak demand. This situation results in quite thin reserves, particularly in Luzon. Of course, these outagesare unannounced andsudden, brought about by the effects of ambient temperatures on the operation of thermal plants; low water supply for hydropower plants; and turbine and part issues of other existing power plants . And there are the many other factors that affect our power supply adversely: weather phenomena such as El Niño and the typhoons that visit our country every year; the de-rating of plants due to unforeseen problems; and delays in the construction of power plants; and various legal challenges to the setting up these power plants are also part of the problem mix.

On top of this, part of our current supply comes from plants running beyond their maximum age—for instance, Agus 6 in Mindanao, which was originally designed to have only a 30-year lifespan, has now been running for more than twice as long. Not to mention, the effect of climate change that has largely impaired its production capacity. And this is only one of the factors that have made the power situation in Mindanao challenging. Their ten-year exemption from the EPIRA law also made it difficult for investors to come in, since they knew they would be competing with the artificiallylow prices of government owned plants.

More recently comes the news that these challenges may extend to Luzon as well, with a possible shortage of up to 300 megawatts next summer.I am told that the worst case scenario even involves a shortage of around a 1000 megawatts.Let me assure you: we are keeping tabs on all the factors involved, and I am very much aware that government cannot be complacent in addressing these issues. After all, should there be a shortage, it is our people who will bear the brunt of the burden—and no amount of excuses or explanations will be able to temper the anger of the public.

This is why our Department of Energy has intensified its coordination and consultation with consumers, industry stakeholders, and other agencies in its pursuit of solutions. Part of their efforts include the Interruptible Load Program or ILP, which allows significant end-users to disconnect from the grid, use their own generators, and receive compensation, as approved by the ERC. But this is a voluntary program, and private companies will have their own, valid reasons to choose to participate or not in this venture.We have generated 142 megawatts through the ILP—but effectively dependable output is only 71 megawatts, based on historical performance. And of  course 71 megawatts is significant, but is obviously still very far from addressing even the best case scenario of having a minimum power deficiency by next year.

To be more efficient and impactful in our efforts, very soon, we will formally ask Congress for a joint resolution, that will authorize the national government to contract an additional generating capacity to address the 300-megawatt projected deficit, and, on top of that, to have sufficient regulating reserves equivalent to four percent of peak demand, for another 300 megawatts. The Department of Energy will also continue to solicit participation for ILP until next year. Let me assure our partners from the private sector: Government intervention will be focused solely on addressing the projected shortage. We have no plans of intervening to distort the market or complicate the situation even further.

After all, we know that it is only through the government and the private sector working together that the Philippine energy sector can realize its full potential—that together, we can find solutions now, and address existing issues once and for all. We need power to continue our resurgence. We need projects like Pagbilao III to sustain the momentum of the Philippines—to power our homes, our industries, and our economy well into a brighter future.

Thank you for your attention and good day.