Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the 111th anniversary of the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

Before I begin, number one, the last time I spoke here, your covered courts weren’t as nice as this. You think Kim doesn’t have a feminine touch, but you can see it. [Laughter]

Of course, earlier, it was mentioned that we’ve surpassed a trillion, maybe P1 ½ trillion by this year. So Casar Purisima said, the compassionate boss, that next year the target will be P2 trillion. But truthfully, when we started, I remembered one of our trips to a country in ASEAN where, to save on government expenses, we rode on a budget airline where the seats were pre-tilted for you. Meaning pre-tilted, they don’t recline. The mattress was bigger than the jeep we rode in to get there. But things are really different now. I’m not saying we’re extravagant now, but we’re no longer obliged to travel like that all the time.

Bosses, last Monday, I reported on how we changed the prevailing practice of lies, fraud, and theft in government. This sparked the rise and revitalization of our country. We emphasized: Because of good governance, we’ve exceeded expectations in just five years. On this anniversary of our Bureau of Internal Revenue, we recognize the unique contribution of an agency that represents efficient service to the people.

For our fighting and determined BIR Commissioner, Kim Henares, [applause] a haphazard tax system is not allowed; there can’t be shortcuts and avoidance of contributing to our collective goals; there can’t be those who get away with it while a few prosper. It’s clear to you where all the collections go: funds used for programs and projects that directly and immediately alleviate the suffering of our countrymen. For us, what we can give to our Bosses, as the younger ones say, should be now. That’s true: With good governance, the State has greater capacity to support Filipinos.

As I mentioned during the SONA, and I think should really be emphasized, the results are very good: Because of your choice to side with what is right and just in the past five years, and because of the professionalism and dedication you demonstrate in fulfilling your mandate, we’ve achieved a lot. In 2012, for example, for the first time in our history, your collections exceeded one trillion pesos. In 2014, you surpassed that; the amount collected: P1.3 trillion.

This year, we’re told, we can collect or are close to collecting P1.5 trillion, which would be another record high if it happens. Compare these numbers to the highest reached by our predecessor: P778.6 billion. On the Straight Path, because of more vigorous and honest tax collection, in a much shorter period, we’ve equaled, surpassed, and now will double their collections. Some say that we were able to do that without adding to the burden of the people, except for the reform of the Sin Tax law aimed at reducing vices in society. The taxes we collect are strategically, appropriately, and principledly allocated to further promote the welfare of our Bosses.

Strong resolve brought us to the realization of this goal. Under the leadership of Comm. Kim, just in 2014, 107 establishments were shut down for evading or underpaying the appropriate taxes. We also filed 380 cases against tax evaders. Together with your mother agency, the Department of Finance, and sister agency, the Bureau of Customs, we identified and investigated more than 380 employees in these bureaus whose implementation of their duties was questionable. In addition to them, 136 were charged, 16 were suspended, 15 were dismissed from the service, 4 were fined, 2 had their benefits forfeited, and 2 were warned. The report to us also says: There is already one person imprisoned and 4 more have been sentenced according to law. Aside from monitoring those in the revenue collection sector, there is also the Tax Watch Campaign launched in 2012, which reports on whether anyone’s contribution is correct—whether a large company or a private individual. All collections can be monitored by our Bosses on the Pera ng Bayan website.

Because people see the process as true and transparent, they are confident that the law is being enforced fairly within the Bureau of Internal Revenue. At the same time, you have improved and made the tax collection system more efficient to more effectively focus on the contribution of our Bosses. You also encouraged them to further unite in driving our country forward through the “Angat Pa Pinas” and “Register, File, and Pay” initiatives.

On your journey along the Straight Path, I am truly impressed with you. Now, wherever you look, you can see concrete proof of your efforts: roads and bridges that have been and are being built; structures that have been awaited for decades completed; sitios that are being lit up and provided with water. Those who benefit from your work: children who now have books and well-maintained classrooms; beneficiaries of the Pantawid Pamilya program who can now afford to go to college; the poorest 40 percent of our population who can now receive free treatment in state hospitals. The fruit of all your hard work: the continued progress of our country and the quality of life of the Filipino. On your anniversary, we can proudly say to our Bosses: Change was made possible because you truly contributed. To Comm. Kim, and to all the personnel of the BIR, thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

At this point in our term, where recognition of our strengthening economy is coming from all sides; when development is now within reach for the average citizen; where the hard work of Filipinos is truly returning to Filipinos: we hold a strong confidence, trust, and dignity that inspires us to further improve our work. As public servants, we are challenged to continue to reciprocate the loyalty, care, and more fervent willingness to serve our fellow citizens to our Bosses.

Comrades, with your continued unity in our agenda of good governance, with our continued demonstration of dedication and determination in our duties, we are sure to reach even higher aspirations not only for your agency but for the nation. With the guidance of the Almighty, and with unity on the Straight Path, we will surely reach a Philippines that is not only elevated but truly flourishing and looked up to by all.

Earlier, we mentioned those who did not follow us on the straight path, what about showing the state’s gratitude? As far as I understand, the Performance Enhancement Incentive has been distributed. Now, the PBB or Performance-Based Bonus, the system is being finalized to make it permanent, where your work will determine what your bonus should be. [Applause] We just need to reward those who are truly delivering. On behalf, not just of the BIR or DOF but of the entire government, for your hard work, we now have the ability to truly reward those who are doing the right thing.

Again, thank you very much. Happy anniversary to all.

View the slideshow presentation that the President used during his speech below:

Click to download the above as a PDF file