At the Liberal Party fellowship, oath taking, and Christmas party

Thank you very much. Please, let us all be seated.

Secretary Mar Roxas; Speaker Sonny Belmonte; Senator Drilon; Senators Kiko Pangilinan, Ralph Recto; Representatives—of course, the APPRO [Appropriations Committee] is important—Jun Abaya; and the kindest among us, Henedina Abad; our Head of League of Provinces, Governor Boy Umali; (Is TG here yet? TG, are you there? Not yet?); members of the Cabinet present; I’ll also mention, there might be some who haven’t been confirmed, but this first one, the youngest, has been confirmed, Tatay Procy Alcala; Dinky had to go to a meeting; Jesse Robredo is present; Gil delos Reyes is present; Mon Paje is present; Ronald Llamas is very present; Lou Antonino is also present; Butch Abad is present in spirit, he’s about to come; officials and members of the Liberal Party; fellow workers in government; honored guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Don't worry, the speech will be short. I finished saying everything I needed to say this morning already [ cheers and applause ]. I learned when I arrived earlier, I should have been wearing red. Luckily, my polo has red stripes. Please excuse me, I didn’t know we needed to wear red. I already left my exchange gift with Boy Umali. Whoever draws it, just collect it from him. And he also chose it, so if you don’t like it, please blame Boy Umali.

I was a little surprised earlier; I said it sounded like different voices from our emcees. And when I came in here, it was Miro Quimbo, then Rachel del Mar. It used to be Chito Gascon and Neric Acosta [ laughter and applause ]. Of course, we enjoyed them. We enjoyed the two. But it’s nice to expand also.

I’m really happy to see so many of you again tonight and I think I just have one theme that I like to impart with you: I went to Tarlac over the weekend. It took me about five months to get, finally, a slot to get back to my district. And we were talking—we had awards for what is called Belenismo . So, there are various entities within the province have these really very nice belens—creativity exemplified various themes that they want to expound. It was nice to see, and that if we remember what exactly the scene was, you have our Savior being born in a manger—very simple terms. In a sense, parang, it is so Filipino. Christmas the start of… I guess, the Christian faith, is also the time when we renew our bonds with the family. At the end of the day—this is the only message that I want to impart to all of you: The things that we have to do, the things that we are all striving for; at the end of the day, really redounds to what we do to the least of our brethren. And I guess, today, I was reading about it several times throughout the course of the day; all of us are here at this point in time, and I don’t think this was by accident. God made us instruments—I’d like to think God is making us instruments—of his will and at the end of the day, we have been given an opportunity to really transform so much of our country and also especially the lives of our people. And when you are given this responsibility, of course the task ahead is not going to be easy. The battle that is looming will not be easy, but we do have a choice. And the choice is very simple. We can choose to try and be visible, at the same time, being invisible or we can really fulfill what we promised our people when we campaigned to them. I’m sure all of us here, whenever anybody criticizes a congressman, a senator or any politician, there is a—for the most part, I would really like to think that the people who enter politics start out with wanting to change the status quo and sacrificing whatever it takes to be able to achieve that dream and be able to face that constituents eye-to-eye and say, “I don’t think I was lacking in terms of commitment and the actual work towards the improvement in your lot.”

So again, we have an opportunity. Do we seize the opportunity? Do we let it go? If we let it go, can we really face our constituents and say, “I was true to you,” or “I neglected you.” At the end of the day, I’d really have to be able to say that I did everything I could that particular day. You know, whenever I’m told, “We are solidly behind you,” there are days I tried to think of one thought: Why are they always behind me? When will someone be in front of me? At least, just beside me.

But, the idea is simple: I accepted this willingly. I know the risks involved. I know the trials and tribulations—at least, I knew what to expect. And knowing fully well the trials and tribulations that will come our way, I committed fully. I want to be able to step down in 2016 and have people tell me that they were satisfied or they were happy with the performance—or that nobody can tell that the commitment that I willingly undertook, I didn’t do. I want to be able to say to everybody and anybody, we really did everything and we took care of this opportunity.

That brings me to the last point. ‘Di ba, at the end of the day… As you know, I don’t have a family. I have nephews and nieces. Several of them are already working. And I guess the greatest tragedy would be for them to be the next in line to suffer the trials and tribulations that we had to undergo in the course of our lives. There is no advancement towards each generation. There are days that I feel weak, or I feel tired, or I feel so harassed—I look back and say, “Am I doing this for myself now?” Perhaps, I’m already at the second [or] third of my life—perhaps, entering the last phase. I already envisioned the time that I will be retired, I have to be able to say I didn’t bequeath to the next generation something the same or worse than what I found. I really have to be able to say what we leave is definitely better than what we found and with your help … with the constancy of your support, your help, your understanding; I see no reason why we will not achieve the same.

Merry Christmas, Happy New Year to everybody.