Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, In commemoration of the death anniversary of Sec. Jesse Robredo

This is somewhat new, I didn't practice this Bicol that is being taught to us now. If I make a mistake, Jun Delantar, who is from Capiz, taught me. [Laughter] My beloved countrymen, good morning to all of you. [Applause] Every time I visit Bicol, Jesse used to teach me back then, and it really adds to what we miss.

You know, this month of August brings back many heavy memories for me. In 1971, August 21st, the Plaza Miranda Bombing happened. Almost the entire leadership of the Liberal Party was wiped out. One of those most severely affected here was the mother of our good Secretary Mar Roxas, Tita Judy Araneta-Roxas. After a few years, August 21st was also when my grandfather, my mother's father, Jose Cojuangco, passed away.

He was walking there by the side of his house in Tarlac. He was thinking about the death sentence or death by musketry that was imposed on my father. My grandfather and my father were very close. When my father was imprisoned, he became my second father, and he was really worried about the death sentence. He even pleaded with the Marcos regime at the time, if it was possible, to imprison him instead of my father in exchange for my father's freedom, and just exile my father.

In 1983, on August 21st, my father was assassinated. Then in 1987, there was a coup attempt against my mother's administration; on August 28th, my vehicle was riddled with bullets. Three of my security companions died, while the last one survived with serious wounds. I myself was hit by no less than four bullets. And until now, I carry a bullet fragment in my neck, along with shrapnel. On August 1, 2009, my mother passed away. And just yesterday, August 17th, my Uncle Butz also passed away. If August is indeed considered a ghost month, we truly feel it in our family.

Now, three years have passed since I received the news that Jesse's plane had crashed. I was really restless that day. It was getting late in the afternoon. Another tragedy in August. I was thinking about how to explain to his wife, Leni, and his children that despite the intense efforts of our government and various volunteers, Jesse still hadn't been found. During that time, I didn't fully know his family yet, because Jesse really did everything to keep his family life private. That conversation, I consider it one of the most difficult I've had as president. I remember, I even brought Sec. Dinky with me because she had somewhat gotten to know the Robredo family.

The dialogue we had then was about who was closest to Jesse's wife and family. Her answer was, “I’ve met them and I think I’m the closest, or one of the two closest, to knowing him.” I’ll admit to you now: I couldn’t help but doubt myself during those times. I wondered how I would cope if something happened to other members of my cabinet. I invited them all to join me in a dangerous job. When there’s a disaster, you have to go. When there’s danger to our countrymen, you have to confront it. When there are powerful interests exploiting Filipinos, you have to challenge them. I had only been in office for two years then, it was already a very heavy burden if I were to lose another comrade in the fight.

I am truly impressed by the resilience shown, and being shown, by Leni and Aika, Tricia, and Jillian. I know how heavy the burden is to lose a pillar of the home. When my father passed away, we also lost our center, our leader. There were doubts about how to continue moving forward when our guide was gone. Our question was: How do we continue this? It was a miracle that where there used to be one leader, suddenly many stepped up to take his place.

Leni, never once showed me her tears. I deeply felt from her and her children that they didn't want to be a burden to anyone. I am sure, wherever Jesse is now, he is happy to see that his wife is one of the most reliable members of Congress today. He would be proud of what his children are showing. For example, their eldest, Aika, gave up a good salary in the private sector to contribute to the government. I am also sure: She loves all of you very much. Although I didn't know you well then, I saw how she valued every opportunity to be with you.

Jesse, a true son of Naga. He saw the problems of the Nagueños and he asked: Why does it have to be like this? Like my Uncle Butz, he left his comfortable life in the private sector to begin serving his fellow citizens. He told me how he addressed the problem of informal settlers. The plan he implemented, as well as the second generation of it, has also been addressed. Even those around Naga, he helped so they wouldn't have to risk going to the city. Wherever he was needed, that's where he went. When there was a storm, no matter how high the flood, he would wear his slippers and visit the victims. Whoever needed to be talked to, that's who he talked to. No fluff, no politicking. Even jueteng lords or drug lords, or his own relatives, he didn't hesitate to confront them because he knew he was right.

When his opponents saw that he was a major obstacle to their personal interests, they threw all sorts of issues at him. They even questioned his Filipino citizenship. But it was clear to the people of Naga what was right for them. They repeatedly chose honest governance. Jesse and the people of Naga proved: Politics doesn't have to be dirty. Goals can be achieved without sacrificing principles.

It's a pity that Jesse was only known outside of Bicol after he passed away. Other Filipinos didn't immediately know how, through sharp strategy and strong political will, he steered Naga from a 3rd class municipality to a first class city. But isn't that what we can really expect from someone who doesn't like to brag and boast?

It seems destined that the date of my father's assassination and the discovery of Jesse's body would be the same. In different ways, both of them proved that “The Filipino is worth dying for.” If Jesse was among the Filipinos who ignited a love for country because of my father's death, I am sure that many were also inspired by Jesse's example. [Applause]

That is why I consider this gathering a celebration. Although he is not with us now, he will remain in our hearts and minds for how Jesse Manalastas Robredo lived and led: An exemplary father and loving husband; a good friend; and a model public servant. Jesse, thank you for the reforms you accomplished and started, and for continuing to inspire us in the party and our fellow citizens.

As I reflect on Jesse's life, and what happened to my family, I cannot help but ask: If there are people willing to give themselves for the benefit of the many, what more could they have done if more people had decided to contribute to their efforts? Wouldn't they have solved more problems if they were free to focus on other issues because someone said, “Okay, okay. I’ll take care of this.”

Truly: The best gratitude we can give to Jesse and other great people who came before him is to continue and improve upon what they left us. Through their lives, deaths, and sacrifices, they showed us what is possible. And by making the possible happen, they ensure that we start better than they found it. It is only right that we reciprocate this with our own efforts and care for those who will come after us.

My Bosses, this is a wonderful time to reach for even higher dreams. We have already planted the seed of transformation. With our continued nurturing and vigilance, and with the contribution of every decent Filipino, we will achieve a Philippines that is more developed, more peaceful, and admired in various parts of the world, even faster.

Let us look back at those who came before us and where they brought us, which is undeniably better than what they inherited. Let us just remember where we came from. Let us remember that this will give us the strength to move towards our aspirations.

Good day. Thank you all very much.