Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Inauguration of Ciudad de Victoria

Good morning to all of you.

My father taught me that when giving a speech, you should look your audience in the eye. But it’s really very vast what we need to look at now, especially those at the top of the balcony. I hope that even in the farthest corners, we can still understand each other. Thank you.

We greet all those who comprise the Iglesia ni Cristo, led by your Executive Minister, Brother Eduardo Manalo. I congratulate you on your upcoming 100th anniversary. We are here today to witness your historic celebration, which further adds color to your centennial: the launch of Ciudad de Victoria. The name of this place—meaning “City of Victory”—is indeed fitting, especially since it reflects the achievements of the Church over the past century. From the founding of the Honorable Felix Manalo, to the continued growth of your congregation, the Iglesia ni Cristo is looked up to, not only in our country, but also in various parts of the world.

I am truly pleased to be a part of this gathering. We personally support an institution like the Church in its fervent shaping of your members as faithful servants of our Lord. You serve as a bridge to deepen the faith of your members, and you strongly guide the spiritual lives of many of our countrymen.

We are also deeply impressed by your strong unity within the Church as a family and community. It is clear to me: your bonding and faith do not end within the chapel. You are not content with managing worship services; you also visit your members to personally check on them, and actively encourage them to participate in community activities. In this way, you understand their situation and the problems that affect their actions and decisions; you guide them to strengthen their relationship with others, and their faith in the Lord.

You truly live the great teachings of Christ. As stated in the Book of John, Chapter 13, Verses 34 to 35 [cheers and applause], when Jesus gave a new commandment to his disciples, he said: Love one another. As I have loved you, so you must love one another. If you love one another, all people will know that you are my disciples.

It is also stated in the Book of Matthew, Chapter 25, Verse 40 [cheers and applause]. You know, I was thinking, why when I quote the bible, even those I’ve worked with for a long time seem surprised. Anyway, it is written: Whatever you did for one of my least brothers, you did for me.

Indeed, the launch of Ciudad de Victoria is concrete proof of the spirit of unity that prevails in the Church of Christ. It was built from the wholehearted offerings of your members, coupled with the desire to help in the good works and mission of the Church. It is also proof of the height of aspirations that Filipinos can reach, and our ability to keep pace with the rest of the world.

We are here at the structure that everyone has been looking forward to—the Philippine Arena, which will be recognized as the largest dome arena in the world. Truly remarkable: With a capacity to accommodate 55,000 people, it is reportedly more than twice the size of Staples Center in Los Angeles, California.

But we know that this structure was built not to compete. It was built for the sacred and noble purpose that Brother Eraño Manalo had dreamed of a long time ago—to support a space to serve and share the grace of the Lord with the local and global community.

Aside from the Philippine Arena, we are also excited about the other facilities that are emerging here that will bring benefits, not only to the members of the congregation, but also to all our countrymen. We sincerely thank the Church of Christ for your concern for our fellowmen; you truly demonstrate this, not just in words, but in deeds. Thank you very much for being a partner of our administration in promoting good governance.

Indeed, through the contribution of the Filipino people, the extensive transformation in our society that we are enjoying has sprung forth. And in our work of promoting reform, it is inevitable that we will have enemies. There are some who, no matter what I do, such as attending this event, will still look for something to criticize. I just remind them: If we are fellow Christians, it is our duty to love one another in the name of the Lord, rather than sow doubt and misunderstanding. As followers of the Lord, let us always help one another in promoting the good of all; let us always be a source of hope and compassion for our fellowmen, especially those who are more in need.

Once again, happy celebration to the Church of Christ. May you continue to deliver positive contributions and good influence to the Filipino people; may God bless you with many more blessings and successes until the next century.

Again: Good morning to all of you and thank you very much.