Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the 28th Awards Ceremony for the Apolinario Mabini Awards

Just recently, news has been circulating in newspapers and social media about the film 'Heneral Luna.' [Laughter] I admit, I haven't watched it yet. Featured in it is actor Epy Quizon, who played the role of Apolinario Mabini. He said that a group of college students recently asked him why his character, Mabini, didn't even stand up once in the film. [Laughter] Some netizens even commented that Mabini was probably just tired during those times. We were really shaking our heads when this was told to us. Even if only a few students expressed this, it can be said that it is also a reflection of the lack of knowledge of history among some young people today. And we will call Bro. Armin [Luistro] shortly to fix this.

It is timely to revisit a question: Why do we consider Apolinario Mabini a hero? The magnitude and extent of the contribution of the so-called “Great Paralytic” and “Brain of the Revolution” to our country is undeniable. He represents the intelligence and steadfastness of the Filipino race. His sharp mind was his weapon to strengthen the foundation of our democratic institutions. He made everyone realize that it is not only those in power who hold the fate of the nation; the people have a voice, and they are the source of power in our country. That is why, despite the condition of Apolinario Mabini, there was so much respect and reverence for him, even during times of turmoil and war.

Just last year, we celebrated the sesquicentennial, or the 150th year of the birth of Gat Apolinario Mabini. Today, we gather again to honor individuals, groups, and agencies that have made significant contributions to the sector of Persons With Disabilities. We recognize their efforts to further introduce our fellow citizens with disabilities as productive and exemplary members of society.

There is Mr. Randy Weisser, who has been caring for and guiding our visually impaired countrymen for 26 years, to enrich their potentials and abilities. Also admirable is our hearing-impaired Engineer Darlito Palermo, who did not mind his condition to become a full-fledged engineer; he is one of the first PWD youth leaders in Agdao, Davao City. We also salute the meaningful contribution of Ms. Annette Lee Esparaz, co-author of “TouchBooks”—the first picture book for visually-impaired Filipino students. It reportedly uses Braille to help them feel the images and convey the beauty of our world. For health, there is also the Philippine Academy of Rehabilitation Medicine, which cares for more than 250,000 PWDs, and has offered funding programs to help with the rehabilitation expenses of our most needy countrymen. Like Mabini, you, along with other individuals, media colleagues, local governments, and private sector partners whom we have honored today serve as beacons and inspiration to many of our countrymen. Therefore, on behalf of every Filipino whose strength you empower: A heartfelt thank you to all of you.

It is true: The broad transformation we are promoting begins with small steps and acts of caring for one another. While it is the state's duty to protect the welfare of our Bosses, we cannot maximize the results of our initiatives without partners like you.

On the Straight Path, we uphold a society focused on the interests of the majority, especially those most in need. We signed RA 10366 in 2013, which mandates the Commission on Elections to establish or designate areas for the quick and smooth voting of PWDs and senior citizens during elections. We expect its implementation to be strengthened even as the election next year approaches.

Your government is also working doubly hard to deliver benefits to our countrymen in the PWD sector. According to the DSWD: Under the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, as of this past August, we have assisted 217,359 households with a PWD member.

We also have a program called “Continue Studying, Without Obstacles,” which aims to enroll young people with disabilities in schools and daycare centers. In 2014, it had already helped 3,380 children with disabilities. Likewise, we have skills training for employment, job referrals, capital assistance, and access to financing for PWDs to expand and maximize their opportunities for progress. Rest assured, with the continuation of the Straight Path, we will further accelerate initiatives for your sector.

I would like to reiterate: I greatly admire the members of the PWD sector. As I have said, instead of calling them “differently abled,” it is more appropriate to call our fellow citizens with disabilities “more abled.” I know this because: Before facing other challenges in life, they have already overcome themselves. Instead of simply pitying their condition, they choose to fight every day. Instead of succumbing to a lack of confidence and hope, they lift themselves up and work hand in hand with others, to reach their potential, and contribute, not only to their families, but to the entire country.

Pope John Paul II also reinforced this idea in one of his Encyclical Letters. He said: “Persons with disabilities are fully human subjects with corresponding innate, sacred and inviolable rights, and, in spite of limitations and sufferings affecting their bodies and faculties, they point up more clearly the dignity and greatness of man.”

You, whom we honor today, prove the inherent talent and extraordinary courage of the Filipino race. Now that our country has come a long way since we joined hands on the Straight Path, may we continue to contribute and care for one another towards achieving the Philippines we dream of – one that is more just, equitable, and progressive.

Good afternoon. Thank you very much to all of you.