Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During his visit to the Palace for the 2013 Ten Outstanding Police Women of the Philippines

Thank you very much. Let us all be seated.

Police Director General Alan Purisima; Mrs. Praxedes Yu Tan; the 2013 Ten Outstanding [Police] Women of the Philippines; officials of the Zonta Club Makati Paseo de Roxas and Philippine National Police; honored guests; my beloved countrymen;

Good morning to all of you.

Our aircon’s cooperation is good. It’s really focused on us now. So if I listen for a bit, it’s not because of you, it’s because of the aircon.

I warmly greet our Ten Outstanding Policewomen, the Zonta Club of Makati Paseo de Roxas Foundation, as well as the leaders of our National Police, on this meaningful gathering today. It is an honor to be with a new group of women law enforcers, who truly serve as models in public service.

When I heard about this occasion, I remembered the female police officers we once recognized and honored for their service. There was Police Senior Inspector Charity Galvez—she led the firefight of thirty police officers against an estimated two hundred and fifty rebels who attacked their station in Agusan del Sur on July 30, 2011. Even though her troops were outnumbered, Senior Inspector Galvez and her team were still able to repel the attacking rebels. I also shared during my previous SONA, the courage of PO3 Edlyn Arbo, who fearlessly confronted a holdupper on the jeepney she was riding. Even though she was off-duty that day, she had no gun with her, and even sustained an injury during the encounter, she still successfully chased after the criminal.

Another example is our official from Tacloban, Police Inspector Marjorie Manuta. When we visited Tacloban, she was one of the first to brief us. Instead of showing fatigue and confusion over the devastation that occurred, she clearly reported the situation and every problem that we needed to address in the affected community. I was even more impressed when I was told that she walked six kilometers to be able to report for duty on the day Yolanda struck. Instead of staying home and prioritizing herself and her family, Inspector Manuta faced the fallen trees and the marks of Yolanda’s devastation; she did not waver despite the distance, fatigue, and the suffering she witnessed, in order to fulfill her duty to protect the majority. She is one of the estimated twenty who were on duty that day. She was not among the 117 who were missing that day. We truly admire her dedication.

Furthermore, when someone attempted to rob the SM Mall of Asia, who was the first to respond? Wasn’t it four policewomen? These four—Police Officers 1 Juliet Macababbad, Delia Langpawen, Mercelina Bantiyag, and Maricel Rueco—they didn’t just report the incident to their station, they didn’t hide, or wait for the crime to be completed before showing up. Instead, they exchanged fire with the criminals, and ensured that no civilians would be harmed.

This level of loyalty and dedication of your colleagues in the service is what restored the trust and admiration of our citizens. And the strengthening of our force on the straight path is even more evident—in our giving recognition once again this year to ten outstanding policewomen from various parts of the country.

Who would not admire the successes and honors brought by our awardees? With your help, our impoverished countrymen have been cared for and given medical services. With your guidance, many young people have been saved from the mire of drug use and abuse, and taught to hold a pencil and recite the alphabet. With your generosity, many communities have become peaceful and quiet; people are at ease and confident in pursuing a dignified life. Despite some limitations and shortcomings in your ranks, you did not lose heart; instead, you worked even harder and pushed your capabilities to achieve your goals. That is why the entire nation pays tribute to you. It is only right that this display of service be given appropriate incentives and rewards. Your leadership ensures that a culture of diligence and integrity will prevail in the police force, represented by you awardees, and also in the ranks of every public servant.

We thank the Zonta Club of Makati Paseo de Roxas Foundation for holding the annual awarding of our brave policewomen. Through your project, in cooperation with our national police, the great contribution of women is highlighted, not only as law enforcers, but also in expanding the scope of our social services. It truly warms the heart to see this initiative led by a private organization; a recognition that comes from our Bosses. To all those who comprise the Zonta Club of Makati Paseo de Roxas Foundation: Thank you for being a partner of the government in promoting the welfare of women, and in uplifting their status in various fields.

Truly: You awardees are symbols of the best qualities of the Filipino, and serve as the face of the change that our society is experiencing. Because of people like you, your government is even more determined to develop your capabilities. Our desire: Just as you show care for our countrymen, the state should also provide the same concern for you. We have proven: The transformation of society is not impossible or a mission impossible. Rest assured that the government will always be behind you to support and help you fulfill your obligations. We are improving your arms and equipment; we are holding accountable those who tarnish your ranks; and we continue to lay out programs to give you the ability to provide for the future of your families.

The challenge and my order to every member of our police force: Just as much enthusiasm as you show while starting in the service, is the same enthusiasm you should bring with you as you rise in rank. Be true to your sworn duty, in the name of our Bosses—the people who rely on you, and contribute to supporting your welfare. Let us prove: Regardless of age, gender or field, uniformed or ordinary citizen, as long as you are a Filipino carrying the dignity of the nation and concern for others, you can make a great contribution to the further progress of society. As long as we are on the side of what is right, we can be assured that the people will always be our allies in every fight. It is an honor for me to serve, together with the national police, our Bosses—the Filipino people who will no longer be defeated by corrupt practices; facing the world with heads held high and working together; and moving forward in a single direction of broad and lasting change.

Good day. Thank you very much to all of you.