Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the awarding of the Nationwide ISO 9001:2008 Certification to the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority

Good morning to all of you.

It feels like the day is starting beautifully like this, you know. And also the week. [Applause] There used to be a song called “Rainy Days and Mondays,” you know. [Laughter] I knew you would all remember that. [Laughter] Isn't it, if you complete it, it's “Rainy days on Mondays always get me down.” [Laughter]

Because of Joel and the entire TESDA family, this Monday feels pretty good. Hopefully the whole week is like this. [Applause]

Regarding those graduates you mentioned earlier, like the mechanic now in Australia. How much is his salary, Joel? [Secretary Villanueva responded: 225 thousand] Almost double my salary. [Laughter] But seriously, our 26 percent placement rate, now is close to 70 [percent]. All of that is due to your hard work. And I have to emphasize, there is a concern. Of course, everything has an upside and a downside. The upside is, we have so many dedicated people that have allowed so much opportunities for our people. That is the upside. The downside is, how long will you be satisfied with doing what you’re doing, especially if your graduates are [getting] multiples of what you are earning? I will continue to pray for all of you that you will continue to be inspired to provide all of these opportunities for our countrymen. And on their behalf, I want to thank all of you. [Applause]

Someone texted me during the height of our Mamasapano incident. And the text was quite long – to be honest, it was three pages on my iPhone. He said, “I have a few thoughts I want to share with you.” So, I didn’t know this person; it was sent to me by one of our senators. There was a part there, he said, “Thank you for taking on a job that nobody in his right mind would accept.” I said, “Is this praise or an insult?” [Laughter] She said she was born a year after me. And she was saying – I can’t name her. I didn’t ask permission to be able to quote her, but I should share it with you. She said, at the end of the long text, with many thank yous, and she was really so positive of all of the changes that have been happening. And I really want to say this because it is not I who did it, I keep saying it’s the Filipino people who did it, and all of you who have partnered with me in trying to correct the wrongs of our society, and leaving something truly worthwhile leaving for the next generations. So the dream is becoming a reality.

There’s so many questions that I had growing up. All of the poverty reduction methodologies that have been used have not really resulted in a significant difference in the poverty levels. Perhaps the phrase I keep using is: “Why does it seem like our fate is always ‘just endure’ and not justice.” And through all of your collective efforts, and our people’s unwavering support, I think we are finally getting to the point that we have justice for everybody. And again, on their behalf, I would just like to thank you and hopefully that which keeps you in this job will sustain you as we face the challenge of providing even more opportunities for our people.

Now we get to the formal portion of the speech. Sorry Joel, I got excited. Earlier I said, “Joel is very much alive. Maybe he drank a case of Red Bull.” [Laughter] But it’s really good news.

This morning, we warmly welcome the ISO 9001:2008 Certificates to the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority. This certification covers their Central Office, 17 Regional Offices, 81 Provincial Offices, including the first and only government agency in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to receive ISO Certification, TESDA-ARMM. [Applause] Following the Department of Health in 2013, TESDA is the second government agency to receive nationwide ISO Certification. This success proves: The positive transformation of our government continues; we continue to improve the quality of life of our Bosses, the Filipino people.

Through the external certification body TÜV SÜD, it is ensured that the products and services of TESDA are of quality, safe, and reliable. The agency needs to demonstrate efficient work; it needs to meet, if not exceed, the expectations of our countrymen for their services. TESDA has done this, and they ensure that the lessons and training, the qualifications of their trainers, facilities, and other services related to Technical and Vocational Education and Training or TVET Programs are in accordance with the standards of training regulations. It is clear: This success did not come from a haphazard system, but from calculated and specific steps; not from luck, but from the collective desire and effort of those who make up TESDA, including their students and graduates.

The important question now is: What benefits does this ISO Certification bring to the ordinary Filipino? Now that TESDA is ISO-certified, it is ensured that their training programs will be even more efficient and meaningful. Therefore, the benefit goes directly to their trainees and scholars—from out-of-school youth, to those belonging to the sector of persons with disabilities, to senior citizens—Filipinos who are given more hope and opportunities to improve and advance in life, and to hold their own destiny.

That is the TESDA brand: Service that yields positive results; good governance, which delivers quality service to the Filipino people. In truth, achieving this kind of success is not new for TESDA since we embarked on the straight and narrow path. This is well known to the more than 7.1 million graduates of TVET Programs from July 2010 to December 2014. This is especially known to those who have already found employment—the TVET graduates with a 65.3 percent employment rate, the products of their Training for Work Scholarship Program, with a 68.5 percent employment rate, and the graduates of TESDA and Semiconductor and Electronics Industries in the Philippines, with a 91.26 percent employment rate. They themselves will tell the Filipino people: In TESDA, you have a choice to sharpen your mind, develop your skills, and improve yourself and your family.

Therefore, I warmly congratulate everyone who comprises TESDA. To each of you: Thank you very much for taking steps and contributing to the straight and narrow path. You are the foundation of the success we are celebrating today. May you be an example to many more of our government personnel, and to our fellow Filipinos.

Of course, we would not have reached this day without the excellent leadership of TESDA. For those who may not know, our colleague Secretary Joel Villanueva is also ISO Certified. [Laughter] In service, he has ISO—Integrity and Zeal, which provides Opportunities for more Filipinos. [Applause] And if you falter, Secretary Linda Baldoz is there to scold you, Joel. [Laughter]

Secretary Joel is truly different. In basketball terms, his initiatives for TESDA always hit the mark. If before, the agency was lagging behind and burdened with problems, now, it is moving forward, and TESDA is now one of the leading government agencies in terms of service quality. [Applause] As I said: TESDA truly wins because of Secretary Joel Villanueva; those like him from the youth sector are sure to do much more for their fellowmen and the entire country.

We believe: Given enough opportunity, a Filipino will truly excel in any field. Whether a barista, stylist, chef, therapist, welder, call center agent, or technician—whatever path our Bosses choose, they have the ability to contribute, not only to improving themselves, but also to developing the Philippines. Our call to action is: Make the most of and hold on to every opportunity that comes your way; give your all so that together we can uplift our one and only nation. This is our time. Let us show ourselves, our fellow countrymen, and the whole world the true zeal and skill of the Filipino.

Good day. Thank you very much to all of you.