[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62_jNe21Fyc[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During his visit to the Sisters of Mary Girlstown Complex

Thank you very much. Let us all be seated.

Secretary, Brother Armin Luistro; Secretary Joel Villanueva; Secretary Rene Almendras; Congressman Roy Loyola; other members of the House of Representatives present, namely, Rep. Boy Blue Abaya and Rep. AA Advincula; of course Manong Ayong Maliksi, the longstanding governor and public servant and role model in Cavite; Sister Elena Belarmino; Mrs. Marixi Rufino-Prieto and other benefactors of the Sisters of Mary Boystown and Girlstown; alumni, teachers, and students of the Sisters of Mary Boystown and Girlstown; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my beloved countrymen:

Good afternoon once again to all of you.

While I was watching your singing and then our actions, of course we were very impressed that you were so synchronized—no one was left behind, no one was ahead, no one cared [laughter]. Then, there are three members of the cabinet. I said, “Should I challenge these three to do it together?” Could they do it while the music is playing? Maybe they can; isn’t there someone conducting? What if there’s no music? Because earlier, after the music ended, you were still synchronized.

Perhaps I emphasize this—especially in our lives in politics, it seems there’s too much contentment in being out of tune. If you all agree, “Isn’t it good to do this here?” Let’s say “White,” there’s always someone who will object, saying, “No. It should be black.” Why? “Just because.”

There is something called, in any society, they call it a “contrarian.” What is a contrarian? No matter how good you are, no matter how well you do something, there will always be someone who opposes, because that is their happiness—they need to oppose.

So just now, while I was watching you, I said, “If we all really march together towards recognizing, understanding the needs of our brothers and sisters – our fellow human beings – if our lives are focused on our fellow human beings, why wouldn’t we reach where we want to go faster? Right?” Instead of everyone doing their own thing and being content – we have a choral group where everyone sings a different song. Of course, if we’re all singing different songs – can we even have a good choral group? We might also be good listeners because who will you listen to, 14 songs are being sung? What would be clear there?

Anyway, let's proceed to the formal portion of the speech.

When Sister Maria and Sister Elena invited me to visit here at Sisters of Mary Girlstown, they asked me to give an inspirational message for you. This is what I can say after really seeing the teachers and students in this school: You are inspiring. Truly, four years and five months, if my count is correct, that we have been serving the nation. Of course, I cover all the problems of the country, all Filipinos with problems, that is mine. Whether in the Philippines or not in the Philippines, that is my problem. We are humans, after all, and it's tiring, in a way. When everyone goes on vacation, you make sure their vacation is safe. When their vacation is over, returning, that is also my job – to ensure they return safely.

My job is also to find jobs for everyone: to teach everyone to have the necessary skills to participate in the growth of our economy. And after that, there are really others, maybe you heard my SONA, I said, breakfast is criticism; lunch is intrigue; dinner – all the ugliness is there. But I ended up here, Mrs. Prieto is right, go here if you're sad, you'll really be inspired. I, along with my cabinet, thank you all. It's like a cellphone battery, we all got recharged when we're here.

You are all admirable for choosing to continue your studies despite the challenges you face in life. You are so young, yet you face such heavy burdens. You give hope, not only for yourselves, but also for your loved ones. You also carry hope for our country. When you graduate and begin to use the blessings you have received to be a light to others, you will become part of promoting a Philippines that is more progressive and closer to God. You prove that: When you give a Filipino an opportunity, regardless of his or her situation, wherever he or she comes from, he or she will not waste it. Instead, he or she will do everything he or she can to contribute to the meaningful transformation of our society.

In 1986, Fr. Al Schwartz established the Sisters of Mary School in the Philippines. That was also the year when Filipinos ousted the dictator and chose my mother as the new leader. It was a new stage in our history: a new path had to be laid after a long period of imprisonment in fear and abuse. The contribution of this school in giving direction to young people on the margins of society, who are beginning to find their place in a free country, cannot be denied.

During those times, I used to hear a joke about my mother. It was said that she was like someone cooking sinigang. Then, she was only given the ingredients of water and salt and told that it should taste like sinigang. To those of you who are into culinary arts, can you do that? The dictator left a broken system, a collapsed economy, and a national consciousness that was truly wounded by the oppression of those in power.

That's what my mother faced after EDSA. The former housewife, now president of the Philippines. And on her shoulders rested the responsibility of leading our people towards healing. Like you, she did not succumb to doubts. Instead, she bravely faced the challenges. It was clear to her: she was given a unique opportunity to be an instrument of change. She wholeheartedly gave herself to serving the Lord and the Filipinos.

The citizen's trust and his deep spirituality were his weapons against trials. His way of life and leadership taught us that as long as you follow your conscience, and as long as the welfare of your neighbor guides your journey, you will not get lost. With this conviction, the once impossible becomes possible.

I am pleased to observe that this belief and practice is imparted by the Sisters of Mary School to your students. I thank the administrators, teachers and benefactors of this school for their solidarity in our endeavor to provide a better future for our youth, especially the poor. You can count on it: the support of your government for your good work will continue. [Applause] Support continues, for example, from TESDA: From 2008 to 2013, 19 of your programs were registered and four were accredited as assessment centers. Through this, we ensure that the training received by students in Technical Vocational Education and Training is sufficient and appropriate. Under the Training for Work Scholarship Program, 288 slots were granted to your students from 2010 to 2013. And I am sure Joel is looking [for a way] to increase that number. [Applause] Earlier, 200 scholarship vouchers were awarded to your students who will be part of TESDA's Special Training for Employment Program. In this program, the specific needs of the community are identified, and then students are trained to meet them. With this system, graduates will not only be given employment; they will also be able to contribute to their community.

Through the cooperation of TESDA, one of your students won the Medallion of Excellence in Fashion Technology at the ASEAN Skills Competition held in Vietnam last October. She is here on our right – Jessica Babon, of course, with honor to the Sisters of Mary, and to TESDA: I congratulate you on this success. You know, we haven't participated for seven years. And when we participated, there was a Medal of Excellence, several gold medals, several bronze medals. So next year, Joel promises us more medals. Unless we have the same hairstyle. [Laughter]

You have proven that we can go far when we move forward together.

To the students here today, I will give you a warning: Life is not easy when you are outside of school, you know that. I say this not to scare you, but to show the importance of humility and faith in God. Hold on to what Fr. Al often says, and translated into Tagalog. He said like this, “You were not created to be fat and small pads wallowing in mud, but to be eagles destined to soar high.”

The quality education and training you receive here at Sisters of Mary School is just the first step towards achieving your dreams. One day, some of you will become professionals and experts in various fields. Others will return to be part of the congregation, and will serve as guides for the next generation of students. Whatever path you choose, I am confident that your teachers and the Sisters of Mary have prepared you for the trials you will face.

Let us always remember: We do not only elevate ourselves when we achieve success. We also serve as inspiration to others, and add to their good deeds. Above all, our collective endeavor will pave the way for the continuous positive transformation of our society. In other words, as we elevate our flight today, we ensure that the next generation will fly even higher. In this way, we more fully fulfill the Creator's plan for all of us.

You know – I just want to share with you what my father told me one day – we were talking about the importance of education. He said to me then, why are you famous today, you're outdated tomorrow? Why are you rich today, you're poor tomorrow? If you take this study seriously and get it into your head, everything said in your lessons, whatever happens, that's your wealth for life. While you have the opportunity, practice hard so that when the time comes, whatever happens, you are ready.

And that is what we are striving to live by. You know, the difference between your generation and ours—of course, my father was among the first to be arrested during martial law—when we look at the towns that experienced martial law, they only gain freedom when there is a bloody revolution. And I didn't expect to surpass the point where I would skip over that bloody revolution. But as they say, perhaps God has a plan for us and here we still are. I didn't think I would reach 30. In just about six years, I will be 60, that's doubled. Perhaps as long as I haven't finished God's plan for me here, we will remain.

Now, why am I sharing this with you? It was our destiny. We needed to go through those difficult times. Perhaps we needed to feel, what does it mean to have no freedom? We needed to feel or see, what does it mean to have no hope? Now, we are changing all of this now.

Earlier, we came from Coca-Cola, the plant in Laguna, in Calamba. Before this plant was expanded, in 2010, Coca-Cola International promised to invest one billion dollars in us. They have already invested P1.2 billion. Their commitment—it was even ahead of schedule because it was supposed to be finished next year—was completed this year. Next year, it will be increased by half a billion. They employ eight thousand people directly. And there are others who sell their drinks, etc.

So, next year, we will begin what is called the demographic sweet spot, where a large number of our citizens are in the working age. Now, it is important that if you are already at the age where you can work, you should have the corresponding skills to participate in the growth of our economy, right? If you have no knowledge to share, or you have not been given knowledge, and you do not have the necessary skills, then you will always be at the bottom.

So, that is our goal. I cannot tell all of you that I guarantee that your results will always be good. I can help. We can open doors. My father also told me that. I can open the door for you. If it remains open, that is up to you. When I started working, he could introduce me, recommend me, he would be given credit. But when I arrived at the office where I was hired and I became unproductive, of course, I would be fired. That is what it means to “keep the door open,” it is up to you.

So, what we are aiming for is to maximize all the opportunities that can be given to every Filipino so that no one is left behind. If you succeed, of course, that is a partnership. That is why earlier, when we all sang together in our synchronized song number, it really is possible that Filipinos can march, with one step, right? My three members here in the Cabinet, they may need to practice for two months to keep up with you. [Laughter] And of course, you are young. We are just young at heart. The suppleness of your bodies and the suppleness of our bodies, yours is real, ours is a memory. But the determination to unite with you so that when the time comes—I always say this—the time will come, we are humans after all, we have a limit in this world. As we said when we were studying, the point will come when Lord will call us, He will say, “Finished or not finished, pass your paper.” There is only one real ambition, before you are called by Lord, you are already in the final stage of your life, in the last minute, I hope you can look back and say, “Wow, the changes I left behind are much greater than what I found. And I was a part of that change towards goodness.” That is always a choice. We can be selfish, we can contribute together.

Just that last point, I remember, my mother helped a lot here and visited you. Of course, I want to know how she really helped because in this time, the election is really coming up, if you think about it, many people are looking for all the flaws: Your breathing is wrong, your combing is wrong, everything is wrong, right? You can see when you watch TV, I haven't done anything right. But those who say that, it's still the same. That's okay. If you don't want to join, stay behind, you have the freedom to stay behind. But we, who want to move forward and progress, please don't hinder us too much. So, we will find a way.

Last thought. The Americans have a saying, “Success has many fathers or mothers. Failure is a lonely orphan.” Here, in the past 28 years, a lot of success has happened here. I think, you have many adoptive fathers and mothers who will give the same opportunity to those who will follow in your footsteps. Please, let's continue to work together. Let's continue the direction that the opportunity given to you, let's make sure that it will also be given to future generations. And we, as much as we can, will strive to help you in this good endeavor and initiative that you are doing.

Good afternoon to all of you. Thank you very much.