Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during the celebration of “K to 12, Kaya-kaya, Sama-sama!”

That teacher who spoke earlier from Don Alejandro Roces, right? I even asked, “Is that Anding Roces?” They said yes, a former Secretary of Education. I said, “He was with my father in 1978. He ran in the interim Batasang Pambansa elections. I think I’m getting old and the schools named after him are ones I’ve known.” [Laughter]

Anyway, Joel told me earlier that there were some who opposed K to 12 who rallied earlier. There were about twenty of them, but their banners were only five each. So I want to see the newspapers tomorrow, maybe they’ll show us a lot of opposing banners for K to 12. I felt sorry for the people, they might complain about unfair labor practice because five banners were assigned to him. Bro. Armin, I can only say to you, it’s too early for this with K to 12. When the time comes, all those who oppose it, when they see the success, will say that if not for their criticism [it] wouldn’t have improved K to 12. [Applause] Sometimes our critics, they are really the children of God; they are the only ones who are smart. So let God deal with them.

My countrymen, my promise to our Bosses: On the straight path, no one should be left behind. This is the reason for our promotion of what is called inclusive growth, or development that reaches many, if not all. We believe: Focusing on education is one of the fastest and most necessary ways to achieve this.

I remember what my father said when I couldn’t see the light in the darkness of Martial Law; when I wasn’t getting good grades, the favorite son. My father said, “You might be rich now, you might be poor tomorrow. You might be famous now, you might be outdated tomorrow. But when you learn, that’s yours for life. You will never lose what you have studied.”

This is the basic principle of the Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013 that we established, or more commonly known as the K to 12 Act. In this education system, we focus on training the youth, to give them enough ability to maximize the opportunities opening up in the country, and contribute to the growth of our economy.

The aim of the K to 12 program is to lay down reforms in the 10-year basic education cycle that we have become accustomed to. To make it easier to understand, let’s just think of a mango: Isn’t it true that we have what is ripened by force, and what is ripened naturally? The previous ten years of basic education, we can consider it calcium carbide—forcing everything a child needs to learn into a short period of time. Perhaps in some past generations, ten years of study would still be okay. But as time goes on, isn’t the knowledge expected of everyone wider, and do we need to keep up with the changes?

When Secretary Soliman was much younger, I remember, she said, “You only have to tackle the 4Rs.” Reading, Writing, Arithmetic… What was the fourth one? I’ve forgotten after all these years. [Laughter] Oh, 3R’s is enough now, too. [Applause] Now even grandmothers should be “techie.” When taking a picture, they need to know how to take a selfie.

We also know: In the old system, everything that needed to be learned, from Grade 1 to Grade 6, was crammed in; when reaching first year high school, they had to catch up on what wasn't taught in elementary school. The same goes for college: Upon entering first year college, time would be consumed again because they had to finish the lessons not completed in high school because one year was taken to fill in the grade school curriculum. Isn't it, if you were the student, your face would really contort because of the amount of knowledge being forced upon you, to the point where you barely have time to digest and savor it? This is the opposite of what our K to 12 program promotes, where young people will be given enough time for knowledge to mature that they need to learn.

Let me ask you to consider this: Before the K to 12 was enacted, we were one of the remaining three countries in the world with ten years of basic education. The other two are in Africa; while we were alone in Asia. There were concerns at the time: Our graduates would really be at a disadvantage and Filipino diplomas might no longer be recognized when it comes to employment or higher fields abroad. They would rather choose graduates who went through 12 years of basic education; if not, you would be required to study further to meet their standards. And that is becoming a problem for our workers.

In K to 12, the teaching of basic knowledge is strengthened in elementary and junior high school; and in senior high school, students can choose specialized tracks for academics, technical and vocational education, as well as sports and arts. Through this, we ensure that our youth have sufficient knowledge upon graduating from high school to become more productive members of society.

That is why we appeal: Instead of thinking of the additional two years in school for our students as a burden, let us consider it an opportunity for them to further improve themselves towards achieving their dreams. If those we are sending to school graduate with a significantly higher level of knowledge, they will also get better jobs, which will lead them to a more comfortable life.

Despite the initiatives we have implemented, we know that some are still saying that we are not ready. This is our response to them: We are ready. K to 12 is the result of years of planning and thorough consultation, with our partners in the education sector. This includes TESDA, CHED, DOLE, and DTI; legislators, local governments, the private sector, and other stakeholders.

I remember when my mother was still in office. One of the steps she took to increase income in rural areas was to establish, or help establish, cooperatives. You know, to be effective, she said it takes two years to train those who manage its projects.

Let me repeat that: During my mother's time, it was considered necessary to have two years [in order] for each person to learn to work with each other before being given a project that would have what we call potential for [conflict].

The problem, my mother said, was that because funds were depleted during the dictatorship, instead of two years of training for our cooperative members, the government could only afford to fund four months. The difference now, because of the changes we are experiencing, we have sufficient funds; we have the ability to meet the needs of the education sector.

The backlogs inherited from the previous administration, we are now completing one by one under the leadership of Brother Armin. There are 61.7 million textbooks and 2.5 million chairs, which we have already filled as of 2012. The shortage of 66,800 classrooms was also addressed in 2013. We are also addressing the additional needs associated with K to 12. In fact, in 2014, 33,607 classrooms were added, being constructed, and in the procurement process. Now, in 2015, we have funded the construction of an additional 31,728 classrooms.

For those worried about the changes brought about by the K to 12 program, we already have initiatives to help those who may be affected. For example: Because there are two additional years in basic education, there will also be two years with fewer students entering college. For teachers who may be displaced due to this change, we are studying several programs for you. In the implementation of K to 12, at least 30,000 teachers will be needed for the new Senior High School level. So now, our teachers in college can consider teaching here as an option. For teachers in State Universities and Colleges who want to take masters and doctoral degrees, we know that some of you, or many of you, were obliged to study only at the nearest university but wanted to study at other universities. Even if you want to enroll in other institutions, you cannot do so because it is far and your time is limited because you are teaching. Now, for those who want to finish their degree at the university of their choice, they can use the two-year transition phase in K to 12 to finally obtain their desired degrees.

Surely, every grain of sacrifice we make now—from the cooperation and contribution of students, parents, teachers, leaders and other members of the academy; to government employees; and to every decent Filipino who desires a more developed Philippines—everything we are planting, if we continue to nurture it, will bear positive transformation, which will be reaped by future generations.

Now, we are not saying that we already have the perfect solution to all problems. We are just strengthening, as much as we can, the education system in the country. The question is: Will we let many years pass again, and tell those who come after us “It’s up to you to address this”? As they say, during the time of martial law, the awakened citizen was asked: If not now, when? And if not you, who else?”

Bosses: We will no longer waste this golden opportunity. We can definitely push forward with the K to 12 program we have started; let us together raise the level of education in the Philippines. In that way, let us be true when we say that we are caring for the next generation.

Good day. Thank you very much to all of you.