Speech of

Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the 2nd Busog, Lusog, Talino (BLT) Excellence Awards

Declared on May 30, 2016, in the City of Mandaluyong.

The Busog, Lusog, Talino School Feeding Program teaches us that when it comes to social services, everything must be complete. If one component is lacking, the benefit is surely incomplete. If “full” but without “health,” students will be prone to illness. If with “health” but without “intelligence,” they will not become useful members of our society. It is also clear from the experience of our teachers: It is very difficult to impart intelligence when the students’ stomachs are empty. Moreover, even if education is free, if there is nothing to eat, the existence of out-of-school children in our country will surely not be eliminated.

That is why we were not content with providing incomplete programs to our youth. We exhausted all our efforts to give them what a Latin saying states: Mens sana en corpore sano. A healthy mind in a healthy body. We did not only address the deficiencies we found in teachers, classrooms, school seats, and textbooks. We also prepared for the upcoming needs in the implementation of K to 12. In our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, we included health care as a condition, such as vaccination and regular checkups. The DSWD has a Supplementary Feeding Program, which provides warm and nutritious food to youth in day care centers. According to Sec. Dinky Soliman, 1.77 million children benefited from this program during the school year 2015–2016. The DOH also implements programs such as the National School Deworming Campaign. Last August 2015, almost 11.5 million students in our public elementary schools underwent the deworming process. It is clear from these examples: On the Straight Path, services are interconnected and comprehensive.

Indeed: With the care and cooperation of everyone, we have further strengthened our programs not only for the youth, but also for communities and schools. For example, in partnership with the Jollibee Group Foundation, we have raised the level of the DepEd’s School-based Feeding Program (SBFP). I am pleased to report to you that last year, the SBFP was funded with 2.27 billion pesos, which improved the health of almost 1.2 million students in 29,773 schools. To further help sustain the program, the DepEd made having a School Garden a requirement. This will be the source of some of the ingredients used in cooking food for students. Commendable also is the Jollibee Farmer Entrepreneurship Program, which connects our farmers to the production of Jollibee ingredients. Because of this, our countrymen are given additional opportunities to earn. Therefore, it is only right to recognize the contribution of the private sector to our endeavors. We thank Chairman Tony Tan Caktiong, President Grace Tan Caktiong, and everyone who makes up the Jollibee Group Foundation.

To the teachers, parents, students, and other stakeholders of the schools being recognized today, especially to the BLT Grand Winner Francisco Laya Memorial Integrated School, and to the SBFP Grand Winner Daniel M. Perez Elementary School: Congratulations. There are young people deprived of the opportunity for a better future due to lack of nutrition. With your dedication and cooperation, you give them hope. Furthermore, you also serve as a good example and inspiration to other communities.

We all know: Because the youth are still innocent and their abilities are not yet sufficient, it is our responsibility to take care of them. If we neglect their development, it is as if we are disregarding the future of our country. Isn't it true that a day will come when they will make decisions that will affect future generations? Our duty: To ensure they are ready when that time comes; to fight for what is right on all occasions; and to leave the country in a better condition than we found it. This will ensure that they go further; that they reach even higher dreams.

Thank you very much. Good day to all of you.