Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Graduation of the Philippine National Police Tagapamagitan 2013

[ Delivered in Silang, Cavite, on March 22nd ]

When we were in Baguio, we were wondering, I asked our Secretary of National Defense, “Why did everyone graduate looking like tigers? Shouldn’t we be happy?”

So here in Silang, many of you were congratulated [congratulate] and smiled—you probably got it from Secretary Roxas and the PMA, they get it from Secretary Gazmin—Secretary Gazmin really doesn’t smile much.

Just last week, I met your batchmates who graduated from the PMA; our new partners in promoting security and peace in our country. It’s heartwarming that today, we will also witness the graduation of two hundred and fifty-two cadets of the Philippine National Police Academy—the new generation of law enforcers; the first line of defense of our citizens in upholding their safety and order in society, including our new jail inspectors and fire inspectors.

As I always remind you: your success today is just a small part of a long journey facing trials and tribulations. You have just finished four years of training; you are just leaving the Academy that taught you theories, and subjected you to intense physical and mental tests. The question is: now that the time has come when what has been sown in your seed of PNPA values is sufficient and you will face the real world, will you choose to sprout as true servants of the people and serve as a symbol of accountability? Or will you wither and let your integrity rot in the system you are used to?

At this point where you are brimming with idealism and eagerness to enter the service, it may be easy to answer “yes, we are ready to serve the Filipino.” But the true measure of commitment cannot be passed through words, but how we match our words with concrete actions.

If it were easy to be accountable for the sworn duty, why do we still have colleagues in the service involved in anomalies and corruption? For example: in illegal logging, particularly in CARAGA. We implemented Executive Order 23 prohibiting logging in natural and residual forests as early as February 2011. We want that when a typhoon comes, there will be no huge logs crashing into bridges, destroying properties, and taking many lives. Instead, there will be lush trees that absorb rainwater to prevent landslides and floods. But there are still some stubborn people who continue this illegal activity, and some government officials are their patrons. Since they are challenging us, let’s respond to their challenge. Thirty-four DENR personnel have been shown the straight path and removed from their positions; sixteen of them are from DENR-CARAGA. Last June, we dismissed the PNP Provincial Director of Agusan del Sur, and six town chiefs of police, followed by the dismissal of the PNP Regional Director of CARAGA in July 2012. They seemed to have chosen to turn a blind eye, ear, and mouth to illegal logging in their area. So to those who are still shrugging off illegal logging, I assure you that your time in the service is numbered. My order as Commander-in-Chief is clear and compliance with the law is not optional. I will not tolerate those who are still being stubborn with our orders.

Another example of a controversy that stains the improving image of our police is the bloody incident in Atimonan, Quezon. It is clear that something went wrong here and the law was put into their own hands. An investigation is currently underway in this case, and we are closely monitoring it to immediately identify those who violated laws and regulations. Now that the election is approaching, we cannot allow this tragedy to happen again. As an additional force of our uniformed ranks, I am confident that you will join us in promoting a clean, honest and free election that will dictate our future.

Let me clarify: I am not here to sow doubt and negativity among the graduates today, but to lay out and prepare them for the difficult trials that await them in their chosen profession. My order and challenge to our Tagapamagitan Class of 2013: Do not fail our Bosses—the Filipino people. I hope that in the face of temptations of money and power, you will prioritize the welfare of those who are marginalized. More than being defenders, you will serve as Intermediaries: bridging the gap between the people and our uniformed ranks, the bridge that will deliver order and a safe life; and uniting every Juan dela Cruz despite any differences and misunderstandings in society.

Clearly: You have achieved this success today because of the collective effort and dedication of your parents to finance your education; as well as the professionalism of your teachers who burned the midnight oil with you to develop your knowledge. In wearing your new uniform and insignia, I hope you will also focus every decision and action on fulfilling our collective aspiration as a nation. In performing your duties, always side with what is right and care for your fellowmen. Always think about what will benefit the majority, and be fair in responding to the problems of your agency; whether you are a police officer, firefighter, warden, or a fellow servant of the people.

I am confident that the principles will stand the leaders of your class, representing the entire Tagapamagitan Class of 2013. There are Jhon Felix Pascual, your valedictorian who chose to follow in his father’s footsteps as a police officer and continue serving our citizens; the second in the class, Christian Javier, whose honor and hard work as a former gasoline boy and grocery bagger in a mall, is the same honor and hard work that he will bring to the BJMP; and Aiman Kamlon, the sixth in your class and the first Muslim to become a regiment commander in the PNPA, who is a model of resilience, discipline, and good leadership.

You are fortunate because you now have a wonderful opportunity to enter the service. The time is over when the government seemed to add to the suffering of those who care for the country. We know that if we let the police only hold a baton in encounters with criminals, and if their equipment is dilapidated, we are also burying them in the grave of certain misfortune. That is why before the end of this year, we are targeting to get almost 74,800 units of 9mm pistol that we purchased under the PNP Capability Enhancement Program. This will address the 50 percent shortage of pistols inherited from us, in order to finally achieve a 1:1 ratio in the number of police and guns.

This past year, we have also purchased seventy-six fire trucks for the Bureau of Fire Protection. The good news is: instead of buying them for nine million pesos, we got each unit for only five million pesos, and the saved funds will be allocated to other needs. In addition, we have also purchased more than 400 short firearms, and more than 960 long firearms for the BJMP. Along with this is our construction and repair of additional prisons for more effective implementation of the BJMP mandate. For those entering the BJMP, don’t worry too much if you see your prisoners seem like prisoners in name only. We are inventorying all of that and we will correct your facilities to help you perform your job properly.

As we promised, we have built 21,800 housing units for our police and military. We are now in Phase II of this program where an additional 31,200 housing units are being completed for the AFP, PNP, BFP, BJMP, and we have also included the BuCor. This should be completed by August.

These meaningful projects are proof that with the straight and narrow path, we are more focused on the needs of the state and those who serve the Filipino people. In the face of these successes, will we allow ourselves to be derailed from promoting broad development? Let us remember that when we turn a blind eye to bad elements, the public loses trust in the government, and chooses to side with those who pretend to be their defenders.

Our duty as public servants is clear: to serve as a monument to accountability and to uphold what is right at all times. To the Mediator Class of 2013: let us all walk the straight path together, and prove that you are worthy to be named honorable products of the Philippine National Police Academy, and serve as servants of the Filipino people.

Before I conclude—Every graduation, I remember my own time when I also graduated. When I graduated from grade school, it was Martial Law. My father was not with me at my graduation. My mother and siblings were there. High School, it was still Martial Law. My father wasn't there again. My mother and siblings were there. College, it was almost like Martial Law again. They all—my father had a heart condition and was sent to America. When he sought treatment, my mother and siblings were with him. Even I wasn't able to march in our graduation because they said my permission to follow them might be revoked. I have a diploma, but I didn't experience that either. And perhaps that also shaped my perspective that the mistakes of Martial Law should not happen again, of course. And every Filipino must feel what the service and value of democracy truly is, for each and every one.

When you reach every crossroads where you need to choose which way to go, perhaps I can share with you the advice of my father. He told me back then, “If we do not defend the rights of other groups, we are also preparing the situation where our own rights will be lost and we will be oppressed.”

It is truly important that every Filipino citizen sees us all as those who can be leaned on and truly relied upon, and you will see a nation helping each other—nothing will really hinder progress and peace.

Good day. Thank you all very much.