Good afternoon to all of you.

I stand here today to speak to an industry that has helped reshape the landscape of business in our country: the Philippine Contact Center Industry, the face of our booming IT-BPM sector. Over the years, the individuals and companies in this room have helped boost the Philippines to what many refer to as the world’s call center capital, and the results can be seen across the metropolis: in billboards, in TV ads, and in the more than one million Filipinos in the IT-BPM sector. The multiplier effect of these jobs can be felt by several sectors, from jeepney drivers to other transport providers, to owners of small businesses to convenient stores and restaurants; thus spurring the economy and leading to even more jobs in the process. I further add that this economic growth is not solely restricted to the National Capital Region. You have also branched out to so many different areas in the country, thereby helping us accelerate the development of the countryside. This has been a tremendously positive development, and we invite you to help further accelerate growth in these areas with even more investments.

Indeed, this industry has contributed significantly to the virtuous cycle of empowerment, confidence, and growth that has characterized our country in recent years. A look at the numbers, however, makes your story even more inspiring . Back in the year 2000, the contact center industry’s total revenues were pegged at $20 million, with about 2,400 people employed. These numbers rose at a blistering pace. By 2014, revenues had increased to $11.7 billion, and total employment was at 686,000 employees. On top of this, I am told that by 2016, the contact center sector alone is well on pace towards achieving your target of at least P15 billion in revenues and 900,000 employees. I certainly would not take it against you if you surpassed these numbers, and reached one million employees before the time I step down from office.

If you want to even double that number, I am sure there will be a lot of us who will say thank you.

There is no question: Your industry has made a massive contribution to the Philippine economy and to Philippine life. It has only been a little more than three months since I last spoke to your sector at the International IT-BPM Summit, but I speak to you again today because I wish to emphasize government’s eagerness to work with you and help you continue your excellent performance. Just as your industry’s rise can be attributed to the joint effort between your industry’s leaders, members, and development-oriented individuals in government, such as then-Secretary of Trade and Industry Mar Roxas and his very able successor Secretary Gregory Domingo, we hope to continue fostering our relationship, where the state amplifies the strengths of industry, and vice-versa, towards building a more inclusive economy.

One of the areas where we can do this is in education. Our administration is aware that among the concerns of your industry is finding individuals with the necessary skillsets to man your workstations. This is why we have focused on improving programs like the Training for Work Scholarship Program of TESDA. These past four and a half years, we have spent more than P1.3 billion on this program solely for the IT-BPM sector. Since the beginning, we have worked with IBPAP, and our collaboration has yielded favorable results, with 70.7 percent of the graduates of the TESDA-IBPAP training programs in 2012 finding employment in your companies. This 2015, we are set to expand the TWSP’s IT-BPM program, allotting it a budget of P443.6 million, a significant increase from its P304.5-million budget in 2014. We are confident that with the leadership of TESDA Secretary Joel Villanueva and the participation of your industry, we will produce even better results.

We also initiated the Service Management Program, a 21-unit specialization track, that students can take to gain the skills necessary to enter the IT-BPM industry. To date, we have allocated P125 million to roll out the program in 17 pilot state universities and colleges both in Metro Manila and in Next Wave Cities. More than 600 teachers have already been trained for this program, with even more training sessions scheduled for this year. At this point, 8,000 students have already enrolled in the program in eight implementing state universities and colleges, and the first batch of graduates will be entering the work force this March. Of course, this is only the beginning, and we envision even more students graduating from this program in the near future.

These initiatives, among several others, make it clear: As your industry treads the path towards continued growth and innovation, government will walk alongside you. It goes without saying that it is in our mutual interest to reinforce quality, efficiency, and boundless talent as the defining characteristics of the Philippine brand.

Before I end, I have noticed that the organizers of this event have chosen a very appropriate name for themselves: CCAP, which, when read out loud, sounds like the Filipino word, “sikap,” for diligence. Make no mistake: it is precisely that trait, diligence, together with solidarity, that will allow us to turn the page to the next great chapter not just in your industry, but in our country’s history. If we continue to display the values of hard work, creativity, and innovation, whether in our everyday work places or in events such as this, then we can continue the success of this sector for decades to come. Thus, I encourage each person in this room to take full advantage of this opportunity to listen, to talk to one another, to share knowledge, and ultimately to navigate the contact center industry in the Philippines towards unprecedented successes.

Thank you. Good day.