Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

at the 2015 Community-Based Forest Management National Greening Program (CBFM-NGP) Congress

[Declared at the World Trade Center, Pasay City on October 28, 2015]

Just last week, we went around several towns ravaged by Typhoon Lando. In our observation, we saw the extent of the damage brought by the disaster, and it became even clearer to us the value of planting and caring for our trees. This is precisely the fundamental principle of our National Greening Program.

Let us remember, the number of typhoons visiting our country every year: about twenty. Along with this is a high possibility of landslides and floods. With the help of trees, severe damage is avoided. Aside from absorbing rainwater, trees also support and stabilize the soil so it doesn't easily collapse, and to avoid erosion.

On the other hand, if the rainfall is heavy and there are few trees on the mountainside, there will also be insufficient absorption of water. Because of this, the soil will become softened and easily carried away. The result of this – the mixture of water and soil – will flow directly into our rivers, and this deposition of dirt in the river is called siltation, which causes the water to overflow and leads to more severe flooding. What is even more dangerous is that the rushing water also carries debris and logs, which are often the result of illegal logging. And the first to be hit are the communities near the mountains.

In my understanding as well: As forests are deforested, the number of trees that absorb carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide is also reduced. Pollution levels rise further; the situation of climate change worsens, which in turn strengthens and increases the frequency of typhoons hitting us. It is a cycle of environmental destruction.

This is the reality of climate change, and one of the main groups affected by it are our small and remote communities. What we want to avoid is danger; what we aspire to is to help those affected by disasters recover quickly, so they can keep pace with our steps towards progress. The strategy is to build back better. An important element of this is the Community Based Forest Management of our National Greening Program.

I admit: When we started, it was truly a puzzle for us to stop illegal logging, reduce the country's total carbon footprint, and promote the right mindset to stop the customary slash and burn farming or 'kaingin'. Just the intense smoke it produces puts our citizens in danger.

In identifying the most appropriate solution, we saw the value of dialogue between the government, communities, and groups that directly depend on nature, such as our indigenous brothers and sisters. From our perspective, this is how we can gradually instill in the minds of our beneficiaries: While reaping the benefits of our natural resources, they should also take care of them to pass them on to future generations. But if we do not make the communities partners, they themselves may become a challenge to forest conservation.

The State has encouraged those who were previously merely benefiting from nature to become partners in its defense. Now, those who used to rely on *kaingin* (slash-and-burn agriculture) are suppressing it. They themselves are taking action to stop illegal logging. They are also voluntarily contributing to further enrich our forests for our future.

As mentioned in the video earlier, through the cooperation of the government, communities and organizations, we have already planted 766 million seedlings in 1.2 million hectares of land. We have surpassed the combined 1.19 million hectares of the previous four administrations. The good news is: The million hectares we have planted with trees will be able to absorb 30 million tons of carbon per year. The previous forest cover of 6.8 million hectares before the program started has expanded to 8 million hectares. This means: cleaner air for millions of our countrymen; a more vibrant nature and more protected natural resources, which will benefit more people.

Some may ask: What is the incentive for communities to protect the forests? Like our various initiatives to empower our Bosses, we focus on developing their ability to improve their situation. What our DENR is doing, in partnership with the DA, DAR, and DILG, is studying an area and identifying the best agro-forestry livelihood for it. The result of this is: More than 390,000 individuals have been provided with decent livelihoods.

An example of this is the planting of mangroves, which helps to avoid the harmful effects of storm surges. Aside from being protection from disasters, these mangroves also serve as habitats for crabs and shrimp, which can be sold by those who care for them. Of course, when the community is safer, more tourists will be encouraged to visit them.

Another part of our Community Based Forest Management is teaching the planting of crops such as coffee and cacao as alternative livelihoods. There is also teaching on identifying the proper seedbeds, using fertilizers, and establishing proper nurseries for the plants. Truly, with these trainings, the beneficiary communities have bountiful harvests, and their income is maximized.

This year, we have completed the Forestland Boundary Delineation in all provinces of the Philippines. The benefit of this: Because the parts of the forest and the land that can be used for agriculture and other livelihoods are identified, we can now focus on developing industries that will help open more opportunities for our countrymen.

Along with our National Greening Program, we have intensified the campaign against illegal logging and instilled the idea that getting involved in this activity is dangerous. It is good news that we received: The 197 illegal logging hotspots in the country in 2011 have been reduced to 23 as of October. The 30.71 million board-feet of illegal timber and forest products confiscated were used to repair 388 school buildings, and to construct more than 146,470 chairs and equipment in our public schools. What we see here is what is called “convergence,” where various government agencies work together to address a variety of problems simultaneously and systematically.

I would also like to add: This month, we submitted to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change the document outlining our “intended nationally determined contribution” to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 70 percent by 2030. It is clear to us: If we do not want our children to face the calamities and trials that we have experienced, we must cooperate to the best of our ability to shape a brighter future.

Clearly: We are now reaping the positive fruits of the good initiatives we have sown—from environmental protection, to economic development, to creating opportunities that will deliver benefits to the people. We have achieved these successes because of our contributions, concern, and unity. Instead of being a burden to each other, instead of prioritizing ourselves, we promoted the interests of the greater number.

For more than five years, with your contribution and with the guidance of the Lord, we have made possible things that we once thought impossible. In the times to come, let us join hands even more to make the reforms permanent. Let us strive even harder to finally reap the more bountiful fruits on the Straight Path. It is clear that this is the tested and true path towards a Philippines that is more prosperous, more just, and far more beautiful than what we inherited.

Earlier, the good Secretary Mon Paje informed me that many are asking: What will happen to this program next year? In my opinion, this program is well-managed, the results are good, why wouldn't it be continued? [Applause] To be sure, of course, all power in this state comes from you. You will ensure that this program continues.

Good day. Thank you very much to all of you.