[youtube]http://youtu.be/4Ey83bDi67Y[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Ceremony for the Warm Welcome of Heroes for the 7th Philippine contingent to the Golan Heights – United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) Peacekeepers

You may have noticed that we removed the teleprompter; we are not happy with speeches read from it. I want what I express to all of you to come from the heart.

Perhaps let us go back to the origin of all this. It has been a year and a half since some of our colleagues were kidnapped or made guests. And since that time, I have asked myself: What is truly our mission here in the Golan Heights and is it possible to carry out this mission?

To be honest, we requested that they either help us add more weapons because the situation had changed. We had Israel and Syria separated, and there were also rebels.

So, the response we received was that we were helped. In fairness, we were helped in acquiring capabilities in chemical, correct, anti-chemical warfare. We were given additional equipment that was supposed to be armored force protection equipment. But regarding all the weapons we requested, or the permission to acquire them, we were denied.

So I arrived, to be honest, about two weeks before this standoff happened, there was already a decision that we had an obligation to the international community to just finish the obligation we entered into, and then go home. Because the mission discussed with us or given to us was not clear, and this mission, I don't want to send you, as your Commander-in-Chief and Father of the Nation, to a mission impossible. We don't enter into that.

Unfortunately, what we feared happened: These rebels went after us, and the reports that reached me that you were ordered to lay down your arms, we do not agree with that.

It's really very simple. If we are taken hostage, the problem will only become more complicated. And our ability to send a rescue force here is truly limited. And we stood firm on this. We are now awaiting the UN investigation into the incident, and that will be the basis for whether we will cooperate further with the needs of the international community. Let me repeat, we cannot deploy our troops while assisting in a situation where the mission they are undertaking is impossible or unclear. The life of each individual is important.

Now, as we have already said, perhaps you are wondering, “Why are we involved in this?” As you know, there are ten million Filipinos scattered around the world. It is important for us to have peace, and we also have an obligation to help achieve global peace. Our armed forces and police are not that numerous. To be honest, during my mother's time, we had around 250,000 soldiers and police officers. Our population then was around 50 million. Now, we are 100 million Filipinos, and our soldiers and police officers remain at the same number of 250,000. And we are adjusting this so that, again, we can manage the missions we are undertaking.

Now, you have been placed in a situation that we cannot say we were fully prepared for. We were sent there, and let me repeat, I was already dealing with this when I arrived.

The task: To separate the opposing forces of Israel and Syria. When things changed, rebels suddenly appeared in the disengagement area. It was really necessary to immediately address this when a new mission was announced. There should be no opposing forces because that is the boundary, right, that is the separation of everyone. So, I don't think it's time for recriminations now, especially with our other interlocutors; but I believe those who promised to help us, you all know that, you all know that some helped us with those promises. And let me repeat, because of what happened here, a year and a half ago, we investigated all the missions our country has entered, and there was one goal. There is risk, that's right. But that risk should be commensurate with having a mission that can be accomplished and is not, indeed, a mission impossible. Let me repeat, you have been placed in a situation. We cannot say that all contingencies were prepared for, but I truly believe, with the quality of your leadership and your training, you really fulfilled your duty; even though things changed, you managed the mission, even though our resources or capabilities were limited.

So really because of that, the entire nation admires that this is the kind of quality, skill, courage, excellence, and intelligence of our Armed Forces. You truly added to the pride and honor of our Motherland, so you should really be thanked. And on behalf of the nation, I am expressing my gratitude for everything they have done.

I will repeat: I hope this success of ours is truly repeated, so we can say it is an addition, like when resolving the Zamboanga Crisis, this time just outside our borders, you once again showed the brilliance of the Filipino.

Again, thank you all very much, have a good day again.