Speech

of

The Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

In celebration of the 76th birthday of Bro. Mike Velarde

[Declared at Amvel Business Park, Parañaque City on August 23, 2015]

Your organization is truly remarkable, that at four in the morning, you all seemed full of energy. [Applause] It was drizzling a bit. I won’t prolong this, but I remember when Pope Francis arrived and we had a mass at Luneta. Not everyone fit in the Quirino Grandstand, and then I volunteered [when we were there] in front. We empathized with our countrymen. If they would get wet in the rain, we would get wet in the rain. Now, when the mass ended, a member of our clergy approached me and said, “Thank you.” I was wondering what he was thanking me for. He said, “If it weren't for you volunteering there in front of the Quirino Grandstand, we would be the ones there getting wet. It’s good that only you got wet.” [Laughter] I said, that’s a very Christian greeting from our brother. But it’s okay.

I am truly impressed and amazed every time we attend such a large gathering. The strength of Filipinos is fully united by a strong faith, so we truly feel the great presence and blessing of our Almighty God. [Applause]

First of all, we are here to warmly greet Bro. Mike Velarde a happy birthday, as he celebrated his 76th birthday this Thursday. [Applause] Now, I also thank you for your unwavering support for me since I ran for senator. Again, thank you all very much. [Applause] Truly, El Shaddai is blessed to have a capable and caring leader like Bro. Mike; who tirelessly guides and steers your brotherhood closer to the divine will of the Creator. [Applause]

For more than three decades of being a servant leader of El Shaddai, Bro. Mike has continuously served as a source of strength and inspiration to millions of our countrymen. [Applause] He promotes strong faith in God and the implementation of El Shaddai’s social services for our less fortunate brothers and sisters. [Applause] With people like Bro. Mike, we are further encouraged to continue walking the Straight Path; praying with us, giving hope to the citizens, and advocating for what is right and just. [Applause] We are confident that he will continue to serve as a model of service to God and the nation.

But truly, even though we were short on sleep last night, we feel stronger and stronger just being with you. [Applause] We both belong to the Catholic Church, and El Shaddai is truly an example of revitalizing and bringing to life the spirit of the church among us Filipinos. [Applause]

Often in the world, it is said that self-interest is the root of many human problems. But here with you, you truly show the opposite. You clearly live out “I am my brother’s keeper.” [Applause] It’s good that Butch Abad isn’t here because he would be smiling again when we quote from the holy book. And as stated in the book of John, Chapter 13, Verses 34-35, “Then Jesus gave a new command: ‘Love one another. As I have loved you, so you must love one another. By this everyone will know that you are my disciples.’” [Applause]

It is the duty of each of us to be a beacon of hope for our fellowmen, especially those who are more in need. Looking back, the chapter we came from was truly dark. Because of rampant corruption and poverty, many of our countrymen lost confidence in the Philippines and were forced to seek their fortune abroad. But with the guidance of the Lord and our unity, the desire to promote meaningful change prevailed. We chose to start and ignite the light of hope, rather than become numb and remain in darkness. We chose to contribute to the solution, rather than add to the problem. Like the great lesson of Jesus Christ, love, compassion, and humanity have prevailed within us.

For more than five years of traversing the Straight Path, we have shown how high a united nation can reach. The people's trust in the government has been restored, and the world has once again recognized our ability to cooperate towards progress. We are creating opportunities in our own country, so that there is no longer a need to go abroad to succeed. We have proven: The Filipino, if given sufficient opportunity, will excel in any field.

As I mentioned in my SONA, this is just the beginning. At all times, we are called upon to sacrifice and serve our fellowmen, our country, and above all, our Lord. If each of us stands for what is right and just; if each of us is ready to always fight against what is wrong and the corrupt; if each of us prioritizes the interests of the majority over ourselves, then what we have planted will surely grow. [Applause]

In the coming year, the people will once again face a crossroads. May we guide our fellowmen in choosing leaders who are worthy. I believe that we will not deviate from the good start we have made towards achieving our aspirations.

We are aware: We will still face enormous trials, and there are still those who wish to return to the old ways. In all of this, our strong weapons are: prayer, compassion, and faith. [Applause] May we continue to prove: With the great love of the Lord, and with our unity: nothing is impossible. As we constantly plead and pray: May each Filipino be blessed with an abundance – “siksik, liglig, at umaapaw” – now and in future generations. [Applause]

To conclude, and it took a rather long time of your time. Thank you very much for your patience. Recently, it was the death anniversary of my father, August 21, and we prayed the rosary at his grave. And I remembered during the early days of martial law, where the only shield left against the darkness that enveloped it was prayer and asking for the grace or blessings of our Almighty God. And we really felt it then, that at the beginning we felt alone, but as time went on, we saw more and more the beautiful plan of Almighty God.

Again, happy anniversary to all of you. Happy birthday to Bro. Mike. Good day.