[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9hnfKb1eh24&[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the occasion of the turnover of dividends from Government Owned- and -Controlled Corporations

Vice President Jejomar Binay; Senate President Franklin Drilon; Secretary Cesar Purisima; Secretary Florencio Abad; Secretary Jun Abaya; Chairman Cesar Villanueva; of course, Senator Cynthia Villar; Representative Jesus Sacdalan; Undersecretary Rosalia de Leon of the National Treasury; officials of the Government Owned or Controlled Corporations; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my dear countrymen:

Truly, it is a beautiful day, and a beautiful start to this week.

It seems we will have a lot of funds for all the needs of the country because of your diligence, so thank you very much again.

We have said this many times: Good governance is the key to a thriving economy. This is proven once again today, and anyone who doubts and criticizes is simply turning a blind eye to the transformation that is happening. I think Philhealth also has help for those who are turning a blind eye.

Every year, you embody your true purpose: To be a champion of meaningful service and broad development. The time is over when GOCCs were used by a few to line their own pockets; when GOCCs were turned into hangouts and parking spaces for friends and lackeys of a few powerful people. We implemented reforms, and as time goes on, we further strengthen them; we make working towards change more vigorous; and it becomes increasingly impossible to return to the old system.

You probably still remember: When we started, those who squandered and pocketed the funds of the GOCCs were the loudest among our critics. They threw mud, spread all sorts of controversies in the media. What they wanted to portray: nothing will really change, and the culture of taking advantage, connections, and corruption will remain—no matter who sits in government.

Today, it is very clear: We are not like them. Let us just look at the total amount of dividends we have deposited into the national treasury since our GOCC Governance Act of 2011 was enacted—which, by the way, was pushed by The Big Man of the Senate, Senate President [Franklin] Drilon.

P95.38 billion—only three and a half years have passed, and we have already surpassed the total dividends of GOCCs—amounting to P81.54 billion—from 2002 to 2010. To make this clearer, their average was 9.06 billion over nine years, while we have achieved an average of 27.25 billion in our three and a half years. The question now is, if GOCCs were capable of doing this, why wasn't it done before? Vice [President] and I discussed this, where did the difference of around P18 billion per year go? And now that we are achieving this, it should serve as a benchmark for your work: the continued increase in dividends received by the government and, ultimately, by the people. With honest management, we have more funds for meaningful programs and services for the Filipino people; we ensure that every peso earned by the government goes towards promoting the welfare of our citizens.

An example of this is the efforts being undertaken by the Governance Commission for GOCCs, led by our diligent Chairman Cesar Villanueva, to further promote the GOCC sector as a true partner in the development of our economy. From the very beginning of our administration, we identified the root causes of the problems in your sector in order to formulate the right solutions. We identified and abolished GOCCs that were not needed, while reorganizing corporations with the same or overlapping mandates.

Likewise, we have implemented initiatives to shield our employees from the temptation of corruption; and incentivize their choice to remain in public service. We are already studying mechanisms to bring the compensation received by our personnel closer to the earnings of those in the private sector. We want to give them the right mix of basic pay and allowances, to reward their wholehearted service to the country. In connection with this, we are also implementing the reasonable provision of bonuses and incentives for an employee. We have ended the culture of hocus-pocus and cronyism in GOCCs. The funds that used to go directly into the pockets of a few are now being used to provide appropriate incentives to those who truly and faithfully serve the country.

For more open and effective governance, we have the Integrated Corporate Reporting System, which we are developing. This is where information about the work of our GOCCs will be placed. With this initiative, we will improve the relationship between our agencies and government corporations. Once completed, our citizens can visit their website at any time. And this will give them greater ability to participate in good governance.

Indeed, we have come a long way on our journey along the straight and narrow path. When you say “government,” it used to mean something negative. There were so many loopholes in the processes, the service was very slow, and you weren't sure where the national treasury was going. But now, with your contribution, the face of government is changing. What used to be a burden has been reduced. What used to be an obstacle is now a partner. Likewise, the sweat you have shed and your continued commitment are our strongest shield against those who cast doubt and intrigue as we promote transformation in society. I congratulate and thank every leader and employee of the Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations, as well as the GCG. It is clear: the success of our endeavors is the success of every Filipino.

Along with my congratulations on your contribution, I hope you will not tire of diligently fulfilling your duties. We have laid the foundations. Let us now reach for even higher dreams together. Let us use the opportunity given to us to ensure that when a Juan or Juana says “government,” what they refer to is a government that is quick to respond to the needs of the people, faithful in service, and promotes only the interest of the entire nation.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much.