Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During his meeting with Filipinos in Vancouver, Canada

This is the last engagement for our State Visit, and I must say that the people and government of Canada have been truly gracious hosts throughout our stay. Allow me to take this opportunity to reiterate my personal gratitude to the Governor General, His Excellency, The Right Honourable David Johnston, and the Prime Minister, The Right Honourable Stephen Harper, for the hospitality and generosity they have demonstrated not only to me and my delegation, but also to the thousands of Filipinos living and working here in Canada. The Prime Minister, in particular, has worked towards strengthening that old and tested friendship between our two nations in various ways, and we truly look forward to deepening that partnership in the years to come. Of course, such positive developments in our relationship would not be possible without the efforts of The Honourable Jason Kenney, Minister of National Defense and Multiculturalism, and The Honourable Edward Fast, the Minister of International Trade, who are with us today. Their respective works in the aspects of cultural relations and trade have contributed in bringing our two nations closer to each other. Their presence is truly welcome. Also with us is The Honourable Christy Clark, the Premier of the province of British Columbia. Around 136,000 Filipinos reside in this province, and I can say that Premier Clark is a partner of our people. Proof of this is her commitment to the Memorandum of Understanding concerning Cooperation in Human Resources Deployment and Development, which we signed with the Province of British Columbia. We indeed laud her efforts, and we hope to see more of her initiatives translate to the mutual benefit for our countrymen here, and the rest of the province and its communities.

To our Canadian friends, on this occasion, I will have to request your indulgence: as this is a special gathering with my countrymen, I wish to address them using our mother tongue. [Applause]

You know, every time we visit communities abroad, those we talk to, foreigners, always praise the contribution of every Filipino there to their places. And it really makes me think, because as you know, we were also once exiled. I experienced what it’s like to be separated from one’s homeland. And now, I don’t want to make our gathering sad, let me share with you a story I heard about one of the experiences of our countrymen leaving the country.

There were two friends, both men. One had been living in America for a long time. And the other had gotten a job to work in America. The one newly working in America said to his friend who had been living there for a long time, “Friend, help me. I don’t know much English. How will I eat there?” He [the long-time resident friend] said, “It’s very easy. Here, just memorize this. First, you’ll go to a place, the name of the place is ‘diner.’ There are many of them. D-I-N-E-R. Just look for that. You’ll remember it easily. When you get there, you’ll sit at the counter so you can be served easily.” “Oh, I can do that. Then what will I do there?” “You’ll say, ‘Can I have coffee and donuts, please?’” “What is that, friend?” “Well, coffee and donuts.” “Ah, I can do that too.”

The friend who had been in America for a long time said, “It will take me about a month to catch up. Let’s meet there. If you have a problem, come find me.” They met, and after a month, he asked first. He said, “Friend, I’m glad we finally met.” “Why, friend? What’s your problem?” “I’ve been eating coffee and donuts for a month now. Breakfast, lunch, and dinner.” [Laughter and applause] He said, “I’m purging myself with coffee and donuts. Maybe you have something else you can teach me.” His friend said, “It’s easy, friend. Tomorrow, tomorrow, say, ‘Can I have ham and eggs?’” “What is that?” “Well, ham and eggs.” “Ah, okay.”

That night, he even dreamed of ham and eggs. His mouth even seemed to be moving while he was sleeping because he was already eating what he would eat tomorrow. He arrived at his favorite diner. The person facing him said, “Can I help you?” “I’d like ham and eggs, please.” He smiled, of course, fully. The server said, “Good. How do you like your eggs?” [Laughter] He replied, “Pardon?” [Laughter] “You know, soft-boiled, hard-boiled, fried, over easy, scrambled, eggs Benedict” the list was long.” “Oh, okay. Coffee and donuts, please.” [Laughter and applause]

Perhaps many of you ate coffee and donuts during your first month here, huh.

In gatherings like these, I remember an instance when I was still a Congressman and we had around 80 nursing students visit us. While I was talking to them—they were visiting the Batasan—I asked them, “After passing the board exam, how many of you will stay in the Philippines?” And so many raised their hands: Two. [Laughter]

Of course, it’s disheartening, isn’t it? You raised 80 of you by Motherland; only two of you will remain here. But we can’t blame these students. Would they be encouraged to stay in the Philippines if they saw no hope of progress? Corruption is rampant, especially in the bureaucracy. Many problems exist, and some people are pocketing the people’s money. Consequently, the economy is sluggish; there is no confidence to invest in our country. There are few jobs, so it’s also difficult to progress. Result: Many are forced to take their chances abroad. As they say: People were voting with their feet.

I admit, even I, upon assuming the presidency, thought that solving the problems we inherited was impossible. It seemed like every day, we discovered a new anomaly and another problem. But we did not give up. To the best of our ability, we are fulfilling our vow: To bequeath a Philippines that is far more developed than the one we inherited. [Applause]

We are only five years into the Straight Path, but we are already seeing the transformation of our society. We are making the previously impossible possible. We are focusing service, not on ourselves and not on corrupt practices, but on the welfare of the majority. Now, the government is a partner of the people in promoting justice, instead of “just-endure”; [laughter] we are holding accountable those who are guilty, whether rich or powerful. You no longer need a sponsor to progress; as long as you are honest and hardworking, you can improve your standard of living.

The result: Public trust in the government has been restored, as well as the confidence of investors and other countries. They say that the former “Sick Man of Asia” is now recognized as the “Darling of Asia,” and is now at investment grade status. [Applause] Of course, our economic cluster is here. That’s why I’m mentioning them because—I’ll just repeat—that’s the only bonus I get. According to Bloomberg, the Philippines is expected to be the world’s second fastest growing economy this year. What does this mean? Just imagine: If you look at the world map now, it’s as if the Philippines has been labeled saying, “It’s worth doing business here; there’s a great chance to grow your investment.” [Applause]

Truly, the successes we are achieving are historic. We have recorded an average GDP growth of 6.3 [percent] per year since 2010—the fastest economic growth in our country in the past 40 years. Our target: To further grow the economy by 7 to 8 percent this year. If we succeed, the resulting six-year average will be the fastest economic growth in the past 60 years. [Applause] Furthermore, we achieved an all-time high of $6.2 billion in foreign direct investments in 2014.

When the economy is good, we have more capacity to serve our countrymen. We encourage businesses to invest in us, which in turn creates jobs for all Filipinos.

This January, 1.04 million were added to the number of Filipinos employed. Last October of 2014, a six percent unemployment rate was recorded in the country; this is the lowest in a decade. [Applause] Let me clarify: This isn’t the type where if you work as a street cleaner for a week, you’re already included in the number of employed. What we are referring to: permanent jobs. [Applause]

As more opportunities open up, we are striving to maximize them for our countrymen. With the help of Canada, our Department of Labor and Employment has a Jobstart Philippines program worth $3.6 million. Its aim is to accelerate job acquisition for our youth through career guidance services, life skills and technical training, and an internship program; again, with the help of Canada. TESDA continues to coordinate with the Department of Labor and Employment, CHED and even Deped, to ensure that our graduates have sufficient skills to fill vacant jobs in the market. We have national job fairs; there is also PhilJobNet which lists vacant jobs on their websites. Things are really different now: When I was young, the signs we always saw posted were, “No Vacancy.” Now, there are so many “For Immediate Hiring.” [Applause] Some companies, they say, even have incentives when you apply with them. Imagine, in the past, to get an interview with a company, you had to do a lot of pleading. Now, when you apply with them, they even give you breakfast. There are also some, they say, “If you get hired by us, if you throw a celebratory dinner for your family, they will cover the cost.” I said, “Why wasn’t that the case when I was a new graduate?” When we visited Bicol State University, I was told they were having difficulty filling their Accounting Department. I said, “Don’t you have an Accountancy program here?” They said they do. But their students are already being recruited by accounting and auditing firms in their 3rd year. And after this—they’re still in their 3rd year, there’s 4th year, there are Board Exams, there’s review—well, really, because they are the ones training, and they are the ones losing accountants after they have been trained. All of this is happening because the transformation of our society is delivering jobs.

We are determined to develop the skills of our citizens so that they can seize the opportunities brought about by change. Our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority, under the leadership of Secretary Joel Villanueva, has seen its budget increase by 84 percent; and the direct benefits of this are clearly visible. Just imagine: When we took office, TESDA had already recorded more than 7.15 million graduates in various technical and vocational education and training courses. Our good TESDA Secretary Joel Villanueva has a story about one of their graduates: He said that when he was young, this person wanted to be a mechanic and trained at TESDA. Later, he became a mechanic and is now working in Australia. If you ask how much this compatriot earns, let’s just say his salary is double that of the President of the Republic of the Philippines. So I think I’ll also go to TESDA, July 1, 2016. [Laughter and applause]

When we took office, TESDA already had 28 percent of its graduates employed within six months of graduation. Now, that number is 70 percent placement within six months after graduation. [Applause] In some industries, that number even reaches 96 percent.

Let’s talk about infrastructure, which is linked to a developing society. When you return to the Philippines and travel around, you may even see and experience the changes yourself—improved roads, bridges, and other new infrastructure. This is the result of the dedication and honest service of the Department of Public Works and Highways, under the leadership of Secretary Babes Singson. In the past, anomalies were rampant in the agency due to kickbacks and commissions, but now, the culture here can be summarized by what we call the 5Rs: right projects at the right cost, right quality, and right on time, and implemented by the right people. That’s why it’s not surprising that the agency’s savings as of March of the current year have reached almost P39 billion, which can be used for other meaningful projects. [Applause]

Just to emphasize, let’s look at the underpass we built at Araneta and Quezon Avenue in 2012. The budget we found for this—what our predecessor did—they said it would cost P694 million. Secretary Singson looked into it. And because of the proper process, the project was completed. And what we actually paid was not 690 [million pesos], it became P430 million. [Applause] That means we saved P264 million. What’s even better is that because Secretary Singson is really meticulous, the project was completed 100 days ahead of schedule. [Applause]

In addition to this, we have also completed infrastructure projects that seemed to be just “drawings” because they had been stalled for so long. There is a bridge, called the “Lullutan Bridge” in Isabela, which we visited this April. Imagine: This bridge was damaged in 1995, but we were the ones who completed it, or we still need to complete it, to end 20 years of suffering for our people. The result: The trip that used to take one and a half to two hours to cross to the other side now takes only five minutes. [Applause] Our officials in Isabela are very impressed with me. While inaugurating the Lullutan Bridge, they said, “We need a second bridge.” Once it was clear that it could be included in the budget again in 2016, to build this bridge. “That’s clear. We have a third bridge.” I said, “Please check my pockets, there are no bridges here. But if we work together, we can do it.”

Another example is the Jalaur River Multipurpose Project II. This is in Iloilo. It was conceived in 1960, but it was only during our administration that it was implemented or is currently being done. There is also the Aluling Bridge in Ilocos Sur, which was planned in 1978. I was in college then, just after graduating from high school, but we were the ones who finished it. I would also like to add the Tarnate-Nasugbu Road, which, although only six kilometers long, took 20 years to complete; we were the ones who built and opened it. If you go to the North, there is also the Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway or TPLEX, which is only now reducing travel time to Baguio. And it is estimated to be only three and a half hours. [Applause]

Let’s look at our Armed Forces, the transformation is ongoing. In the past, due to the lack of their equipment and skills, they always seemed to be embarking on “mission impossible.” The situation is different now. Our uniformed personnel are more modern, and their capabilities have been strengthened. For example: In the past, we found only one C-130 aircraft. Now we have three—we are also buying others. We also have two Hamilton class cutters—these are modern ships for more effective coastal patrol. In addition to these, we have also bought—let me repeat, we did not inherit—bought 12 new FA-50 aircraft from South Korea, eight combat utility helicopters. In all of this, I remember what a new PMA graduate said this year: Thank you for making our Air Force now have a “force” and not just “air.” [Laughter and applause]

Let's also look at the changes in DOST-PAGASA. Before, the head of the agency we knew was in office for a very long time. It seemed like weather forecasts were just guesses. [Laughter] Because think about it, instead of reporting the actual weather conditions, they were minimizing the reported information. Consequently, their reports were often wrong. For example: A typhoon came before, and they said it would hit Aurora – the province of Aurora. But I was living in Quezon City at that time, in our house in Times. And I said, “This typhoon is really strong. It’s in Aurora but it feels like it’s hitting Manila.” [Laughter] It turned out the typhoon was in Southern Tagalog and hit the Metro Manila area. I really said, “What a big typhoon. This typhoon is really huge.” Imagine, from Aurora to Metro Manila it covered everything at once. What's painful about this is, when we spoke to people from Aurora, they said it was sunny and hot there. [Laughter]

This is the response we made. You know, the work of PAGASA is very important. When they say it will go there, we prepare there. If the direction they point us to is wrong, our preparations will be wrong. Is that right? And the hardship and misfortune to our countrymen will increase.

Our response was to replace the head of the agency. We provided PAGASA with modern equipment such as Doppler radars, automated rain gauges, and water level monitoring sensors to give them greater ability to monitor typhoons. In addition to our early-warning system which provides a buffer, or at least a six-hour buffer, for communities to prepare, there is also the Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards or Project NOAH, including multi-hazard maps, which helps identify areas that are dangerous during disasters. Now, when there is a typhoon, you can be sure that PAGASA will be able to tell you where it will pass, how strong the winds will be, and how much rain will fall. Through this, our Local Government Units are guided to warn their citizens of the possibility of storm surges and flash floods, and thus they can evacuate if necessary. Now we can say, “PAGASA, truly there is hope.” [Laughter and applause]

This is how your government works now. We identify the real problem, in order to lay out the correct solution. Likewise, we look at responding to the problem in a way that can provide opportunities for our countrymen. One example of this is the project that emerged in Davao Oriental, after they were hit by Typhoon Pablo in 2012. Because of the strength of the typhoon, coconut trees, which were the source, or main source, of livelihood for our farmer brothers and sisters, were toppled. If they had to wait for the trees to grow back and mature, it would take them seven years. And where would they get a livelihood without these trees? The solution, or one of the solutions: the project dubbed “Hot Pablo.” Some may ask: Why “Hot” and “Pablo”? Their product is chili powder, so “Hot,” and it was linked to “Pablo” because it started with the name of the typhoon. According to our Department of Trade and Industry, invest P90,000 per hectare per year for this product, and you can grow to P200,000 in income per harvest. And that's the gross. The net income is P110,000 on an investment of P90,000; the capital has increased by more than 100 percent. A win, right? Domestic sales of Hot Pablo have been recorded at P7.62 million; but the exports with it are much larger, which are surely worth more. That is what happens when the government and the private sector work together: Opportunities for our farmers to progress are expanded.

Now, different coconut products are really being talked about. The main one is coconut water. If before, the coconut water was just thrown away, now it is being profited from. Think about it: In 2010, we exported only 1.8 million liters of coco water, worth $1.8 million. In 2014, 21.7 million liters of coco water were exported from the Philippines, equivalent to $32.9 million. Aside from coco water, there is also coco coir and coco peat.

The good news is: the Coco Levy fund can now be used to develop our coconut farms. We thank the Supreme Court for their final judgment [applause] allowing the use of the fund of almost P73 billion from the Coco Levy Fund. We will use this to develop the coconut industry and revitalize it, and to support the livelihood of our farmers.

Our focus: Continue our agenda of reform. If before, all our achievements were just dreams, now they are true. We are addressing the problems, so that we do not pass them on to those who come after us. We are expanding opportunities in the country, and preparing for the future, so that emigration is no longer forced. We know: Give Filipinos a chance, and they will surely shine.

This is the challenge to all of us: Water the reforms we have planted on the Straight and Narrow Path; nurture what we have started well; continue to reach for the dreams we thought we could never reach. We can do this if the Filipino people choose the right leaders again. As our race has repeatedly proven: As long as we are united, we can overcome any challenge, no matter how difficult; any dream, no matter how high, we can reach. In unity and concern for one another, surely, we will reach the destination we want: A just, progressive, and dynamic Philippines.

My Bosses, it is an honor for me to serve the Filipino people. You are still my strength. You are still the ones who make, and continue to make, change happen. You are still the ones who prove that “The Filipino is worth dying for,” “The Filipino is worth living for,” and truly “The Filipino is worth fighting for.”

Good evening to all of you. Thank you very much.