Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the presentation of credentials of non-resident ambassadors-designate to the Philippines

[Delivered in Malacañan Palace, Manila, on June 10, 2014]

Excellencies, we meet at a time when all Filipinos are reminded of the value of freedom. In just two days, we will be celebrating the 116th anniversary of our proclamation of independence, and I cannot help but remember what my father once said: that the first freedom is the freedom from hunger.

I believe this is precisely why all our countries are making an effort to deepen our bonds with friends in the international community: to ensure that our people have the resources to live dignified lives and, above that, to help give them the wherewithal to develop their skills, to work, and to build better futures for themselves and their families.

Your presence today is a sign of our collective commitment to this goal. After all, no country, in this day and age, can exist in a vacuum. In a continuously shrinking world, we have to acknowledge our interdependence with one another, and work shoulder to shoulder to promote stability, which is a necessary condition for growth that leaves no one behind. And truly, I am thankful that our country has been able to work with diplomats who have not just maintained our good relations, but have worked tirelessly to maximize our partnership.

Look around, and you will realize that the Philippines you see today is very different from the Philippines of the past. These past four years, our people have empowered us on our campaign to reform the way government works. It has been our people who have given us the wherewithal to truly dismantle the vicious cycle of corruption, negativity, and underachievement that has long held our country back, and to replace it with a virtuous cycle where true public service, social justice, and compassion for one’s fellowmen are able to build a true regime of opportunities for our countrymen.

Our people’s achievements speak for themselves. We now have one of the fastest growing economies in Asia, despite the spate of disasters that befell us in the past year; we have regained the capacity to undertake large-scale programs in social services that will equip our people with the skills they need to take charge of their own destinies; higher, brighter skylines are rising in our cities, while the countryside is becoming increasingly connected to hubs of industry and commerce; and international organizations, publications, and neighboring countries alike are finally recognizing the potential of the entire nation. Indeed, one can notice a regained sense of pride and solidarity among our people—solidarity that has made itself most apparent during our response to Typhoon Haiyan, and in our current effort to build back better.

Of course, the solidarity that helped lift our country from one of the darkest moments in our history was not just that of the Filipino people; the international community likewise did not hesitate to give assistance to us, and I cannot overstate my gratitude to your respective countries for the help you have extended.

Typhoon Haiyan continues to serve as a reminder to me of just how much can be achieved when the entire global community cooperates closely. It only emphasizes the value of our partnerships—partnerships that will undoubtedly allow us to continue pursuing our shared interests and serve our people in the best manner possible. Moving forward, I am eager to further deepen the ties between our countries, and help give rise to a truly prosperous community of nations.

On a personal note, I wish you all a pleasant stay in the Philippines. I am confident that, throughout your visit, you will be witnessing for yourselves the warmth, skill, and talent for which our countrymen are renowned; and that you will realize that, truly, it is more fun in the Philippines.

We wish you all the best successful tour. Thank you, and again, we wish you all the success.