[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W1hYAE_o6Kk[/youtube]

Your Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; Secretary Cesar Purisima; Chairman Al Haj Murad Ibrahim; Secretary Arci Balisacan; Secretary Ging Deles; Secretary Lou Antonino; Secretary Mar Roxas; Secretary Butch Abad; Secretary Proceso Alcala; Secretary Babes Singson; Secretary Dinky Soliman; Secretary Gil de los Reyes; Secretary Jun Abaya; Secretary Tati Licuanan; Secretary Yasmin Busran-Lao; Secretary Joel Rocamora; Mr. Gasari Jafar

Good morning to everyone.

Whenever I get the chance, I make it a point to thank anyone and everyone who helped us throughout the Peace Process with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front. For instance, just the other day, when I met with a number of journalists from Japan, I reiterated our gratitude to their country, for helping to facilitate an early meeting between myself and our brothers from the MILF, a meeting in which both sides were reassured of the other’s sincerity, and in which we began to rebuild trust.

I do this because the value of lasting peace for a region like Mindanao is beyond measure. For years, our countrymen in areas affected by conflict had been shackled by violence, injustice, and impunity; they were deprived of opportunities to succeed; and prosperity was seemingly reserved only for a few. Now, however, as Mindanao is becoming an increasingly stable environment, we can see that the region is on the cusp of a profound transformation: from being a Land of Promise to being a Land of Promises fulfilled.

In March of this year, the efforts of everyone involved in the peace process culminated in the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro, a final peace agreement between the Philippine Government and the MILF. Now, more than ever, it is vital that we focus on getting through the next steps in the process: Getting the Bangsamoro Basic Law passed in Congress, which would establish the Bangsamoro as a political entity. In September of this year, we turned over the draft law to Congress, and both houses are currently conducting hearings and consulting various stakeholders. At this point, I believe all of us are duty bound to make our voices heard. Please talk to your representatives so that we can pass a bill that truly represents the interests of all, and benefits all of the people.

Our work to ensure the success of the peace process runs parallel with our ongoing efforts to eliminate systems that are prone to abuse, and to uplift our countrymen in the region, even before the Bangsamoro Basic Law is passed. After all, attaining peace also means eliminating unjust milieus, or situations dire enough that people begin seeing violence as a solution.

This thinking has guided our efforts in Mindanao from day one. It is why one of our first major institutional reforms was the synchronization of the elections in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao with our national elections. It laid the foundations for change by forcing those running for office to contend with one another on a level playing field. In effect, it put an end to the abuse of elections by national and local leaders alike, and to the mindset that ARMM communities were mere vote banks that one could sell to the highest bidder during national elections.

Government has likewise been active in expanding the menu of opportunities for our countrymen in conflict-ridden areas. After all, no one can deny that they have been deprived of legitimate opportunities to succeed, which is why we are giving them a significant boost up, so that they may catch up. This is what we aim to do with the Sajahatra Bangsamoro Program. Through the SBP, we are improving the living conditions of several Bangsamoro communities by offering cash for work, technical vocational training, study grants, and health insurance premiums, amongst others. The goal: to give them the necessary skills and services to take advantage of opportunities that arise, and to allow them to win back control of their destinies. We are confident that the Bangsamoro Development Plan can be harmonized with these efforts, and build on the progress we have made at the soonest possible time.

The development boost we want to give to Mindanao likewise includes investments in infrastructure, which is necessary for the region to become a competitive destination for investments. From 2011 to 2014, the Department of Public Works and Highways has spent nearly P100 billion for road, bridge, and other infrastructure projects in Mindanao, and next year, the government—Congress willing—intends on investing even more. For 2015, the DPWH budget for Mindanao will be at P63.13 billion.

In terms of power, Mindanao is also looking at a full recovery. In fact, the region might even have power security ahead of Luzon. By 2015, I am informed, several major power plants will be coming online here, including the 300-MW Coal-Fired Therma South Energy Power Plant in Davao del Sur, and the 200-MW Southern Mindanao Coal-Fired Power Plant in Sarangani. These two plants, among others, put us on track to have an energy surplus in Mindanao by 2015.

The early impact of our efforts at peace, stability, and fostering a good business climate, has been near instant. Just look at ARMM. In just the first nine months of 2014, they registered a yearly all-time high of P3.37 billion in investments. This is more than double the P1.46 billion in investments recorded in 2013, and almost six times the P569 million in investments ARMM received in 2012. ARMM’s GDP has likewise been on an upswing, from a contraction of 0.3 percent in 2011, to a growth of 1.2 percent in 2012, and a growth of 3.6 percent in 2013. I am told that the growth of 5.6 this year is very attainable.

There has also been a sea change in terms of business interest in Mindanao. The numbers, again, tell the story:  In the Davao Region alone, inbound missions of companies from Japan, China, Korea, and other members of the Brunei Indonesia Malaysia Philippines – East Asia Growth Area have drastically increased, from 18 in 2012, to 37 in 2013, and to 51 in just the first ten months of 2014. On top of this, we have heard of plans to expand and diversify from several companies from vastly different industries—from energy, to coconut products, to palm oil, and various other consumer products.

Indeed, more than at any other point in history, the Mindanao we all aspire for is within reach. The progress is palpable, and it is apparent that our efforts are having a profound effect. Nevertheless, I believe that, in forums like this, we are given an opportunity to contribute our individual voices, with the goal of accelerating the positive change in the region, and we must take full advantage of such opportunities.

It is with the participation of stakeholders from different sectors across the world that we have successfully established Mindanao as a stable, peaceful region. With the help of everyone present here today, I am certain we can do much more. If we continue thinking of new, better ways to accelerate development in the region; if we continue to work with perseverance and creativity; and, above all, if we always remember that the end goal of our efforts is to uplift our fellowmen and allow them to live full, dignified lives, then I am certain we will achieve what we have hoped for all these years. Together, we will realize our vision of a new Mindanao: one seen by the global community as a region of skilled, talented, and peace-loving people, of vast natural gifts, and of boundless progress and prosperity.

Thank you for your time and good day.