[ Read this in English ]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During his visit to Cebu

Our last stop on this trip is your plant; yesterday, we went to the province of Negros Occidental to inaugurate a rice processing center for our farmers, and a cyber center that will generate jobs in our IT-BPM sector. Here in this very beautiful city of Cebu—actually the province of Cebu and the city of Cebu—we attended the Jobstart forum on creating jobs for the youth, and we also inspected the new facility of the University of Cebu Medical Center. Now, before we leave again for Manila, we were given the opportunity to tour this new mill facility of CEMEX. In all of this, the tour was truly worthwhile, because we see the fruits of our efforts to improve the lives of our Bosses. We are happy to see the results of the Straight Path, especially now on Labor Day.

I was informed that CEMEX invested three billion pesos in this facility. 800 individuals were given jobs during its construction, and currently, 950 people are employed here. What’s even better is that this mill facility will add 1.5 million metric tons of production per year, increasing the cement output of this plant to four million metric tons.

Why is this increased production important? The cement industry contributes significantly to the ongoing construction of infrastructure in every corner of the Philippines. We have already mentioned the new facilities in Negros Occidental; in recent weeks, we toured Isabela to inaugurate the Lullutan bridge, which our countrymen there have been waiting for for 20 years. This bridge has reduced a trip that used to take one and a half to two hours to just five minutes. We also came from Tarlac and Bulacan to inaugurate new classrooms and school buildings. In the province of Quezon, we also visited the SLEX Toll Road 4 project, which was planned during the time of the dictator, and we will be the ones to finish it.

You know, I am also looking forward to the opportunity to return to Cebu, even though I am still here, to inaugurate the improvement of our Cebu Mactan Airport. The terminals will be expanded. Of course, this will also require a lot of cement.

It is clear: The roads, bridges, classrooms, and other infrastructure being built in many parts of the Philippines are not accidental. We are really accelerating and focusing on this, because it is part of our comprehensive strategy towards broad development.

We have been given the ability to support these initiatives because of economic growth. As Secretary Arsi Balisacan of NEDA told us, we have recorded an average GDP growth of 6.3 percent per year since we started in 2010—the fastest growth of our economy in the past 40 years. Our target: To further grow the economy by seven to eight percent this year. According to our economic managers, if we reach this, the resulting six-year average will be the fastest growth of our economy since 1955, or in the past 60 years.

What this means is that when my Mother and Father got married in 1954, it was a year later that we last experienced such an economic surge.

What does this mean for Juan and Juana dela Cruz? Because of a thriving economy, investor confidence in investing in the country will further strengthen. With the emergence of new businesses, more jobs will be created; opportunities for the advancement of more prepared Filipinos will expand. The effect of this: The taxes collected by your government will increase, which will once again serve as funds for additional infrastructure, and for the development of social services. This is what we call a “virtuous cycle.” Let me repeat: the people made this happen; the people will continue it.

We know: The opening opportunities can only be maximized if Filipinos have sufficient skills to fill the jobs being created. That is why, included in our strategy is the development of the capabilities of our Bosses. In addition to our continued development of the education sector, special mention goes to TESDA, under the leadership of our senior colleague Joel Villanueva, [applause] who is truly focused on ensuring that Filipinos who are willing to work hard have the right skillset to find in-demand jobs.

Imagine, since we came into office until the last record in December 2014, the Technical Vocational Education and Training of TESDA has completed more than 7.15 million courses. According to a study conducted, 65.3 percent of these have found employment within six months. TESDA also has a STAR Program, where they collaborated with local governments and the private sector, to provide training to sari-sari store and karinderya owners, and to improve their businesses. Secretary Joel mentioned to me: There is one beneficiary who exemplifies so many of his colleagues, who owns a sari-sari store. He used to earn 800 pesos a day. Now, because of STAR, this store’s income has reached 4,000 pesos a day. Because of the STAR program, his income has increased fivefold. And to maximize the growth of capital, beneficiaries are also guided on what they can do with the additional income so that it is not wasted. Imagine, even concepts such as inventory control and product mix that are often only taught in prestigious business schools, are also taught by the program to sari-sari store owners.

Currently, 34,252 beneficiaries have been helped by this initiative. We are challenged to increase the number of beneficiaries further; we will look into what we can do about this, because of course, there are also limitations to the budgets of our agencies.

You have seen: Our focus is complete on all aspects to maximize the benefit of the transformation being enjoyed by our country. In this system, where everyone contributes, everyone also benefits. This is also the basic principle of our empowerment of the labor sector. Under the leadership of Secretary Linda Baldoz, we see her focus: She is not used to blaming, but to contributing; not to interference, but to decent and proper discussion; not on what should be debated, but on what we can agree on for the good of all. Under Secretary Linda, mechanisms of SEnA or Single Entry Approach, and SPeED or Speedy and Efficient Delivery of Labor Justice were established. If before, it took a year to resolve disputes, now, they are addressed immediately. No less than 77 percent or 80,830 out of 104,698 requests for assistance were resolved by DOLE in an average of 17 days from October 2010 to December 2014. And I am sure that Secretary Linda and DOLE will continue their efforts to increase this number, and make the relationship between our workers and businessmen more transparent. It is no longer surprising that in 2013, there was only one workers' union that went on strike throughout the Philippines; this is the lowest in the history of DOLE. [Applause] Let me also knock on wood, lest this year be jinxed. [Laughter]

During the previous administration, 259 strikes were recorded during their term. In the current administration, since 2010, the total number of strikes: only 12. I think this is strong proof of the competence of Secretary Linda Baldoz. [Applause]

I hope that this kind of positive relationship between workers and their employers will continue, which is also a result of the active focus of the Department of Labor and Employment on their sector. If the trend continues where issues of each side are addressed quickly and fairly, I am sure that the number of strikers per year will remain in the low-single digits, if not zero strikes that we can reach.

This is the kind of stability we are striving to uphold so that the cycle of a growing economy and widespread progress in our country continues. Now that we are individually enjoying the positive results of our efforts, it is once again in our hands to make the most of every opportunity that comes our way; it is in our hands how to further expand it; it is in our hands whether we will continue to nurture the positive change we have sown, so that its fruits can be harvested and enjoyed by future generations. If we continue to walk the Straight Path, if we choose the right leader in the next election, we will surely be able to continue and even surpass our achievements. May we hold on to every opportunity, so that we may uplift, not only ourselves and our families, but also our fellow citizens and the entire nation. This is the time we have been waiting for; we now hold the opportunity. Therefore, we must: Work together to achieve our dreams. [Applause]

And in closing: You know, I will really admit to you that there are days when we are very, very tired. We came from ASEAN, then we will go to Canada next week to thank them for all the help they have given us. They were also among the first to help us when Yolanda struck. Earlier, at the JobStart program, they are also helping our countrymen who have finished high school to have good jobs.

Now, when I was young, we often saw signs that said, “No Vacancy.” Is that right? I don't think there's anyone here as old as me. [Laughter] Now, it seems that Joel often reports to us—we talked to someone yesterday—they tell me that there are no more workers available for engineers and electricians for refrigeration and air conditioning. When I went to Bicol State University, they said that they are having difficulty getting Accounting graduates. Accounting students are now being hired by companies like SGV. They are in their third year of their four-year course, with a review in their fifth year, right? So it's really a long way from before. Perhaps we should work on the skillset even more, so that we have employees who can take advantage of the opportunities that are coming.

In the field of cement, you know that the government and the private sector are really making infrastructure now. One thing I really hope we can at least start is what is called the nautical highway. Currently, traveling from Luzon to Mindanao takes two and a half to three days. A new route has been shown, requiring new roads and new ports for these roll-on roll-off vessels that will traverse the middle of the Philippines. The result will be that the two and a half to three-day trip will be reduced to 15 hours. And if the trip is that easy, of course, everyone's business will grow. [Applause]

Now, with the confidence of companies like CEMEX that have invested in us, so we definitely have cement for all this infrastructure. [Applause] But I will admit to you, shouldn't we be able to say, is all of this certain? The problem, they say—actually, sometimes, often—they call it aggregates. I called Babes Singson: “What are aggregates?” He told me, basically, sand and gravel. I said, “How did we lose sand in the Philippines, and gravel in the Philippines?” But the point was, those who used to invest here, they didn't believe the economy would surge like this, that it was lagging but is now catching up.

Bottomline, what? This is what we are striving for, that we all contribute, giving everyone opportunities. Earlier, a female member was very happy, she said she only finished high school, she's a single mother, and she was grateful for the good job she got, with the help of DOLE and TESDA. Before, she seemed to only see problems every time she woke up. Now, her face was very bright when she faced me, because she really believes the future is good.

Let me repeat: You made this happen, you will continue this.

Good afternoon, thank you all very much.