Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during his attendance at the mass for the graduates of Loyola Schools

First of all, I would like to apologize, our proceedings were delayed today. There is only one reason: In a broadsheet, it was stated that this is my last formal speech during my term. Of course, there is pressure. Last night, a batchmate of mine texted me. He was given a ticket by Fr. Jett; he wanted to hear me today. This was followed by a cousin who suddenly reminded me, and that's when I remembered that I have a nephew who will be graduating in this batch. I said, you really put a lot of pressure on me. Of course, we will be listened to by our peers here. The most difficult measure or basis for me is that given by our peers. I hope that our fourth crafted speech will finally succeed. Fr. Jett said earlier that I am used to cramming.

I saw Fr. Jett earlier and I remembered our exchange of texts when I was once in Cagayan de Oro, and he was president of Xavier in Cagayan. His text said, “If you have time, drop by here.” He invited me to Xavier University. I told him, “I’m sorry, I have five engagements in Cagayan de Oro today. My schedule is a bit tight.” I thought about his next reply. He said: “I understand. It’s really difficult what you’ve gotten into. Maybe you should go straight to heaven.” I said, maybe Fr. Jett knows something I don’t, why would I go straight to heaven? I asked, why did he say that? His response: Because, he said, it seems like I’m already in purgatory because of what I’m going through as President of the Philippines. He said he would always pray for me.

I revisited that exchange when Fr. Jett became president of Ateneo. I sent him a message. I said, “Pre, congratulations. I now have company in purgatory. But I just want to remind you: Mine is only six years, yours could reach 18 years. I will also always pray for you.”

Now, as I am about to graduate as President of the Philippines, I was thinking Fr. Jett and I would just look at each other and smile at our private joke. But, every time I face the media now, every time I go out, or when acquaintances send a text, the question is always, “What will you do when you step down?” I thought it was just a normal question. Just curiosity, as they say. But we spoke to a cadet engineer from the DPWH, and the tone of the question seemed to change. He said: “What can we expect of you when you step down?” That was also the point of a question from the president of a well-known federation of businessmen. His question to me: “What position will you run for in 2019?” I suddenly said “Huh?” He replied: “You’re still young, you can still do a lot.” And when I responded a bit slowly, he added, “We will support you all the way.” Inside, I thought, is what I’ve given and gone through in the past six years not enough?

I am also surprised why many say, “We will miss you.” Sometimes we are forced to answer, “I’m still here, why do you already miss me? And after my term, I will be staying at The Times. I’m not leaving.”

The night before Father’s Day, I had dinner at a mall. On that floor, restaurants were side by side. One table immediately greeted me and shook my hand. Soon, many people started clapping, even in the neighboring restaurants. I asked myself: Are they clapping because they are happy for me, or are they happy that I am leaving? I think the correct answer is: With so many people asking for pictures, they were probably happy with us.

You know, to be honest, writing this speech wasn’t easy. As I mentioned earlier, in fact, this is the third version. Version, not revision. Because it felt like the first drafts weren’t hitting the mark. As I recall, when I spoke here, also a graduation, in 2011, I received a good reception. The only complaint I received was that I didn’t give the audience a chance to applaud. Of course, as an Atenean, aside from being humble, we also have the concept of Magis: We need to surpass what has been done.

Thirty-five years have passed since I graduated from Ateneo. That's why, while thinking about what to say this morning, I thought it best to seek advice from someone older than me. I texted Fr. Jett, who graduated 36 years ago. His reply to me was: “Just speak from your heart; tell of the things that inspired you, sustained you. And perhaps that will in turn inspire and challenge these aspiring young ones to become men and women for others, generous enough to offer their lives for our people,” and then he added a smiley-face at the end.

Fr. Jett’s advice is good, so I went back to the experiences that shaped me. Of course, when looking back, it’s inevitable to compare it to the present. Similarities and differences emerge. For example, I am sure that even now, when finals week comes, more students attend mass in the chapels here at Ateneo. It’s good now because you have the Church of the Gesu, because it can accommodate more people who want to pray.

I am also sure that during oral exams in Philosophy, there are still professors with very stoic expressions. There are also those whose faces react to every word you say. You’re not even sure if what you’re saying is right or wrong.

You can still learn a lot even outside the classroom. During our time here, we learned an important lesson in marketing in the cafeteria. There came a time when many Biology students were dissecting cats in their class. That was also the time when the cafeteria started selling siopao. No one bought any. That’s when we learned that timing is important when launching a product.

We used to wonder why our parents couldn't even manage something as simple as operating a home theater system. In my generation, there were those who understood Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. But most likely, the current generation is far more expert. In my parents' time, their entertainment revolved around the radio and the cinema. And in the cinema, there was a category called a cliffhanger. The action would be left hanging, and you would only find out what happens next after two weeks, when you return to the cinema. You, who are very used to Netflix, might go crazy with how long you have to wait. If we wanted to go on vacation, it would happen during the semester break, and we would save up for it for a long time. Now, it seems our youth probably have higher salaries. Secretary Almendras, a batchmate of mine, told me that his son, who graduated from Ateneo in 2011, can go out of town at least once a month without asking for a subsidy from his parents.

But of course, there are differences that are really striking. Most likely, your teachers and parents tell you to study hard as preparation for a better future. We were told that too. But it was difficult to put into practice because during our time under the dictatorship, we weren't sure if we even had a future. If you spoke out against them, you could be imprisoned, tortured, or killed. There were stories during that time: Businessmen didn't want to expand their businesses anymore. Because if the dictator's cronies saw that you were doing relatively well, they might become envious and take away everything you worked for.

Perhaps you have also read about what happened to my father during that time. He simply did his job as a Senator. When he gathered information about abuses, he revealed it. He opposed the oppression and greed of the dictator. Because of this, he was arrested while working in the middle of the night and imprisoned.

To be honest, we were still lucky in a way because we were still able to see my father. The violation of rights was widespread during those times. My father was a Senator, but that's what happened to him. How much more for others. Many were killed. The saddest part is, until now, we still don't know what happened to them.

You may have also read: I was unable to attend my own graduation during my graduation season. It was difficult to leave the country then; you still needed permission. Fortunately, we were able to obtain an exit permit. Due to my parents’ worry that the permit might be revoked, I had to leave five days before the ceremony.

When we were in exile in Boston, we became part of a small community of Filipinos there. I will never forget the couple we met there. They made kutsinta every Christmas. I thought to myself: In the Philippines, it’s very easy to find kutsinta; in Boston, you can only taste it once a year. Then, you only get two pieces. On television, in a Florida advertisement, they said something I still remember to this day: “warm breeze and palm trees of Florida” while it was winter in Boston and you were very cold. It makes you even more homesick. People would visit us, and because of that, we would get news. But there would come a point when they would leave. We would be left wondering when we ourselves would be able to return home. What we held onto then: Trust in the Lord. We believed that He would not give us a trial that we could not overcome. That everything happens for a reason.

As you all know, when my father returned to the Philippines, he was assassinated as soon as he stepped onto the tarmac. This became the spark that awakened the Filipinos, so that at EDSA, we could reclaim our freedom.

As philosopher Edmund Burke said: “The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing.” The period of dictatorship is over, but the need to get involved in social issues has not disappeared. That is part of being “men and women for others.”

Perhaps when you first heard “men and women for others,” you said, that’s right. It’s a good philosophy of life. I’ll leave the spiritual reasons why we should live for others to the religious and philosophers. Let me approach this from a logical level, and why, when we measure it at a logical level, we can see the importance of this principle.

What do I mean by this? Isn’t it that if you continue a system that doesn’t maximize the opportunities of your fellow human being, you leave them in a low state? As they say in liberation theology, “if you do not fight an oppressive structure, you are supporting it.” For example, if you are a businessman, and you don’t look at your workers as fellow human beings, but rather, as a factor of production, what will happen? You’ll give them a small salary so your expenses will also be small. You’ll push them into a life of barely getting by, which will only get worse with each generation. You’re almost guaranteeing that you’ve also hindered your own progress.

If they become desperate and are willing to grasp at straws, how can you be sure you’ll be exempt from the crime they might be forced to commit? When they get sick and an epidemic breaks out, how can you be sure you’ll be exempt from the illness? It’s clear in our history: No problem has been solved by people who don’t care.

This is why we strived to be a government for others. For anyone who looks at our accomplishments fairly, it’s clear: We focused the government on the welfare of our citizens, especially those on the margins of society. There are 7.7 million individuals who have risen out of poverty thanks to Pantawid Pamilya. From 47 million in 2010, we’ve increased the number of Philhealth beneficiaries to 93 million. We closed the inherited backlogs in classrooms, textbooks, and chairs in schools. We removed the sirens from the systems and processes of government. From being the Sick Man of Asia, we are now recognized as Asia’s Darling and Asia’s Bright Spot. We modernized our police force and Armed Forces. The budget, which was always reenacted and used as an instrument for corruption, we passed on time every year, and always focused on the reasonable spending of public funds. If you think about it, these were just lofty dreams before. But as they say, we dared to dream. And because of that, we can look anyone in the eye and say: We maximized the opportunity given to us to give what is due to the majority, instead of just a few.

All of this, and much more, was achieved because so many Filipinos contributed: Within the administration and in the private sector, in our own ways, big or small, noticed or unnoticed by the public.

At this point, I would like to thank the Ateneans who have contributed over the past few years. The Ateneo community did not lack participation in any discourse surrounding society. When there were attempts to make us forget the nightmare of Martial Law, Ateneo was one of the first to issue a collective statement. With the piling up of disasters that befell us, it was no longer necessary to ask for the college covered courts to be a volunteer center, and there was no shortage of those who helped carry and repack relief goods. So many graduates chose to serve in the government, rather than earn more in the private sector. Honestly, if you say you were inspired by me, I would respond: You also served as a source of inspiration for me.

I am sure many of you are thinking about what you will do after graduation. You are probably thinking what I was thinking 35 years ago. What might lie ahead in my future? For me, we can learn from our alma mater song, the Song for Mary.

Our alma mater song begins with the lines “We stand on a hill between the earth and sky. Now all is still where Loyola’s colors fly.” For me, the hill is Ateneo, our friends, and our family who shaped us. Among the things we learned was to be critical of what is happening around us. In other words, we were trained not to be followers or simply go with the flow of the prevailing opinion. During our last year at Ateneo, our teachers said: If after all this, all you know are facts and figures, we have failed. We taught you to question the conventional. We succeeded in teaching if “now you know that you do not know.”

It also means that along with study and reflection, we must also accept that we are created beings. We are not perfect and our abilities are limited. We will face intense trials. That is why we seek to remain true and have unwavering trust in God and the Virgin Mary. They will fill what we lack. That is why the prayer is fitting: “We pray you’ll keep us, Mary, constantly true/We pray you’ll keep us, Mary, faithful to you!”

In my life, I have gone through many challenges. And one of the sources of my inspiration is what happened to my parents. What have I gone through compared to what they overcame? The source of my strength is faith in the beautiful plan of our Lord for all of us.

And beyond faith, we also see a strong call to each of us. “Down from the hill, down to the world go I,” our song says. We did not train only to confine ourselves to an ivory tower. The knowledge we have gained here is not focused solely on ourselves. Down from the hill: with and among our fellow human beings, to be instruments of the Lord. Always, the focus is on others. In the wider world. Because we are men and women for others.

My fellow Ateneans: Everything you went through here at Ateneo, everything Fr. Jett and your teachers taught you is preparation for the wider and more complex world of being a person-for-others. Your graduation is a sign of your success in the controlled world of Loyola Heights. Whatever path you choose, do not forget everything you have learned here at Ateneo. Now, I am with those who fully trust you: May you go forth and be “Lux in Domino,” confidently be Men and Women for others, and be exemplars of zeal, compassion, and integrity on your long journey “down from the hill.”

Thank you very much, and a warm greeting to all of you and your parents.