[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HJ4R_KYUTk0&[/youtube]

[ Read this in English. ]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the celebration of National Heroes Day

[ Delivered at the Libingan ng mga Bayani, Fort Bonifacio, Taguig City, on August 25, 2014 ]

For me, our annual gathering to celebrate National Heroes Day represents three things.

First, it is a remembrance of people who initially had their own concerns. They all had personal ambitions: to finish their studies, to find a partner, to raise a family, to grow a business, or to advance in their profession, and to live peacefully. But when events occurred that affected not only them but also their fellow citizens, they found themselves at a crossroads. They could have ignored it and continued their personal struggles. But they chose to overcome their personal agenda, fear, and needs to promote the welfare of the greater number. They saw the danger of confronting the powerful, but they did not back down. They knew that if they did not use their intelligence and strength to fight, the cycle of abuse and violence would continue. These are the people we consider heroes. Isn't it often said: Heroes are ordinary people who found themselves in extraordinary situations, and chose to do what is right.

Second, it is also a gratitude. Because of their sacrifices, we now enjoy various kinds of freedom: We are free from invaders. We are free from the violence and destruction caused by war. We are free from the dictator. We are free to express ourselves and pursue our dreams.

Third, it is also an opportunity to reflect on what it means to be a hero, not only in the past, but also in our current situation. This is important because although our society has come a long way, our struggle is not yet over. Furthermore, we also bear the responsibility of ensuring that the Philippines we leave for future generations will be more free and more progressive. It is true: our time is different, so the kind of heroism we can live out is also different.

For me, defining heroism is personal. We all come from different backgrounds, and we all have different abilities. Therefore, different opportunities open up for us to serve our Motherland and our fellow Filipinos.

I remember a story shared with me by Secretary Mon Jimenez about Filipinos living in Fukushima prefecture, Japan. It was 2011, and a large tsunami had just struck. Many perished, were orphaned, and fell ill. Homes were destroyed, and the livelihoods of those living in Fukushima were ruined, if not washed away by the strong currents. People were sad, and there seemed to be no hope of continuing life. In the midst of this suffering, there were Filipinos who could not stop thanking God for surviving the disaster. They infected their Japanese neighbors with their enthusiasm and strong faith, and with their positive disposition, the rebuilding of Fukushima began.

There is also the story of Noli dela Cruz, one of our non-uniformed personnel. During the height of Typhoon Yolanda, he quickly gathered blankets and clothes to tie together, so his neighbors being swept away by the flood could hold on to something. He saved 36 people in this way.

In these two examples, the Filipino's ability to be a beacon in times of darkness is admirable. Instead of throwing criticism or spreading negativity as some are accustomed to doing now, they chose to be a strength for their fellowmen.

We must also remember that there are many heroes who are unnamed or unheard of by most. There are Filipinos who, instead of giving up during a disaster, readily cooperated with their countrymen. There are teachers who lovingly guide the next generation. There are law enforcers who choose to fulfill their duty rather than succumb to the temptation of quick money. There are soldiers who bravely defend our territory and citizens. There are professionals who use their intelligence to serve their fellow Filipinos. There are religious leaders who are our allies in fighting corruption and promoting reform. There is every citizen who strives to improve themselves, to become a useful member of society. On behalf of the Filipino people, thank you all very much. [Applause] You are proof that the Filipino race is truly a race of heroes.

According to the latest estimate of the Commission on Population, there are now one hundred million Filipinos. On days like this, I cannot help but think and ask: What could be achieved by one hundred million Filipinos working together towards a common goal? No more conquerors, no more wars, no more martial law. But there are still a few who relentlessly want to return to the old system of deceit and exploitation. This is our fight now: to be vigilant against those sowing doubt and lies; to not be instruments of those pretending to be reformers; to reject the distorted and stand for what is right.

This is also why I find an article I read in a newspaper recently to be admirable. It was written by Ma. Francesca Santiago, a student from Bacolod. She said that at first, she wasn't very interested in following politics because she preferred to focus on other things. But she said she was worried about what she was reading and watching these days. It seems that blaming others is trendy, even towards those who are doing everything they can to promote the interests of the people. She also said that in the face of the challenges facing our country, instead of being open-minded and seeking the truth, others prefer to spread baseless accusations; rather than help find solutions, some prefer to exacerbate the fear and suffering experienced by our countrymen. It is clear to her: everyone has the right to express their opinion, but everyone also has an obligation to be reasonable. I was surprised when I saw Ma. Francesca's age: she was only 13 years old. It's admirable that she is more discerning than some who are older than her. If this is the quality of thinking of our youth today, our future will surely be brighter.

For more than four years, we have been treading the straight and narrow path. The seeds of change we have sown are bearing fruit, and the exploiters are becoming desperate. Let us not waste this. This is our only way of showing gratitude to the heroes who sacrificed to get us where we are today. This is the only way to ensure that when future generations celebrate National Heroes' Day, they will remember, thank, and reflect on this time, and they will say: This was the time when Filipinos decided to be heroes together.

Good day to you. Thank you very much to everyone.

[ Read this in English. ]