VIDEO:

[youtube]http://youtu.be/m6pKULh1jw0[/youtube]

Speech

of

His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III

President of the Philippines

At the Asian Defense, Security, and Crisis Management Exhibition 2014

[Delivered at the World Trade Center, Pasay City on July 17, 2014]

Each and every one of our men and women in uniform bears a heavy responsibility. In times of calamity, they are called upon to secure communities, to rescue those in immediate danger, and to make certain that relief goods are delivered as soon as possible. In times of conflict, our people also look to them to restore order and keep the peace. Our history teems with stories of their heroism, but perhaps we do not need to look past the year that was to truly appreciate our uniformed services. During the Zamboanga Siege Incident last September, our soldiers and policemen displayed unparalleled bravery. They went against lawless elements who were purposely involving innocent civilians. Imagine the adversity our soldiers faced, going into combat with the enemy, while at the same time doing their very best to do no harm to the civilians, who the enemies were using as human shields. Despite the enemy’s tactics, they managed to neutralize the threat and save 195 out of 197 hostages and people trapped in the firefight.Our uniformed personnel were also called into action in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan, or Yolanda as we call it here. They worked tirelessly—often with very little sleep—to make sure that those affected were safe, and that they were receiving relief goods in the soonest possible time.

Indeed, through the years, heroism has become the norm for our soldiers and policemen. Many of them are stationed away from their loved ones. They forgo their comfort and safety so that they may guarantee ours. Not to mention, each time they step on the battlefield, they run the risk of making the ultimate sacrifice. While nothing government can provide will truly ever match the sacrifices they have made in our country’s name, the very least we can do is throw our full support behind them—to make certain that those who risk their lives for the country are likewise taken care of by their country.

If I may share: For the longest time, the state of our military’s equipment had been neglected. It reached a point where even lawless elements possessed superior equipment. This is precisely why, from day one, we have done everything in our power to give the AFP the support they need to perform their duties to the fullest of their capabilities—and to make sure that the risks they take in the battlefield are reduced to a bare minimum.

Over the past four years, we have released more than 40 billion pesos to modernize and upgrade the capabilities of our military. Compare this to the 26 billion that my predecessor released in a span of nearly ten years. On top of this, we made it a point to follow a procurement process that is fair, transparent, and strategic.

Most prominently, we have added two Hamilton Class Cutters to our fleet, namely the BRP Gregorio del Pilar and the BRP Ramon Alcaraz. We have also acquired eight Sokol Combat Utility Helicopters, three AW-109 naval helicopters, four refurbished UH-1 helicopters , and the BRP Tagbanua, the first locally-built landing craft utility ship, among many others.

We also have very good reason to be excited for what is to come. For instance, we have already received the first batch of the new M4 Caliber 5.56mm rifles, and by the end of this year, we expect that all 50,629 units we bought will have been distributed. And might I add: because of our fair and transparent procurement process, we have saved 1.2 billion pesos on these rifles, which has allowed us to order another 12,657 M4s, and to set aside a budget for succeeding rifle procurements. We are also looking forward to the arrival of two out of twelve FA-50 lead-in fighter trainer jets next year, with the others all arriving before 2017. Apart from these, we are expecting seventeen more refurbished UH-1 helicopters, eight more combat utility helicopters, two long-range patrol aircrafts, six close-air support aircrafts, two anti-submarine helicopters, two frigates, and three full missile capable multi-purpose attack crafts, along with other equipment that will strengthen the capacities of our armed forces.

Lest anyone accuse us of shifting to a more militaristic position, I must emphasize: Our efforts seek to modernize the capabilities of our security sector is to address the needs in human disaster response arenas and for our own internal defense. None of these actions are meant to increase tensions in the region; rather, they are meant to address our domestic problems and issues.

All that we have achieved in this sector is not only because of our all-out support for our troops, but also because we are guaranteeing companies a level-playing field—that our decisions will be made based on which bid offers maximum benefit to our troops for the best possible price. Clearly, if this event is any indication, we have no plans of slowing down. Anytime we have an opportunity to make our military more efficient, we have every intention of taking that opportunity. More than any other time in history, our country is making certain that our soldiers’ commitment on the field is met not only with the respect and admiration of our people, but also by the necessary support from government.

I imagine that our men and women in uniform present here today are already very excited about your showcases, and personally, I am also quite excited to see what you have in store, and I am hopeful for all the potential partnerships that may grow from this event.

Thank you and good day.