Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the accomplishments of the Aquino Administration in Apayao.

Let me just tell you: When good Governor Bulut invited me to come here, he gave me what he called “12 good reasons to go to Apayao.” He proudly shared the transformation happening here in your area, in the fields of infrastructure, social services, peace and order, local governance, tourism, and others. I even joked to him, “I’m sure no one can say that I made Apayao a less of a priority. You know, when I ran for senator… This Butzi, back then, he and the late Chito Bersamin were our two friends from the Cordillera, aside from Larry Wacnang. But I was more often with Chito Bersamin and our good Governor Butzi. That’s why he showed me he was my friend when I ran for Senator: I didn’t get zero votes here in Apayao. [Applause] I won’t tell you what number I got here in Apayao. [Laughter] But when I ran for President, again, my good friend Butzi didn’t abandon me – I was number four then. [Laughter]

But more seriously: I thank our countrymen who gave their trust to the Straight Path. Because of this, we were given the opportunity to change your situation.

I remember now the time before I became Congressman in our place in Tarlac. While going around Tarlac, I noticed that there were places that when my father saw them – if he were still alive at that time – he wouldn’t be surprised. Because it seemed like nothing had changed since the 1960s in the places I was referring to. That’s when I wondered: Is it intentional that there are leaders who don’t want to see their constituents progress?

I would like to give an example to make my point clearer. We all know that building a road in the mountains is much more expensive than building one in the plains. According to the DPWH, it costs P20 to P25 million per kilometer of concrete road in the plains. But if the area is steep because it's in the mountains, it will cost P35 to P40 million per kilometer. We need to install various things like slope protection and the famous “cut-and-fill.”

In this situation, the provincial government in an area with many mountains will naturally ask for help from the national government to fund their projects and necessary infrastructure. If a traditional politician is in power at the national government, he will ask: “How many voters do I have there?” And if the answer is “Very few,” the response from the politician at the national government will be, “Too bad, because traditional politicians don't like projects where they won't get many ‘pogi points.’”

A traditional politician wants the people to remain dependent on him. He doesn't want voters to be able to stand on their own two feet so they will always run to him for baptisms, weddings, funerals, or any need. That's why when election time comes, he will demand repayment for his favors in the form of gratitude; until it becomes a cycle where the poor remain poor, and the rich get richer and richer.

That is exactly what we want to stop or end as we walk the Straight Path. [Applause] When I took my oath of office as President, I told the entire nation and God, “I will be just to every person, and I will dedicate myself to serving the entire country.” Every person, whether they voted for me or not, friend or foe, supporter or critic, I am their President, and they are my Boss. [Applause] I, for my part, was raised by my parents to be true to my word. As proof, let's discuss some of what our colleague Butzi says are his “good reasons to come to Apayao.”

Before we came here, we first conducted an inspection at the Far North Luzon General Hospital and Training Center. You know, just from the name itself, right, hospitals are usually named after people, named after saints. Here, Far North, it really seems so far, [laughter] of this hospital. Earlier, it was mentioned to us, a housewife will go there to give birth. They say the equipment is insufficient, continue on to Cagayan, three hours. Perhaps many were born in between Far North and the hospital in Cagayan.

We can clearly see how the Far North Hospital has changed under our Health Facilities Enhancement Program (HFEP). Perhaps some of you remember that this hospital started in an old public school building with only four rooms. Through HFEP, we allocated P23.08 million for infrastructure upgrading in 2011, and P26.5 million for equipment upgrading in 2014. Now, the former 35 bed capacity has been increased to 100 bed capacity. There are also available x-ray machines, patient monitors, continuous positive airway pressure machine, heavy duty examination lights, and others. The construction of their solid-waste management plant is also ongoing. In the 2015 HFEP, we allocated a total of P25 million for their proposed 4-storey ward. [Applause] Now, the Far North Hospital is the only Level 1 core referral hospital in the entire Apayao. Even hospitals in some parts of Cagayan and Ilocos Norte refer patients needing special facilities here.

The transformation of Far North Hospital is part of the bigger story of change that we are experiencing as we tread the Straight Path. Our position is clear: No matter how far or remote the province; no matter which party is in power in the LGU; or whoever received the most votes in the area; no one will be left behind as we move forward. [Applause]

Here in Apayao, more than P7.5 billion is the total value of the funds we have allocated for the establishment of important infrastructure. Our guidelines in choosing the projects to be built for you were simple: Address the needs through the proper process, with the right project, in the right place, using the right materials and design, and implemented by the right people. [Applause] Because Governor Takit and Governor Fongwan are being applauded, I think that means their province was not neglected either. [Laughter]

One example of this is the Kabugao-Pudtol-Luna-Cagayan Boundary Road Project. Aside from the upgrading of 52.15 kilometers of road, it also includes the construction of the Mangoli, Paco, and Nagan Bridges. Once this project is completed, the trip that used to take 5 hours from lower Apayao to upper Apayao will be reduced to just two hours, we promise. [Applause]

We have also reached 134 kilometers of the Abbut-Conner-Kabugao-Solsona Boundary, Ilocos Norte Road, where we have already upgraded 55.05 kilometers of road, including the construction of the Butao Bridge. Once this road is completed, along with the remaining bridges, the trip that used to take eight hours from Tuguegarao to Laoag, passing through the Maharlika Highway and Manila North Road, will be reduced to just 4 hours on the new route. [Applause] This also includes the repair of more than 13 kilometers of road from Claveria to Kabugao.

We also built roads to make it easier to reach the tourist spots here in Apayao. There's the Turod-San Gregorio-Shallom-Lussok Road Project, which will provide access to the Lussok Crystal Cave in Luna. 4.21 kilometers of it have been completed, and another 3.30 kilometers will be built by January of next year. There is also the Poblacion-Lappa-Marag Road Project, to make it easier to reach the limestone rock formations and the Manacota Underground River in Marag Valley. Now, our tourist guide, I think, will have more allowance to save.

Of course, tourists who come will not only look at the beautiful scenery, they will also book hotels, pay tour guides, and buy products here in Apayao. Result: more opportunities for you.

From 2011 to 2015, a total of P215.33 million was allocated for the construction of various farm-to-market roads (FMRs) here in your province. As early as 2013, the rehabilitation and improvement of the Sta. Filomena FMR in Calanasan, and the Cacalaggan-Malibang FMR in Pudtol were completed. [Applause] This past June of 2015, the Buluan-Daga FMR in Conner was finished. In total, more than 900 farmer households are benefiting from these projects. Earlier, I was very happy to hear our farmer brother – from 70 cavans, it became 150 cavans. That 150 cavans is close to what is called 5 metric tons per hectare. That has been our target for a long time. It’s now at 4.785 tons. So I will push Secretary Alcala – just a little more, maybe we can finally reach 5 tons per hectare.

Of course, along with the construction of infrastructure, we continue to expand social services to give you more ability to achieve your dreams, and contribute to our collective goals. This August, 7,867 households are already benefiting from our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program here in Apayao. As they say in a popular saying: We are teaching our countrymen how to fish instead of just giving them fish, if not occasionally, then just once. That is the difference between us and the traditional politicians. We are giving strength to our Bosses because we do not want them to remain dependent on handouts.

There are 715 graduates from the TESDA Training for Work Scholarship here. We also have 228 graduates who completed their studies with the help of the Private Education Student Financial Assistance program. Another 225 graduated from the Special Training for Employment Program. All of them have sufficient skills and knowledge to find better livelihoods. They can help their families, their communities, and our country. That is the cycle we started on the Straight Path.

To ensure that the progress of our countrymen is not interrupted, we are also taking care of their health. We all know that our countrymen can go back to zero if they are struck by illness. 113,408 individuals are covered by PhilHealth here in Apayao. [Applause] As you know, we have expanded the number of people in PhilHealth, and we have also expanded the illnesses covered by PhilHealth.

We also know that any effort of our countrymen can be wasted if there is unrest. With the development of roads here, the patrol of the combined AFP and PNP will be facilitated, and their response to reports of crime or even disaster reduction will be faster. Our uniformed personnel are also working doubly hard to apprehend criminals. In fact, the total crime volume was 433 in 2014. We have lowered this to 197 at present. Since February 2010, Apayao has been declared peaceful and ready for further development. Until now, there have been no reported NPA-initiated violence in your province. [Applause]

For all these successes, I thank the people of Apayao for their continued trust and support for the Straight Path. With your cooperation, we have funded 42 projects under what is called Bottom-up Budgeting. In a way, you initiated the projects you need. These are the projects you yourselves suggested. You chose irrigation, road repairs, bridges, and evacuation centers. As I always say, you made these 42 projects happen.

Bosses, isn't it true that before we embarked on this path, we couldn't even dream of the things we have now? Earlier, it was mentioned, “When will we have a road here?” We were left with a meager fund, fragile institutions, a system full of holes, and many areas long neglected.

Now, you can clearly see what we have achieved in over five years of treading the Straight Path. Apayao is not the only one with “12 good reasons to visit.” The story of the transformation of the Far North Hospital and the changes here in your area is also the story of other provinces, municipalities, and cities in the Philippines. And because of the good start we have made, those who come after us will surely reach even further.

In the upcoming election, you will choose whether we continue on this path or deviate from it. Many will posture and promise you the moon and the stars. My earnest plea: Look at the new roads and bridges; the opportunities opening up; the youth being given the chance for a better future. Those are what are at stake in the choice you will make. I trust that with our continued vigilance and unity, we will finally achieve a Philippines that is more peaceful and more progressive, where every Filipino is capable of reaching even higher dreams. All of that, you are the Boss, you will decide.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much to all of you.