Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the Japan International Cooperation Agency’s International Conference on the Consolidation for Peace for Mindanao

[Delivered at the Sheraton Hiroshima Hotel, Hiroshima, Japan, on June 24, 2014]

Next year, the world will mark 70 years since the terrible power of nuclear weapons was first unleashed—right here in the City of Hiroshima. The tragedy that took place in this city on August 6, 1945, involved a previously untested type of uranium bomb, and claimed over a hundred thousand lives. It was followed by the use of a plutonium bomb on Nagasaki on August 9, 1945, inflicting, again, over a hundred thousand casualties in a city that was actually a secondary target. Heavy ground haze and smoke obscured the city of Kokura, the real target, leading to the decision to bomb Nagasaki instead.

A fundamental question arises from this tragedy: What did the peoples of both Hiroshima and Nagasaki do for them to pay the ultimate price of war?The tragedy that was the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, seven decades later, only reminds us the futile results of conflict, and impress upon us the collective responsibility we hold in defending the rights of our respective peoples to live not only without fear, but to live in a world where peace is a shared reality by all nations.

It is therefore fitting that we are gathered in this city consecrated to the principle of the preservation of peace, to discuss how the combatants of yesterday can become partners for the avoidance of future conflict. In this regard, I believe that the Philippines, which also paid a colossal price in lives and material damage in war, has something significant to share when it comes to setting aside conflict and achieving reconciliation and harmony.

On the 27th of March of this year, in the garden of Malacañan Palace, representatives of my government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front forged an agreement that promised an end to more than four decades of strife in Mindanao, an agreement that opened a new chapter of solidarity in our nation’s narrative.

The agreement, which was witnessed by those who had worked with us and by the international community, was the culmination of the hard work that all stakeholders and partners put into opening this chapter of peace for Mindanao. While it is the task of Filipinos to work out peace in the Bangsamoro, the international community has played a role in supporting this process.Japan is one of the countries to which we owe our gratitude—in fact, it was on these shores where our journey to peace began on an evening in August of 2011.

With very little notice, Japan opened its doors to me and my Cabinet members, and to Chairman Al Haj Murad Ebrahim, and the members of the MILF. Japan generously accepted our request to host our meeting—admittedly a risky move, especially since there was no certainty that negotiations would succeed.

This meeting happened at a crucial time: Talks with the MILF had reached a difficult standstill, and I had broached the idea of directly meeting with Chairman Murad to move the discussions forward. To their credit, they responded in the affirmative.In hindsight, to us, that was the turning point in our narrative to secure a just and lasting peace. Trust was established between brothers, and genuine dialogue was possible.

As a congressman, I had come to understand that the degree of resentment in the hearts of the Bangsamoro people was, on a large part, a result of land grabbing and the opportunism of some of our less scrupulous compatriots. Taking advantage of the illiteracy of our indigenous peoples who did not know that their lands had to be registered under their name, these lettered Christians sought control of the lands our Moro and other indigenous peoples called home. This in turn led to a struggle of our Moro brothers to reclaim what was rightfully theirs. Given the many deaths, which were the result of the conflict that raged and festered for generations, one cannot help but wonder: If a law had been passed to protect the marginalized, like the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA) we have now, could bloodshed have been avoided? Is it not right that as one of my predecessors once said: That those who have less in life should have more in law? I wondered: With all the hostility and animosity that once existed between brothers, how could one achieve the trust crucial in forging an agreement?

As President, these questions continued to preoccupy my mind. This is why every avenue to build a once-scarce trust was explored the moment we stepped into office. At one point, I even thought that, if we could allow students from Mindanao and other parts of the country to come together and learn in a cross-enrollment setup, build friendships and strengthen those friendships as they grew older, then perhaps one day, when those very students hold the reins of power, trust would not be scarce, and peace would be a possibility.

I have always believed that true leaders embody what is best of their peoples, and that in turn they would protect the interest of their peoples. Both Chairman Murad and I thus met, not thinking how to win, or how to give up the least—but, rather, how we could work together, and how we can improve the lot of our followers, who, after all, are all Filipinos.Both of us understood that the suffering of our people had to stop, and that any form of violence, neglect, and misgovernance only fueled the hatred one side had for the other.

I knew this narrative of injustice: My family, after all, was victimized by a president who abused his power. I fully understood the plight of those who, like my family, could not find justice within the system. I saw firsthand how the State, which was there to protect its citizens, served as the very vehicle for oppression. It was hard to hope; it was hard to believe that meaningful change could happen. How could democracy and freedom be regained from a dictator? How could our rights be upheld? After all, history has made it clear: Oppression is often met with violence, with those at the frontline never seeing the culmination of their efforts.

Chairman Murad had also witnessed injustice. Development in Mindanao was hampered by instability; the lack of opportunities bred discontent, which fueled further violence, thus instituting a vicious cycle in which so many of his brothers in the struggle sacrificed their lives.

In the end, atrocities were visited upon all sides. However, those who once experienced atrocities sit at a table with us today, working with us as we advance the peace process through dialogue with the modicum of trust established between us. And while Chairman Murad and I had gained the trust of one another, the task of hammering out the details in every annex was left to the able hands of MILF Chief Negotiator, the Honorable Mohagher Iqbal, Professor Miriam Coronel-Ferrer and her predecessor—now Justice—Marvic Leonen, and of course Secretary Ging Deles.

Despite the many challenges in pursuing peace, both Chairman Murad and I, as well as our followers, knew that we had to put an end to this vicious cycle, and in turn ignite a virtuous cycle of empowerment and advancement.

This was the context from which we approached that day in August here, in Japan, almost three years ago. I sometimes wonder: If that meeting did not take place, where would we be today? Fortunately, that meeting, my first face-to-face encounter with my brother Chairman Murad, was a breakthrough.

Japan’s friendship and support were, without doubt, instrumental as we took those early steps. The goodwill and, eventually, the consensus resulting from that first encounter with Chairman Murad enabled us to move through the various stages of our peace process, which culminated in the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro. Thus, I cannot overemphasize just how much Japan has contributed in nurturing the atmosphere of fairness and hope that enabled all of us to look towards a future of meaningful opportunities, especially for those in the Bangsamoro. My people, therefore, will forever be grateful for such kindness: And I must say, on their behalf, arigatou gozaimasu .

Indeed, the people and government of Japan have stood as a reliable and very patient companion in our quest for genuine and lasting peace and development in Mindanao.

This is evident in the support you have provided as a member of the International Monitoring Team, the International Contact Group, and the Independent Commission on Policing; in the assistance you have extended in helping to jumpstart a process of rebuilding and development in Mindanao; and in the knowledge and resources you have shared with our people through the Japan International Cooperation Agency.

For the Bangsamoro in particular, through the Japan-Bangsamoro Initiatives for Reconstruction and Development—aptly acronymed J-BIRD—JICA has funded projects that have helped restore normalcy, develop the local economy, and strengthen the foundations of human security and development in affected communities. Proof of this can be seen in the initiatives you are undertaking in Mindanao, namely, the Capacity Building for Community Development in Conflict-Affected Areas in Mindanao, the Study for Socio-Economic Reconstruction and Development of Conflict-Affected Areas in Mindanao, and the Grant Assistance for Grassroots Human Security Projects, which you continue to extend to communities in need. These are on top of the many other efforts you have done, and continue to do, in Mindanao and throughout our country.

I am told that, to date, assistance coursed through J-BIRD has reached around 15.1 billion yen or 6.6 billion pesos. This will redound not only to the development of livelihood and industry, but more importantly to the empowerment of our brothers and sisters in the Bangsamoro—allowing them to take hold of their destinies and bring their families, communities, and ultimately our nation to greater heights.

All these complement our administration’s own resolve to spur growth and inclusiveness in Mindanao. Through our Sajahatra Bangsamoro program, we have extended the coverage of healthcare to MILF communities, and implemented the Cash for Work program to help them transition towards becoming even more productive members of society. Our goal—a goal I believe you share—is to ignite a virtuous cycle of empowerment and growth, a cycle that takes root in the stability and security borne of a just and lasting peace. This is a vision we share for Moros, Christians, and Lumads alike.

The contributions of Japan, Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei, Norway, Libya, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Canada, Australia, the United States, New Zealand, Sweden, the European Union, and the many other nations, international organizations, and agencies who have worked with us are truly invaluable. This critical juncture in our journey now only highlights the fact that the pursuit of peace, challenging as it may be at times, can and must be an undertaking filled with optimism.

This much is true, especially when reason and a determined mindset to espouse harmony prevail between parties. Peace becomes all the more possible when those at the table work towards building a condition where the rights of each one—regardless of history or belief—are recognized and upheld, and where the rule of law and justice are not merely lip-service but the compass that guides all our endeavors. Indeed, when we do right by those we have sworn to serve, we can ensure our equitable advancement. And because our peace is based on justice, it is a peace that will last; and it will serve as a firm foundation for development and security.

I believe this is the very essence of all our efforts and of our gathering today: It is by working together to boost the capacities of the people of the Bangsamoro that we can truly enable them to succeed, and show them that peace, stability, and harmony—whether in Mindanao or in the wider international environment—are both possible and sustainable. This can be done if we can harness trust and friendship towards a reasonable, mutually beneficial consensus.

I believe that all of us here today are bound by this hope. This is why my administration will work doubly hard to ensure that free, peaceful, and democratic elections for the Bangsamoro government will take place come 2016. This is why our government will continue to take on programs and implement projects that will empower more Filipinos to contribute to the growth of our nation. This is why, even in the face of immense challenge and difficulty, the Filipino people will continue to tread the straight and righteous path to progress—because we know that true, inclusive growth affects individuals, communities, nations, and the entire world. It is with this commitment that we will continue to work with all partners of goodwill.

For the longest time, my brothers and sisters in the Bangsamoro have sought to live dignified, productive, and peaceful lives. Today, this vision is within reach—not only for them, but for all of us. It is a vision that motivates all of us to finish the journey we had taken. Through our sustained solidarity, I am confident we can and will fulfill the promise of peace—a promise that will illuminate not only our own path, but also that of generations to come.

I would like to add that if solidarity among Filipinos and with other nations of goodwill, like Japan, like Malaysia, and others, can bring about peace, then it is incumbent on all nations to look at our regional circumstances and ask of themselves if conflict should be considered inevitable. While it is undeniable that tensions do exist in our part of the world, and that it can even be said that we have entered into an era of brinksmanship, all of us have it in ourselves not to be prisoners of our past.

Should we not strive, instead, to firmly learn from the past—and by so doing, unchain ourselves from the inflexibility and unilateral attitudes that caused so much conflict within living memory? If lives were needlessly sacrificed to achieve power and prestige, is it not our obligation not only to the present and future generations, but to millions of innocent dead cut down by conflict, to firmly insist that losing any life is a price none of us can afford to pay?

In the face of rising tensions in our region, our shared future lies in the appreciation of three basic truths. First, that there has to be a right and wrong; second, that we have to champion what is right; and third, most crucially of all: that in championing what is right, we are always conscious that conflict is not the necessary course . Principle is no obstacle to peace; but war annihilates everything—including principle. I ask you, and all peoples of goodwill, to take a similar path of dialogue and negotiation to achieve mutual understanding, justice, and prosperity.

Whenever it seems that the path to peace is filled with so many obstacles, when our spirits are tested and our faith in the processes are shaken, those of us who are in a position to make decisions must remember what happened here in Hiroshima, and in Nagasaki, and in the many places that have faced and are now experiencing conflict: If we falter, it is the innocent who will pay the ultimate price.

Thank you, and good day.