Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the Philippine Physicians in America – Philippine Medical Association Joint Congress 2015

[Delivered at Manila Hotel on January 8, 2015]

First of all, allow me to wish everyone in this room a happy new year. I am hopeful that everyone here was able to spend time with their loved ones, and relax a little and unwind a little to prepare for the year ahead. To those of you who came from overseas, perhaps I can also point out that 2015 is “Visit the Philippines” year, and that you are among the first visitors. Hopefully, you were able to spend your holidays catching up with old friends and relatives, while enjoying the sights, the sounds, and the food our country has to offer. Indeed, I have no doubt that the festive and unique way we Filipinos celebrate this holiday season provided a welcome respite from the demands of your profession.

The field of medicine is certainly a challenging one; nonetheless, it is a field in which Filipinos have demonstrated excellence over generations. Throughout the United States, Filipino doctors have become pillars of society, having earned the trust and respect of their respective communities. On top of that, however, they have also displayed a remarkable affection for their motherland, consistently going out of their way to stand in solidarity with their fellow Filipinos.

This is something I have experienced first hand. Some of you may remember that, for a period of three years, my family lived in exile in Boston, away from the comforts of home. In the cold winters of Massachusetts, it was the warmth and support of our fellow Filipinos in the neighborhood that kept our family going, helping us continue the struggle against the dictatorship. In fact, among those who showed the greatest compassion and solidarity with us were families of doctors, who remain good friends to this day, such as the families of Dr. Mario Bucal, Dr. Florencio Hipona, and Dr. Steve and Cheri Agular.

Today’s gathering is proof positive that, while many things have changed significantly over the years, the compassion of Filipinos in medicine remains. By this, I refer to much more than your professionalism and skill; I am talking about how much you give back to your countrymen. Over the course of its history, the Association of Philippine Physicians in America has always made its presence felt to our countrymen, in the form of humanitarian, medical, and philanthropic help. You were there in the aftermath of the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991; you sent help after Typhoon Haiyan made landfall in the Philippines in 2013. On top of this, you have regularly extended help in the form of medical missions for the less privileged. Your efforts to spur change can also be seen in events such as this, which serves as a venue to share your expertise in your respective specializations, thus helping raise the standards of healthcare here at home.

I stand here today to extend the gratitude of our people, and to tell you that our administration moves in support of your efforts. The goal of making good, quality healthcare available to all Filipinos cannot rest on the shoulders of a single entity or sector. All stakeholders, from government and private sector alike, must do their utmost. This is precisely why our administration has directed tremendous focus to the health sector.

From 2010 to 2014, the approved budget of our Department of Health more than tripled, going from P24.65 billion to P83.72 billion, and the 2015 budget has increased this even further, to P86.97 billion. Secretary Garin points out that once the tally for the so-called Sin Taxes is finally computed, these figures will undoubtedly rise very significantly. Might I point out, with the exception of the sin taxes: We have done this without raising taxes, whose revenues likewise go directly to improving public healthcare.

The effects of our focused and strategic approach to the health sector are clear. We have been able to register a vast majority of our population under PhilHealth, our national health insurance program. We likewise expanded the diseases covered by the program to include those that pose the greatest threat to the lives of our countrymen. We are also providing free healthcare to those identified to be the poorest sectors of our society. Now, they can simply walk into any government hospital, show their PhilHealth card, and receive medical treatment, free of charge.

We have also managed to give our health facilities much-needed upgrades. From 2010 to 2014, we have spent a cumulative total of P46.39 billion upgrading more than 6,900 health facilities nationwide. At the same time, we have been strategically deploying health professionals to communities. During our term alone, for instance, we have deployed 429 doctors, 9,137 midwives, and 48,390 community health teams, and 64,023 registered nurses to communities found to be in need.

Of course, like you, we subscribe to the saying that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. For this reason, many of our social interventions have also been deliberately designed to target a healthier citizenry. One major example of this is our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino program, which covers more than four million Filipino households. The program gives cash grants to families, providing they fulfill certain conditions, which include having children vaccinated and having pregnant mothers go through regular check-ups.

In line with this, we have likewise stepped up our efforts to provide vaccinations for our countrymen. For instance, we have consistently strengthened our immunization program against measles. As of November 2014, we have been able to immunize 91 percent of our children one-year old and below from this disease, and we are intent on achieving our target of at least 95 percent. [Applause] Not to mention, in 2012, we also launched the rotavirus vaccine. This immunizes infants from the most common cause of severe diarrhea, which thousands of children suffer from each year. We have already been able to protect a great number of children from this disease with this program, having vaccinated over 670,000 infants from our country’s poorest families.

It is clear: As doctors from here and abroad strive to strengthen their partnership to build a healthier Philippines, our administration will work shoulder-to-shoulder with you. These past few years, the world has witnessed the resurgence of the Philippines, and the unparalleled talent of our people; and it is up to us to make certain that, moving forward, our people will be skilled enough and healthy enough to realize the vast potential of our nation. I am hopeful that the participants in this joint congress can maximize this opportunity, and realize your goal of advancing the state of Philippine healthcare.

If I may share: Whenever I go abroad, one of the things I look forward to the most is meeting the Filipino community, who always prepare a very warm welcome. Time and again, during these events, they ask me, “When can we go home?” To this end, we have been working overtime, improving opportunities for gainful employment in the country. We even have initiatives like the Department of Science and Technology’s Balik Scientist program, which encourages Filipino scientists to return to the Philippines and share their expertise towards our country’s development. The head of PAGASA is one of these scientists.

All this is in pursuit of our shared dream: a Philippines in which our people leave our country only by choice, and not by necessity. I am glad to say that, through our people’s support, and the backing of individuals like yourselves, we have been able to make dramatic strides. Through our collective efforts, we have increasingly made it possible for our people to live good, dignified lives within our shores, and perhaps soon, those of you who have come here from America will be able to look at the Philippines and see a country to which they can return or retire to, one that is prosperous, progressive and, without doubt, close to their heart.

Thank you and good day.