Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the Day of Honor for the Police Force.

Last Sunday, there were Games of the Generals where—for your shooters—you know, shooting, it’s somewhat an individual event. And because it’s an individual event, there’s a team’s course first. The aggregate of each individual is what’s summed up. But, the two latest versions of the Games of the Generals were designed to emphasize the team. The events themselves required a team to undertake the particular problem solving of the various stages. Then, they added another version hosted by the Air Force last Sunday, where the shooting sequence was dependent on the luck of the draw. So, you’ll form a team, no programming, no exemptions, where you’re assigned—divided—the task at hand by five people and the best will be placed. For example, in sniping, the best in speed—there’s none of that. You don’t have a decision on who will be assigned to what task—it’s a raffle. So, the result of that is, it obligates each team to finish what needs to be done, to really help each other and tune their strategy to address what we call the weakest link, the weakness of the weakest member. The result of that is, the team with a mix of luck but also planning given difficult circumstances, of course, will win each stage and in the overall.

I’d like to add that yesterday, we were really unlucky when it comes to the PNP lately. Yesterday, I admit to you, I was a little delayed going to the PNPA because I couldn’t shake off the argument of the two seniors managing the PNPA. Honestly, until last night before I slept, I couldn’t shake off the phrase, or the line, “What are you doing, you kids?” And the question, “What about the cadets under your care?”

Yesterday, I think you saw, it’s a uniform, of course, a gala uniform. Notice the pants; aren’t they too tight, constricting? Others are okay. I said, “Why is it like this?” It seems the tailor did a lot of scrimping. And if the tailor scrimped, why was he obligated to do so? Of course, we probably have a “lowest bidder” being discussed there. So many things come to mind, “why?”

I’d like to add: Yesterday—well, of course there was trooping the line, graduation. Now, we know our tradition is to follow the beat of the left foot with the beat of the bass drum. Right? But the bass drum had a broken tone. It sounded like you hit it with a balikbayan box. I thought, I said, “Maybe there’s something wrong with my ears.” The worst part is, my neighbor said the sound was still like that. And I really couldn’t control myself, I called the head of the Public Safety College. Even the drum he can’t take care of. What happened to our cadets? Fortunately, and yet that’s where I take pride—we saw how they marched, we saw how high they stood, we saw how they carried the honor of the entire service and in all the services they will join.

Of course, during the march, they were in front of us, I was wondering, why do the front ranks have rifles, while the rear ranks don’t? And we were told that an investigation into the procurement of stocks of ceremonial rifles is also ongoing because it seems there is also corruption here. So I said, “What a pity for our police. They look like beggars.” And I’m sure you won’t blame me if I say, “Should you feel like beggars?” I think not anymore. Regarding pistols, the ballistics examination—one-to-one ratio—is being completed.

In the old days, when my mother was president, I remember there was a trend called “buying rights.” I said, “Buying rights? What does that mean?” When someone retires, they would surrender their issued firearm; the next person wanting to have a gun would buy the “rights” so that it could be issued to them. I’m sure that doesn’t happen anymore, and there shouldn’t be a market for that.

Regarding vehicles, there are also many vehicles […] So, your shoot, move, communicate—I think that’s being addressed or has been addressed.

I would like to add, just observations: Here, we are honoring people who are truly honorable and who have truly shown excellence. Like our official from Tacloban.

When we arrived in Tacloban, she was one of the first to brief us on where, number one, she knew what she was saying, number two, her dedication was truly there—she walked five to six kilometers because the law enforcers needed it, especially during the looting in Tacloban, right? Two hundred nineteen officers and men for the PNP in Tacloban City, and there were only 20 present, and this lady, at the risk to herself, at the risk of leaving her family unattended, performed her duty to which we are now acknowledging.

I would like to add, going back to the women: MOA, there was a holdup or attempted holdup the other day. Who responded first—four policewomen. Those four, drew their firearms, engaged the robbers in a shootout, did not think twice about, “Should we run from here” or “Should we just wait for the chaos to subside there” before approaching. They approached, defended our citizens.

Of course, our citizens, when they look at the police, hopefully, that's what they will always see—role models. When there's a police officer there, we are sure that we feel at ease.

And let me contrast it: When we talk of all these people who have been getting the awards, most of them are in the junior ranks. What about in the senior ranks? Lately, we have had an issue of a person who refused to take a new assignment. Let me ask you: Can we choose assignments? I’ll include myself: Can I choose problems? Last year, if there had been a suggestion box, “If possible, enough of the Bohol Earthquake, maybe enough of the Zamboanga Crisis,” we were then hit by Yolanda, there was Santi in between, there’s been a fourth typhoon this year, I think. I had no choice. I need to address the job.

Of course, by definition, there are good or desirable positions, and there are bad positions. Can we, “I am volunteering for the good positions only.” Who would volunteer for the bad ones? This person, unfortunately, was not getting a bad position. And let's say he showed excellence, which should be rewarded and acknowledged. But at the same time, this also entered my mind: Okay, this is good—goes out to media, says this and that, keeps quiet for a while, then, goes back to the media–And I really think does the service a disservice. He harmed the institution that he had served for a long time.

So I’ll go back to this, let me ask: Why is there a contrast here that came to my mind? Why is there a contrast between a rank-and-file, from the cadets to the policewomen in MOA, to the lieutenant in Tacloban and everybody else who we acknowledged today. For them, my mission is very clear: I entered this, voluntarily, I have an obligation to the community, I did it. Very simple. I don’t think it should be that the attitude is, while low-ranking, you understand others, when you rise, you understand yourself. We can’t be like that. Nothing will happen to us if we are only self-serving, especially those at the top.

Let me repeat to you: Some of you I’ve known for quite a number of years. Most of those that I’ve agreed to put in various positions, I only know for their achievements. That’s the only criterion, really. Did they accomplish the mission? Did they do it correctly? That should be recognized. If you were given a position and, by the grace of God, you failed and still hoped to be promoted so you could cause more harm, well, excuse me—that will not happen.

Let me reiterate, this is an appeal: We are addressing all of the issues that we inherited from your pension system that is unfunded to ensure that what was promised to you by the state will be delivered by the state. We have reformed the systems and procedures to make sure that you are not given impossible missions. We are there to back you up all the way. We ask in return that you be true to that sworn duty of yours to protect and serve the community which nourishes you and which relies and depends on you.

Let's make it clear, the example set by our younger colleagues should be emulated, especially by the highest-ranking officials in our ranks. Let us remember, a time will come when we all step down from our positions, and I believe we all aspire to be able to leave our homes—or even while at home—with peace of mind and genuine tranquility in our country. That is in your hands.

Let's fix the system, especially while we have the opportunity, so that we have something planted that we can harvest when the time comes, rather than let wrongdoings persist. Bad behavior, wrong practices—we should not repeat these. It is wrong for us to cover for each other.

Let me reiterate: Regarding this very vocal official, let's say he is good—of course, the question there is, “Is he reliable?” And the common answer to that is, “We can rely on him if he is happy.” So if he is not happy, we can no longer rely on him? Is that professional?

So colleagues: 97 million Filipinos depend on you. Let us not make them feel this is a thought that had no basis in fact. Let us make them believe everyday that their trust in all of us was correctly placed.

Thank you. Good day.