Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the Harvard John F. Kennedy Jr. Forum

[Delivered at the Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, on September 22, 2014]

As some of you may know, Boston was home to me for about two and a half years. It was here that my family found warmth in exile during the dark days of the Marcos dictatorship. Harvard, in particular, was a haven for my father, who was one of your visiting fellows during those years. Back then, however, the closest I ever got to entering Harvard was traveling along Massachusetts Avenue. I never even owned a shirt from your souvenir store. [Laughter] Now, I am here talking to you and I hope that later the organizers who invited me will be patting themselves on the back instead of shaking their heads in dismay.

As a young man, I was taught that not opposing an oppressive structure was tantamount to perpetuating it. If you recognize a problem, and choose not to do anything about it, then you become complicit, and in fact, you even exacerbate it. This reminds me of something that President John F. Kennedy once said: “Other people see things and say why? But I dream things that never were and I say, why not?”

I take the difference to be in how people respond to being dissatisfied with the status quo. Anything made by the imperfect being that is man is, by nature, imperfect as well. The natural course therefore is to continue bettering the situation, to continue challenging the status quo so it can be changed for the better. But sadly, there are those who think that that’s the way things are, there’s nothing you can do about the status quo. Others, though, think in terms of positive transformation: If things are wrong, why not change it?

This refusal to settle for the status quo played a pivotal role many times in the history of my country. It was in 1972 when Ferdinand Marcos, approaching the end of his second and last term, tried to float the idea of being replaced by his wife, Imelda. When that did not pan out, he tried to push for a shift to a parliamentary government—with no term limits. However, the political process for constitutional change stalled, and the 1973 elections were fast approaching. At that dead end, Mr. Marcos declared martial law.

My father, a Senator in those days, was perhaps the fiercest fiscalizer of Mr. Marcos, in conformity with the concept of checks and balances in government. For this, he was put on top of Mr. Marcos’ order of battle, when martial law was proclaimed. My father was jailed for seven years and seven months, for the most part in solitary confinement. He was, however, allowed to leave for the United States to undergo a coronary bypass. He brought his family with him, to live in exile here in Boston, for about three years.

As late as 1983, even with the Gandhian example of non-violence toppling a colonial regime, a lot of people still believed that it was only through violence that freedom can be won. I must admit that back then, I was also of that disposition. In furtherance of his belief that the non-violent route would be most beneficial for our countrymen, my father returned to the Philippines despite the many concerns about his safety. He was hoping that, even out of mere curiosity, Mr. Marcos would agree to have a dialogue with him. My father hoped to relate to him the true situation of the country, that is: More and more of our people were becoming disillusioned with the dictatorship; more and more were turning towards militancy; and the risk of civil war was increasing. My father feared the dictator was detached from reality; he was, after all, surrounded by cronies and flatterers who would tell him only what he wanted to hear.

This dialogue was not to be. My father was assassinated while alighting from his plane in Manila. His death reawakened the Filipino people: In three years, they would bring the dictatorship down in a bloodless EDSA People Power Revolution.

How did they do it? Not by settling for and accepting the way things are, but by dreaming and acting on that dream. When people clamored for my mother to lead them, she set down two conditions: First, that a million signatures be gathered in support of her candidacy; and second, that there should be snap elections. When Mr. Marcos, in his hubris, felt undefeatable and called for snap elections, he scoffed that my mother, a so-called mere housewife without any experience in government, could never run the country. My mother responded by saying, “I admit I have no experience in cheating, stealing, lying, or assassinating political opponents.” [Laughter]

Mr. Marcos assumed that regardless of how the Filipino people voted, he could rig the results. Little did he realize the Filipino people would dare to dream, and confront every act of fraud and intimidation with solidarity and vigilance at the polls. In EDSA, the major thoroughfare bisecting our National Capital Region, my people responded to tanks and machine guns with flowers, prayers, and songs. They dared to believe that the ultimate loyalty of our soldiers would be to their fellow Filipinos, and not to the tyrant.

When we regained our freedom, there was a popular song that said that we will never allow the aberration that was Martial Law to happen again. And starting in 2001, however, my predecessor, instead of learning the lessons of Martial Law, seemingly adopted Mr. Marcos’ handbook on how to abuse the democratic process. At the end of her regime, our people were so apathetic to all the scandals and issues affecting her, and government’s inability to effect change, that the overwhelming ambition of so many was to leave the country. We have now an estimated 10 million of our countrymen—10 percent of the population—residing and working abroad.

In 2010, our aspirations were summed up in a campaign slogan: Eliminating corruption would eliminate poverty. To do so, we would make right all our systems and institutions that were so wrongly tarnished and abused. Our people dared to dream, and acted on that dream by entrusting to me a mandate: To undo the corrupt, broken-down government that Filipinos had once accepted as the norm, and thus turn it into an effective and efficient government working to uplift the country.

Allow me to share with you four case studies of how we are fulfilling our mandate for change, and how it has ignited a virtuous cycle in our country. The first two cases revolve around two individuals: a young woman I met during my campaign for the presidency, and a former Chief Justice of our country being held to account by means of impeachment.

The young woman I speak of, at age sixteen, had just given birth to her second child. She had little in terms of resources or education, and was in a relationship where both she and her partner, not that much older than her, had very little in terms of job prospects. Add to this the fact that there were very few support mechanisms to help them raise their children. At a very tender age, all the problems in the world were hers, and I had to wonder: what would be the future of her children, who were born in such deprived conditions? The odds were stacked against them from the very beginning.

Consider this: If a nation’s greatest resource is its people, then it is the state’s obligation to invest in the people, to give them a fighting chance to improve their lot in life. The young woman I met convinced me that we must enact, amongst other legislation, one that provides access to information about reproductive health, while respecting the conscience of the individual. We accomplished this through intense public debate and a conscience vote in Congress. We also undertook programs that allocated our limited resources to where they could have the most impact at the soonest possible time. For example, we have a Conditional Cash Transfer Program which now provides regular cash grants to 4.1 million poor households, who commit in turn to have regular health check-ups for pregnant mothers, among other conditions, and to having their children vaccinated, and most importantly: keeping them in school.

Investing in the well being of the people is the surest way to ensure that no one will be left behind. The Conditional Cash Transfer does this on the most basic level, but we are well aware that, as with all other challenges, our approach in fighting poverty must be multifaceted. This is why we have closed critical resource gaps in education, such as classrooms, books, and school seats, while expanding our basic education to put it at par with international standards. Our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority, or TESDA, today partners with the private sector to ensure that training programs produce employable graduates. We continue to work to reduce Filipinos’ vulnerabilities to calamities by improving weather forecasting and flood-mapping systems, and even construction standards, and by fostering greater coordination amongst agencies. These are only a few examples of the measures we have taken, all of which empower Filipinos and show them that ours is a government that will always stand behind them and beside them.

This brings me to my second example, involving an individual at the pinnacle of his career. My predecessor, who put a premium on political survival, tried to protect herself by appointing a Chief Justice to the Supreme Court, despite a prohibition on appointing people to office when a presidency is about to end. Much as I opposed this, for the sake of harmony, I tried to make the best of a sordid situation. It soon became clear, however, that the Chief Justice considered himself accountable to no one, failing even to meet the minimum standards of transparency outlined in our laws. To illustrate: As a measure towards transparency, our Constitution requires government workers and officials to declare their wealth in a signed Statement of Assets, Liabilities, and Net Worth. The Chief Justice declared a mere two percent of his wealth, hiding the rest in an apparent attempt to mislead the public. We resolved to stop this impunity: Our House of Representatives impeached him for violating the Constitution and betraying public trust. The Senate later convicted him. His dismissal from office and the charges he now faces in the regular courts is just one example of accountability. My predecessor and three incumbent senators, to cite the most potent examples, are now in detention as they undergo trial on the charge of plunder. May I just state for the record, we only have 24 senators for the 100-million population.

It is no surprise then, that we have a more efficient, better motivated, and better performing bureaucracy, whose services yield true benefits. Infrastructure costs less, and there is far more of it, built with better quality: 12,184 kilometers of roads have been constructed, rehabilitated, or improved under our watch so far. By cutting red tape and minimizing, if not eliminating, opportunities for collusion, the Public Works Department has saved over P27.79 billion, which can then be used to implement the next phases of these projects. Today, government is multiplying the benefits that each peso can bring to the Filipino people.

Taxes have not been raised, except for those on products society discourages such as alcohol and tobacco. Government-owned corporations, where cronies used to be put out to pasture, no longer lose money while paying lavish bonuses to themselves.

A rational, results-driven approach to budgeting has vastly reduced waste and corruption, while freeing up funds: We have more than doubled spending on infrastructure, expanded social services, and yet we have halved the deficit. The world, taking notice of our efforts, has helped in this regard. Under our watch, the Philippines has received positive credit ratings actions 20 times, with Fitch, Standard & Poor’s, and Moody’s, ranking the country, now investment-grade for the first time in history. These ratings upgrades came at a time when ratings agencies have been more conservative in their evaluations, because they have come under greater scrutiny after the global economic crisis. This has allowed us to retire old debt, obtain better terms for new debt, and demonstrate to the world that the Philippines is a safe and worthwhile place in which to do business.

Last year, our economy grew 7.2 percent; in the second quarter of this year, our 6.4 percent GDP growth was one of the highest in our region. Most important of all, comparing the first semester in 2012, to the same period in 2013, 2.5 million Filipinos have been lifted above the poverty line. We continue to make massive investments into the people and for the people, not only to ensure that more Filipinos surpass the poverty line, but also to ensure that those who have crossed the poverty line, will never fall below it again.

Prosperity requires peace and stability, within our own borders and in our part of the world. And so the third and fourth cases I will share with you today involve my decision to meet a man who had long rebelled against the government, and our efforts to find a path to peace in the face of competing claims on the South China Sea.

Conflict between Filipino Muslims and the central government has torn Mindanao, our southernmost island group, for over 40 years. In August of 2011, in an effort to engender trust and revitalize the stalled negotiations, I embarked on what was then a secret trip to Japan, to meet the leaders of these rebels.

At the time, there were those who warned me of the potential political risk involved in such a move, especially if failure were to arise from the dialogue. The question for me, however, was not one of political calculus; rather, it was one of personal risk versus national gain. There I was with the chance to advance the country along the path to peace; I knew it was not something I could let slip through my fingers.

Conflict had been decades long; the negotiators were belligerents at certain times. Both sides had committed atrocities; both sides had failed dreams and aspirations. Hence, we needed to rekindle trust; to do so, we had to put ourselves in each other’s shoes. Individual goals had no place on the table; the objective was not to gain an advantage over the other party, but to create a win-win situation for all involved. Our dialogue proved that we agreed on a vital point: that our Moro brothers and sisters sought and deserved a push for genuine structural reform to ensure inclusive development. To achieve this would achieve what we all desired, which was lasting peace.

We are well on our way towards that goal. Peace negotiations have been successfully concluded, with surveys showing overwhelming support amongst our public. Before I left the Philippines for this extended trip, my administration submitted a draft law to Congress, which hopes to achieve our collective dreams of fairness and inclusiveness in Muslim Mindanao. The task before us: To ensure that those who have been long neglected are empowered to reap the gains of equitable progress.

If trust and long-term thinking can usher in peace in Mindanao, my final example to you is that there is a similar way forward, in reducing tensions in the South China Sea. Nations in the region have asserted competing claims to this area, which has, for millennia, been part of the way of life for our seafaring ancestors. The question we face: will the consensus of the international community, as embodied by laws such as the UN Convention on the Laws of the Sea, be upheld in resolving these claims?

All signatories to the UNCLOS have bound themselves to the equitable delineation of maritime entitlements. It grants us equal rights and also equal obligations. As a founding member of the United Nations, we believe that its covenants such as UNCLOS, and institutions such as its International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, provide the most rational, just, and respectful mechanism for countries to find harmony, despite their differences. This has informed our decision to advance two tracks of action in addressing disputes in the sea which is known by many names in our part of the world. First: to continue calling for the formulation of a binding code of conduct for the South China Sea. Second: arbitration, to clarify the maritime entitlements for all countries concerned. International law allows for a dignified and sustainable resolution to competing claims, as demonstrated by the recently concluded Bay of Bengal Maritime Boundary Arbitration.

These four case studies illustrate how the adherence to our bedrock principles of integrity, inclusiveness, and justice based on the rule of law, have taken our country from one triumph to the next. Some might be wondering: How did we get where we are now? Our country is not rich, after all. And, coming into the Presidency, I inherited many problems, which, early on, seemed insurmountable.

The transformation came about because we asked, “Why not?” We got here by refusing to give up; and by always asking, why settle for, or endure, the status quo when we can change it? Our experience has taken us from a party that not too long ago was labeled as impractical do-gooders, to an administration that few in the opposition dare attack publicly, for fear of a backlash from all those who have benefitted from our programs; after all, attacking our reform agenda would mean attacking the very people whose votes they were courting. Today, even the political opposition grants that we have made tremendous progress, which the Filipino people, of course, have seen for themselves. In the 2013 senatorial elections, the candidates we recommended to our people won 9 out of 12 seats. In fact, we won 9 out of the top 10 positions, with the opposition’s highest candidate winning 5th, and the rest hanging on to the bottom two places.

This is not to say that everyone in our country is willing to traverse the straight path with us. There is a saying about Philippine politics: There are only two kinds of candidates: those who won, and those who were cheated. [Laughter]

I should note that those who thought they were cheated were free to file cases before our Senate Electoral Tribunal; but none were filed.

As Robert F. Kennedy once said, “One-fifth of the people are against everything, all the time.” In public service, you will be criticized for what you did, for what you did not do, and even for what you are about to do, or not do. [Laughter] Do something right, and there are those who will say it is the least that is expected.

And yet we forge on, because to give up would mean allowing the shameless and the unscrupulous to have free reign over the fate of everyone else. My administration’s mandate lasts six years, and I am determined to make the most of it. Our challenge today is to make the gains even greater, and to ensure that the transformation becomes an enduring mainstream of justice and inclusiveness. It is my hope that our experiences will motivate those like you, from the other side of the world, to be influencers, who in turn will inspire the communities and institutions with whom you will interact.

Benjamin Houston Brown, who was the program director at the Center for International Affairs during my father’s fellowship in Harvard, once paid tribute to my father by quoting the philosopher Henri Bergson. Dr. Brown said my father lived up to Bergson’s challenge to the young to think like men of action and act like men of thought. In this more inclusive age, every person of goodwill has it within themselves to do the same. All of you here are presented with the same opportunity to maximize the positive transformation in society; you can dream and change the problematic status quo, or succumb and merely bend in whatever direction the wind may be blowing.

Men and women from all walks of life and faiths in the Philippines have taken up Bergson’s challenge and are making what was once impossible, possible. The Kennedy School of Government has sharpened the skills of some of them, including four current members of my Cabinet: The Budget Secretary Butch Abad, the Social Welfare Secretary Dinky Soliman, Presidential Assistant on Food Security Kiko Pangilinan, and the Presidential Management Staff Secretary Julia Abad. Julia is part of today’s delegation, and also the CEO of our Bases Conversion Development Authority, Arnel Casanova. Jesse Robredo, a former Secretary for the Interior and Local Government and a leading light in our reform agenda, and whom we lost too soon, was also one of your fellows. Despite the difficulties of public service, they all dreamed, and dared to shape their “Why nots” into reality.

John F. Kennedy dreamed bigger, and acted on it. My father, laid down his life, and in so doing ignited a movement that toppled a dictatorship. My mother devoted her life to ensuring that the democracy we had reclaimed would never again be taken away. All of them were faced with daunting tasks, and all of them dared, risked, and acted. This is my message to all: Like JFK, Ninoy, and Cory, each one has the capacity to dream, to die, to live, to fight, to stand for something, to ask “why not” when the challenges seem insurmountable. Thus can we transform the world for the better.

Thank you for your kind attention.

[ Learn more about the President’ official visits, September 2014 ]