Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During an interview with the media regarding the Ebola Virus.

We just came from Guiuan, Eastern Samar earlier, and there, we personally inquired about the condition of our countrymen affected by Typhoon Yolanda. After a year, we are pleased to see the changes in the situation of our countrymen there.

While we are addressing the rehabilitation of the affected communities, we are also facing new challenges in our country. Let's talk about the Ebola virus disease. You have probably heard that there has been an outbreak of this disease in West Africa. In August, the World Health Organization also declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. There have also been reported cases in several countries. And as part of the global community, whatever happens in other parts of the world, we may also be affected. Let us just remember: We have approximately ten million countrymen who are working and living abroad. It is the state's obligation to protect our countrymen, wherever they are in the world.

Therefore, as our country's contribution, we will provide at least one million dollars to the United Nations in its efforts to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus disease.

When the MERS-Coronavirus spread this year in the Middle East, and posed a threat to our country, we did not waste time in improving our response system, in case the said virus entered the Philippines. We signed, as I mentioned to you, Executive Order No. 168 which created a task force to focus on the problem of the spread of diseases that could pose a danger to our country. We are closely coordinating with the World Health Organization regarding effective measures to prepare for and address the spread of infectious diseases. I would also like to add that we are coordinating with the Center for Disease Control in America based in Atlanta to increase our knowledge. We are laying out effective ways to monitor the exposure of our countrymen to diseases, especially those abroad, so they can be brought home, while protecting their health and that of our countrymen here.

Therefore, when we learned about the spread of the Ebola virus disease in Liberia, we decided to recall our 142 peacekeepers stationed there. These are our countrymen who were sent to other places to help promote peace.

As Commander-in-Chief, and father of the nation, I cannot bear to just let them stay in a place where they could be infected with a deadly disease. We cannot tell them, “Thank you for your service to us, but you’re on your own there.” That is not Filipino. No one would say “That’s no longer my problem, I don’t care about them.” Because whatever our faith, we have been taught to care for others and treat our fellow human beings as brothers and sisters.

Our recall of our troops from Liberia is just part of the state’s duty to protect the welfare of those who care for the nation. We ask for understanding from our peacekeepers, especially their families. For 21 days, as mentioned earlier, they will not be able to return to their homes yet; we will give them a vacation on an island where they can relax and rest. This is part of the process established by your government to ensure that the Ebola virus does not spread in the country or that the Ebola Virus enters the country. Let me clarify: It does not mean that because they came from a place where Ebola is widespread, they already carry the virus. We just need to make sure they are safe to mingle with others. This is called quarantine.

Earlier today, a briefing was held by the current Acting Secretary of the DOH, Dr. Janette Loreto-Garin, regarding the Ebola virus—along with Dr. Lyndon Lee Suy. They presented the data related to the said disease, and our initiatives to prevent it. Aside from the briefing, the DOH also has an information campaign about it. Hopefully, this has enlightened many of our countrymen. If you have any questions, the agency's office is always open to provide you with the appropriate answers. Our appeal: Let us not give in to fear or anxiety due to lack of knowledge.

As always, with cooperation and our collective action, the fulfillment of our collective goals will be easier and more effective. The state will continue to care for and protect Filipinos wherever they are in the world, towards promoting a safe and vibrant future for our country.

Just to be sure, earlier, when our screening procedures were shown, it wasn't just the cameras, it wasn't just the personnel, but also the documents that will be presented to us, such as passports; they will be reviewed and investigated if you have traveled to or resided in the three mentioned countries, to ensure that any chance, even a small one, of exposure is not a potential problem for our country. And our improvements to the process are not yet finished. We will continue to tighten them, to ensure that we do not have these diseases, which, if not addressed immediately, can have serious consequences.

Thank you all very much.