VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oIvdHHuBTN0[/youtube]

[ Delivered at the Manila Polo Club, Makati City, on June 26, 2014 ]

Thank you. Good evening.

Leila [de Lima], you continue to amaze me. Leila and I were in several meetings in Malacañang today. She was not in this outfit during the meetings, and she has had the time, while dressing up and rushing through the traffic, which was really bad today—it took me about an hour to get here. In fact, my advance party is still somewhere en route.  [ … ]. Thank you again, Leila.

Of course, Secretary Leila de Lima; Atty. Beda Fajardo; lawyers of the Philippine Bar Association and the Integrated Bar of the Philippines; representatives from the Makati Business Club, Rotary Clubs, and Association of Ambassadors and Consul Generals, specifically, may I address also and welcome, His Excellency Thomas Ossowski, His Excellency Esra Cancorur, and His Excellency Ivo Sieber; my idol in the media, Mr. Jake Macasaet; and of course, Ms. Julie Yap Daza, truly an institution; fellow workers, honored guests, mga minamahal ko pong kababayan:

Good evening to all of you.

Let me apologize for being late, number one. Number two, let me apologize for this kind of lengthy speech which I will endeavor to deliver in record time. But hopefully, I would be able to still impart the key messages that we have been working on especially for this event. I actually was editing this speech up to about 6:10 this evening. That was the fifth revision, and I’m sure my speechwriters love me more for having revised it five times.

Whenever I have the chance to meet with audiences like this, I am reminded of a memorable instance during my time in Congress. There was a day when we were tackling a very simple matter. However, when a debate erupted between the sponsor of the bill and the interpellator, what should have been a straightforward discussion became incredibly complex. At that point, I could not help but ask another colleague—a lawyer, who had obtained his Master’s Degree in Law from a top university in the United States. And I asked, “Why is it, when lawyers are talking amongst themselves, simple matters become so complicated?” His reply: If the law were easy to understand, then lawyers would be jobless.

In one sense, of course, he was joking, and we shared a good laugh over his answer at the time. However, I should admit that his words have a ring of truth. In our society, we are told that often times in the Philippine context, the test of a lawyer’s competency is not to ask his client what actually happened, or who is in the right, but rather, the very first question when talking to a client is, “What is our position?”

Men, by definition, are imperfect beings; disputes will undoubtedly arise in our interactions. We have crafted laws to settle these disputes in a just and orderly manner—after all, in the absence of these laws, we would be reduced to the law of the jungle, where might is right. As such, the Law embodies the consensus of society—a consensus on how we must all interact and treat each other, with fairness and justice.

If justice is defined as doing right by all, then it must be based on truth. Whether as advocates or judges in the settling of disputes, lawyers like you are very much involved in the process of meting out justice—a process that ultimately relies on the search for truth. But when truth is put aside in favor of the position the client wants to take—when the search for truth becomes optional, as opposed to the only path we must take, I have to ask: what would happen? What would happen to justice? If the search for truth is no longer the focal point of interest in settling disputes, can a true and lasting resolution of disputes take place?

My family has had experience with this. One year before the declaration of martial law, Mr. Marcos accused my father of several crimes. He did not, however, bring my father, as you all know, to a civil court—Mr. Marcos brought him to a military court that he created a year later after accusing my father, when he had already declared martial law. In my dad’s case, the accuser; the appointing authority of the judge, which was the military commission; those of the prosecution; and even of the defense; and the final reviewing authority for the outcome of the case were one and the same: Mr. Marcos. On paper, it would seem that they had followed all the appropriate legal procedures. But does anyone doubt the impossibility of obtaining justice in that situation? Does anyone doubt that this court was created to carry out only the will of the dictator, and not to search for the truth?

I have never been a formal student of law, and whatever law degrees I do possess currently are all honorary. But, like you, I am duty-bound to uphold the law, and a copy of the Constitution is always within my reach. And it has always been clear to me that, because the law is created by men, it then follows that the law is supposed to be in the service of men—that our laws, in providing the rights and obligations of all, are supposed be in the service of the Filipino people.

This makes me wonder, then, about the existence of this much-abused saying (and I’m sorry if I mispronounce it, as there were so many different accents when they used this phrase): dura lex, sed lex. The law is harsh but it is the law. Some of my colleagues in Congress sounded like broken records, with how often they repeated this maxim. Just as often, I wondered: what about the times when a rigid obsession with the letter of the law comes at the expense of the people the law was meant to serve? What about the negative consequences of an unyielding focus on the letter of the law? In the application of the law, is it not true that both the letter and the spirit of the law must be given importance? After all, the spirit of the law is defined as its intent, and all laws—if they are rightful laws—are intended to serve man and improve his lot in life. When, in adherence to the letter of the law, the spirit of serving man is lost, then, I submit, there is something wrong with the entire process.

Victor Hugo, in Les Misérables, personified this danger in the character of Inspector Javert. Here was a moral man in the truest sense of the word—a man whose rigid definitions of right and wrong guided his every action. This included the longpursuit of the protagonist, Jean Valjean. Javert pursued him relentlessly, believing that a criminal would always remain a criminal—and this belief was challenged when, in an unexpected twist of fate, Jean Valjean spared his life. In the end, Javert could not reconcile the compassion of this so-called criminal, with his inflexible commitment to what the law prescribed as right and wrong.

I am certain you have seen examples of this in your professional lives, as well. Time and again, expert lawyers have been hailed and hired for their legal prowess—for their ability to slip through the loopholes and cracks in our legal system, in order to secure decisions that benefit their clients. Time and again, we have seen situations where it seems as if the letter of the law has been followed down to the smallest and most exacting detail, and yet truth and justice are absent.

And how can we forget that dark period in our country’s history, when a man succeeded in becoming the supreme law of the land? It was during Martial Law when some lawyers helped Mr. Marcos craft his presidential decrees and other utterances in order to give them a veneer of legality—when these decrees, in fact, only served one man and his cronies, and allowed for the abuse of so many Filipinos, my father included. Indeed, when the observance of said law hampers the progress of man, then it is the law that is served—and not man.

As legal practitioners, you are faced with difficult situations all the time—moments where your decisions can set a precedent for others. These kinds of situations have become very familiar to me, especially today, in my job as President. Perhaps you will allow me to share with you a simple method I use whenever I am faced with challenges: All I do is ask myself, “Does this redound to the common good?”

I find that no matter how complex or convoluted the situation, asking myself this question illuminates the path I must take—a path that would allow me to do what is right, uphold justice, and help my countrymen, not just sometimes, but all the time. If you are a good and able lawyer, then I hope that you already ask yourself this question on a regular basis. After all, we do not have to go further than the past 25 years to see so many cases in which members of the legal profession stood tall as advocates of right and justice—we do not even have to go further than the Philippine Bar Association.

Looking back on your long history, it seems that the PBA has made it a tradition to safeguard and uphold the rule of law. You were a voice for the oppressed during Martial Law, as you investigated human rights violations, and even the assassination of my father. You were likewise a voice for the restoration of democracy and the rule of law after the People Power Revolution, when you supported my mother’s promulgating the 1986 Freedom Constitution, which paved the way for our present 1987 Charter. Even during the time of my predecessor, you did not waver, remaining a sober and responsible guardian of our Constitution—even taking a lead role in questioning the midnight appointments of my predecessor.

You were right to be so concerned. In our system of government, there is a separation of powers among the executive, judicial, and legislative branches—a built-in system of checks and balances that, most would agree, relies on an objective and nonpartisan Supreme Court. Unfortunately, this objectivity was subverted when Mrs. Arroyo appointed then-Chief Justice Corona in what many in the legal profession, including the Philippine Bar Association, believed to be improper.

In fact, when the Supreme Court issued a ruling validating her appointment, might I ask: was there already a justiciable controversy, warranting such an immediate ruling of the Supreme Court? Of course, all of you are familiar with the principle of “justiciable controversy ripe for judicial determination.” Even if Mrs. Arroyo did not appoint a new Chief Justice, the next President would still have had 45 days, or half of the period prescribed by the Constitution, to appoint a fitting candidate to the position. There was no conflict or controversy yet, but the Supreme Court at the time saw it fit to decide. I am sure a lot of you looked at that decision, and I am just as sure that I was not the only one who wondered whether or not they rewrote the Constitution in a manner not approved by that very same Constitution.

The entire nation became a witness to the consequences of this midnight appointment when it became clear that Mr. Corona was in the Supreme Court to protect the interests of the woman who had appointed him. As if his integrity were not already compromised, while in office, Mr. Corona also failed to display the highest integrity demanded of his position when he did not declare over 98 percent of his assets in his Statement of Assets, Liabilities, and Net Worth [SALN].

The submission of the SALN is an act clearly mandated of all public officials—as Article 11, Section 17 of our Constitution says, “In the case of the President, the Vice-President, the Members of the Cabinet, the Congress, the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Commissions and other constitutional offices, and officers of the armed forces with general or flag rank, the declaration shall be disclosed to the public in the manner provided by law.” It is not difficult to understand why the public disclosure of SALNs is mandated. At its most fundamental level, it helps the citizenry to monitor and observe the actions of officials who may seek to enrich themselves in office.

However, for Mr. Corona, “disclosure to the public” consisted of handing over his SALN to his clerk of court, who would then pass it on to another employee, who would then place it inside a locked filing cabinet, inside a vault. What definition of “public” was used, I wonder? In this case, was it “public” just because he turned his SALN over to a public employee? I am not a lawyer, so perhaps I do not understand how Mr. Corona thought of that, but even I can clearly see that this was a violation of the provisions of our Constitution.

In this case, his actions posed a troubling question: if the truth—or if the law—is changeable, ephemeral, and uncertain, does it redound to anyone’s benefit? In these instances, Mr. Corona had already failed the very people he had sworn to serve and the law he had sworn to uphold.These failings became even more apparent in the indecision that the Supreme Court displayed under Mr. Corona, as it contributed to judicial flip-flopping in cases like that of the Flight Attendants Association of the Philippines [FASAP], and of the League of Cities of the Philippines [LCP], where it reversed earlier decisions. Apart from corroding judicial certainty, the flip-flopping of the Supreme Court in these instances created complications that will not be easily resolved. With all these reversals, what form of redress was available to the flight attendants under FASAP, or to the affected municipalities and cities? Under Mr. Corona, the Supreme Court’s apparent willingness to change the institution’s earlier decisionsset a dangerous standard for litigation that, seemingly, could not reach a conclusive end.

The decision to undergo the process of impeachment was not one that we made lightly. Often, we wondered: how many lawyers would want to side with us—to side with justice and the rule of law—knowing that they would have to go to the Supreme Court at various stages in their career? How many lawyers would willingly risk their source of livelihood in such a manner?

Thankfully, so many responded, the Philippine Bar Association included. Through the impeachment, we have a clear-cut example of accountability, obtained through constitutionally ordained processes that show the rule of law at work—processes that clearly show the interdependence and the equality of all three branches of government, where primus inter pares does not apply. Through the impeachment, all branches of the Philippine government were tested solely according to the litmus test of how they served the Filipino people.

I made it a point to be here with your association today not just to thank you for taking a similar position with us, but to thank you for being a consistent voice for the rule of law. Even when so many other lawyers’ groups seem so willing to add to the noise and clamor, your association remains sober and measured in its statements. This is what sets the Philippine Bar Association apart from all other groups. Even in disagreement, you do not pander to public sentiment, but raise the level of discourse and uphold the rule of law—in all situations, you have found that there is only one answer to the question, “Does this redound to the common good?”

This question is the litmus test not only for those of us in government, but also, and more importantly, for all of us. I have every confidence that, moving forward, all members of the Philippine Bar Association have the integrity and the discernment it takes to choose the path of truth and justice each and every time you find yourself asking this particular question.

Whether as lawyers today, or as judges and justices, each time you make a decision that redounds to the benefit of all—each time you choose the straight path, you are not only living up to the oath you swore when you were admitted to the Bar, you are also and more importantly helping to build a more just, a more fair society. Whether or not you are a member of the PBA, whatever your alma mater or area of practice, this is what must unite all those in the legal profession: a firm resolve to uphold both the spirit and the letter of the law, towards serving your fellowmen.

My sincerest congratulations on your 123rd founding anniversary.

And since 123 years ago, modes of communication were very, shall we say, less efficient than they are now, I wonder, since it took the country about seven years after the organization was founded to declare a national revolution, what happens now with the more instant communications available to us?

More power to each and every one of you. May you continue to uphold the traditions that have marked the Philippine Bar Association.

Thank you. Good evening.