Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during his meeting with Filipinos in Korea.

Thank you very much. Let us all be seated.

Let us all be seated. Thank you again.

I will greet Ambassador Luis T. Cruz first. I was planning to sing you a happy birthday song, but we will be flying later, and something might happen to the weather. (laughter) Happy Birthday! instead, Ambassador.

Senate President Frank Drilon; Secretary Albert del Rosario; Secretary Cesar Purisima; Secretary Voltaire Gazmin; Secretary Greg Domingo; Secretary Icot Petilla; Secretary Rene Almendras; Secretary Sonny Coloma; Secretary Julia Andrea Abad; Ambassador Hyuk Lee; Representative Jasmine Bacurnay-Lee and family; His Excellency Oswaldo Padilla, the Apostolic Nuncio; leaders and members of the Filipino community in the Republic of Korea; honoured guests; my beloved countrymen: Once again, good evening.

Just now, while I was listening to the prayer, it said we should avoid typhoons. The typhoon comes and goes, doesn't it? It appears and disappears. Earthquake, just after a big earthquake, and others. I said, let's hope not the 'and others.' Maybe we can just stop at the typhoon and earthquake, and maybe our quota for this year is already finished.

Anyway, I am really very happy to have had the opportunity to face all of you. You know, one of the happiest parts of our travels is the opportunity to meet our countrymen who have ventured abroad, and now I see that they are truly reaping the fruits of their hard work. The problem is, we can't just say the same things to all our Filipino Communities in the different countries we've visited. We all know that everything is being uploaded to YouTube. (Laughter) Someone might say that we're like a broken record and have nothing new to say to our countrymen, that's our problem.

On my way here to Korea, yesterday, one of the first things I remembered and what we should talk about is the story when I had just assumed office. One of the first tests of our administration was the tension between North and South Korea. If you remember, in 2010, a ship from South Korea sank, and there was also shelling by the North on Yeonpyeong Island. I hope I said that correctly. A bigger conflict threatened, where our beloved countrymen here could get caught in the middle. It was my responsibility to respond to keep them away from harm, not only the approximately 50,000 in South Korea, but also the nine in North Korea. I wondered, what are our countrymen doing in North Korea? It turns out they are working under various UN agencies.

I also asked: How will we respond to this impending crisis? The answer: We have an airplane—we’re like an airplane, it seems like there’s only one—and it’s true, a C-130. It can carry one hundred people per trip, it takes four hours to get there, four hours to return, and maybe one hour to pack everyone who will ride it. In other words, nine hours. 50,000 divided by 100, you can do the math (laughter), times nine hours. I said, the turmoil might be over there before we’ve evacuated a thousand people. (Laughter)

But we also have a ship, well, okay. But we have a ship—it seems singular again—that can carry a thousand people. Hey, okay, a thousand now, not a hundred—but the trip will take ten days. (Laughter) Maybe by the time we get there, the fighting will be over (laughter), or when we arrive in Korea, the ports will already be closed. And at this point, I want to thank our embassy. How many embassies do we have? At that time, about 23. Those 23 will handle fifty thousand, and earlier, the coordination with our community organizations was praised, where we are ready if evacuation is needed, we have contingency planning. We don’t just rely on the twenty-three, although they are diligent, the tension was really eased because I am sure that our embassy and you are working together will really lessen our burden. So again, thank you all very much. (Applause)

We needed to find a way, even though our limitations were really very large at that time. We asked a neighboring country to temporarily accommodate Filipinos who might be caught in the conflict until we have enough time to evacuate everyone in the dangerous area. They agreed, and thank God, the situation here in Korea did not worsen.

Let’s fast forward three years. Now, we have three C-130s. (Laughter) We are still negotiating to acquire two more. And this is not a loan, we will buy them. Of course, they are not brand new but upgraded to the highest standards avionics and engines. We now have two larger and more modern Hamilton Class Cutters from America. We can use these if things really get desperate.

Since we are already discussing preparedness for unexpected events, where are we now? Perhaps you have heard about the turmoil in Zamboanga City last month. A group associated with Nur Misuari went there, they said they were going to hold a peace rally but they brought a lot of weapons. They planned to raise their own flag at the Zamboanga City capitol. When their plan was thwarted, they took hostages, used civilians as human shields, burned down many houses, and even snipers and mortars fired at firefighters and Red Cross volunteers.

Let me just remind you, there have been two plebiscites in different years voted on by the people of Zamboanga City. The question, according to the majority there, in response to the question, is that they do not want to join the ARMM. In our system, the majority decides for everyone. So I can only ask, is it right that a group will force their will, using violence? Because of this audacity, more than 100,000 of our countrymen were displaced and we evacuated them to avoid harm. Of course, we need to make sure they have shelter, they don't get sick, and they don't go hungry. Fortunately, the government and the private sector contributed to meet the needs of those caught in the crossfire.

Perhaps many of you cook every day. It is not a simple task to cook for a family. Imagine if you were cooking for more than 100,000 people who need to be fed, of course, breakfast, lunch, and dinner. We can be proud that food is ready and available for them. But I will admit to you, I don't cook at home, we didn't ask how to cook this food, and I think you will agree that there is no caterer in the entire Philippines willing to feed 100,000 meals per day.

One of the stories that made us smile back then. There were nuns who helped and contributed, they said they would cook part of the rice to be eaten. But that was probably the first time they cooked so much food. When they were cooking the rice, because the pot was so big, there was a burnt layer at the bottom, a perfectly cooked middle, while the top was for those who like porridge. (Laughter)

There are also our colleagues in the media who, sometimes, in search of a story, look for things that haven't been addressed. What they discovered was that even our Badjao brothers and sisters, who cannot be far from the sea, and the evacuation center being far from the sea, were given attention by the state. Our point is, the government now has sufficient capacity to respond, even including those with unique needs.

And the proof that your government is now capable doesn't end with evacuation. We also need to address the problem of those who lost their homes to fires, disrupted studies, lost their livelihoods and sources of income. We estimate that we need P3.9 billion to rebuild Zamboanga City. Before, it was really a problem to find that much funding. Now, the money is ready, and we no longer need to go to Congress to ask for additional funds. (Applause) The homes that were destroyed and burned, we can rebuild them in new and more planned communities—there are many informal settlers there—with proper facilities. Because of the government's preparedness, the disaster even became a bridge to a better life for our brothers and sisters there.

I remember when we were starting, we were really happy when it was Friday, because somehow we would have a time-out from the problems we discovered—problems that seemed to have no solution. Now, whatever day the challenge comes, I think we are very ready to respond. Of course, if we could have no problems, we would be grateful for that, but as one person said, if you lose your problems, that's a problem, it will be boring. (Laughter)

This is just one in a long list of changes that our country is enjoying now. Let me add another example: We were made to believe that we couldn't feed ourselves. We imported—or they imported—and we suffered so much from overpriced rice that just rotted in warehouses; that's why the debt of the National Food Authority, from over P12 billion when they took over, ballooned to P77 billion when it was passed on to us. Now, we are almost 100% rice self-sufficient—the rice we need is planted and harvested by Filipinos, Filipinos earn, and Filipinos benefit.

Previously, if the offender was rich or powerful, don't expect to get justice. Now, cases are being filed left and right against millionaire tax evaders; a Chief Justice has been impeached, elected officials have been charged with plunder, and a former president is under hospital arrest.

I am often asked for stories about the Philippines. Good news is coming from all sides, and praise for our country reaches us wherever we go. They always ask, how did we achieve change? We didn't need magic or a miracle to achieve change. It was simple: When we face a decision, we don't ask “how can I benefit from this?” or “how can I stay in power because of this?” What guides our actions and decisions: “What benefit will this bring to the people?”

We removed the sirens from the system; eliminated extortion and kickbacks, and dismantled the mechanisms abused by the corrupt. Because of this, the holes in the national treasury were patched; we created space in our budget which we then focused on programs that benefit the majority, especially our impoverished brothers and sisters. For example, in education: Each textbook previously cost P58. Secretary Brother Armin Luistro of DepEd reviewed this. When he bid out the textbook contract, the exact same book—no difference—he obtained for only P30. Let's compute: We have 20.7 million students in public schools; each of them has five textbooks. With a difference of P28, when summed up, we saved almost P2.9 billion due to the correct pricing of the books. P2.9 billion saved, that's a large portion of the 3.9 allocated to Zamboanga City.

Another example: When we came into office, the country lacked 66,800 classrooms. At first, we thought it might not be possible to fill this gap or to fill it, because according to the initial assessment, we could only fund 8,000 classrooms from the budget each year. That's why there were youth under trees, and even if the tree was cut down, they were still under the sun. But the good news is: Before the end of this year, we will have closed the backlog in classrooms, and we will continue to be able to build more for more students because the K to 12 program is now law. It will add two years, so we can build classrooms for those two years, we can hire teachers—about 30,000—for these two additional years, and of course the books they need.

In PhilHealth, when we started, 66% of our citizens were enrolled. Now, it's playing at 84%—and the remaining, including those in the informal sector and those living in hard-to-reach areas, we continue to look for. You may have also heard of our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program. In this program, poor families receive cash transfers in exchange for sending their children to school, vaccinating and deworming children, and having pregnant mothers get check-ups—conditions that will also help them. When we took office, 800,000 families were registered here. Now, nearly 4 million families are beneficiaries of Pantawid Pamilya and are given the opportunity to improve their lives. I would also like to add that, in the new budget proposal, we will add Pantawid Pamilya for high school. Why? There are new studies proving that completing high school, compared to elementary school, increases a citizen's income by 40%.

That's just an example—it doesn't include the roads that were built at the right cost and completed ahead of schedule, or the hospitals that were given the right equipment, or affordable housing for the police and military, or our relocation of informal settlers to safer areas, or our rapid response to those affected by disasters. We were able to do all of this because corruption was stopped, and spending from the national treasury was put in order.

The truth is, all these programs were funded without us raising taxes, except for the Sin Taxes on cigarettes and alcohol. And Sister agrees, it's right to raise taxes there. That's why I appeal to our citizens—maybe you can pay the taxes that are there correctly and on time; after all, it goes to where it should. Think about it, there are minimum wage earners who pay more taxes than other doctors or lawyers. I'm not joking. The minimum wage earner pays more than someone who specialized in becoming a lawyer or doctor. There was even a person who declared for several years in a row that he had no income, so he had nothing to pay in income tax, but he bought a Lamborghini. That was the first case filed. I hope everyone will cooperate and contribute to our change. If we can show the world that in the Philippines, everyone follows the law, maybe our GDP growth of 7.6% in the first part or first half of this year will be surpassed and even increase further.

I will be frank with you: There are still many who want to cling to the old system. Now, you may have heard, the issue of PDAF in the Philippines is hot. We have already filed charges against some of those allegedly stealing from the national treasury.

Clearly: The fight is not yet over. Those who benefited from the old system are becoming truly desperate. There are those who deceive, those who try to mislead us, those who lie to evade the judgment of the people. The old system might be restored, where the majority are oppressed by the few. Their goal: To divide us, those they oppress. There are those who put on a show and want to remove the government's capabilities, wanting to remove lump sum funds from the budget, including calamity and contingency funds. Let me ask them, can calamities be planned? Are storms or earthquakes by appointment? Can we predict how many and how strong the disasters that will come to our country will be? Without a calamity fund, we are weak—perhaps—and lucky if we spend four months exchanging letters with Congress and deliberating to get additional funds by following procedures. I mentioned Zamboanga City—let's add our storms, as well as the earthquake that struck our countrymen in Bohol and Cebu just a few days ago. If there is no calamity fund, if there is no contingency fund, what will we do? Will we tell them, 'Sorry for now, we will still ask Congress for funds, please bear with us, you have nothing to eat'? In Zamboanga, it took almost a month, didn't it? We have money, but it seems they want to prohibit the system of immediately addressing the needs of our countrymen. Is it right to begrudge giving aid to those in need when we are capable of doing so?

The question is: Now that we have achieved what we aspire to, will we surrender now? Will we doubt each other now? I have full trust: They cannot defeat us; we are more numerous, and our belief in our principles is deeper. We can only be defeated if we allow ourselves to be deceived.

Isn't it true that we have been convinced for a long time that we cannot change the Philippines? Let's admit it, that is also the reason why so many of our countrymen have left to seek a better future abroad. And now, we are gradually reaching a situation where a Filipino will leave his own country because he wants to, and not because he is forced to—not because he sees no hope.

We achieved this transformation of the Philippines because we united. You gave me the opportunity to lead, carrying the voice saying, 'I no longer want the system that has oppressed us for a long time.' In overseas voting, wherever the polling place, we truly swept all the opponents. Thank you very much for this. (Applause) Thank you very much, because you made the change. You are still my boss—you will say whether we will continue, or return to the old system where only a few benefit. We have achieved change—and it is still up to us, up to our willingness to unite, in our hands how to make the change we are enjoying now permanent. I am fully committed to your mandate, my Bosses: Correct the wrong, be faithful to my sworn duty. You can count on my continued and tireless contribution to achieve our collective aspirations.

Before I finish, someone is whispering to me, saying, you've said so much, why don't you talk about your love life. (Laughter) It seems someone woke up in the back. (Laughter). I just want to add this, I went to a wedding about two weeks ago. I really couldn't stop looking at the fathers of the bride because they were all biting their lips. And their eyes were getting narrower and narrower, just holding back tears. I said, shouldn't you be happy that your daughter has found someone she deserves? They glared at me, as if they were really holding back tears.

There's another incident. I have a friend whose daughter is now a teenager and having a soiree. So, she asked her father. She said, Dad, we're having a soiree like this, can I go? The father's answer was simple: No. (Laughter) After two months, she asked again, we're having a soiree, maybe I can go now? Still no. When will I be allowed to, to have a soiree? How old are you now? Thirteen. Wait until you're 30. (Laughter) But we were able to convince this friend of ours, it was held at his house. The soiree started at 2:00 o'clock in the afternoon and ended at 3:00 o'clock. (Laughter)

There's another story. That's it, his daughter is in college and has a suitor, and when he arrived—he was courting her at their house—when our friend arrived, his daughter said, Dad, this is so-and-so, she introduced him. The suitor just looked at our friend, didn't stand up, didn't greet him. My friend said, the world is really different now, isn't it.

So, all I can say about my love life is that the benefit I have until now is that I'm still single, when the time comes that I have the problems I mentioned to you, I think I'll be senile and won't feel them anymore, (laughter) I think that's good news too. (Applause)

So, this is the last part, I repeat to all of you, if we truly have a very large ambition when we step down in 2016—that’s only two years, eight months from now—I really want to look back and say to you, hasn’t our country changed a lot already?

Good evening. Thank you very much to all of you.