Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the Philippine Business Opportunities Forum

[Delivered in Paris, France, on September 18, 2014]

There is a French word that perfectly encapsulates the state of the Philippine economy and that word is renaissance. My administration took office in 2010 with the clear mandate and intention of reversing the fortunes of our country—which had, for an entire decade, been kept in the darkness of apathy and hopelessness by an administration motivated only by self-service, as opposed to public service. From our very first day in office, we refocused the priorities of government, rekindling the true spirit of governance, and showing the Filipino people what it is like to have a government that works for them.

The strategy we used was simple. After all, our advantage as a nation is clear; our workers are blessed with inherent skill, talent, and creativity. From the onset, all they needed was to be empowered and put in a situation where they could display their capabilities. This is the reason behind our drive to invest in our people, foster a business climate in our country can attract investments, and to level the playing field in my country, and, by doing so, multiply the opportunities for our countrymen to make a decent living, and to show the world the true value of the Filipino worker, and the richness of the Philippines.

This is why one of our administration’s first messages to the world was that “the Philippines is once again open for business.” Since then, we have worked tirelessly to show that our country is truly worthy of your consideration. We rewrote the formula for success in the Philippines, from one where patronage and a willingness to bend the rules were necessary, to one that rewarded hard work, innovation, ingenuity, and abiding by the rules. We cut bureaucratic red tape to optimize the process of setting up shop in our country, and to likewise reduce opportunities for corruption. To do this, we put up the Philippine Business Registry, which gathers the business registration processes of multiple agencies into a one-stop shop. Now, registering a business in the Philippines only takes a maximum of three days–a process which once could take up to three months.

The world has also seen that when it comes to demolishing the culture of corruption, and instituting a regime of transparency in its place, the Philippines means business. A good example of our commitment is in the way we have revamped the way we spend our people’s money. I have always said that one of my most important jobs is the efficient allocation of resources, which is why my administration has implemented a program called the zero-based budgeting. This means that we take a closer look at each and every project, and make sure that every peso spent yields a tangible good for social or economic return on our investment. Furthermore, for the 2014 budget, we began using what we call a “Performance-Informed Budget”; alongside the budget numbers, one can now find information on the targets, or specific targets, of government agencies, together with their performance targets—which emphasizes their accountabilities to the public. May I add, that we have been criticized for being too detailed a list of things that we will be doing while spending the people’s money.

Another stark example of our anti-corruption commitment is our Department of Public Works and Highways. For the longest time, it was an agency that had a reputation as being a hotbed of corruption. However, in these past four years and three months, with Secretary Rogelio Singson at the helm, it has become one of our top performing agencies. And amongst the things that he did, one simple example: He eliminated the requirement for prospective bidders to submit a letter of intent to bid. The original purpose of this procedure has been lost in the mist of time. But what we found out was that it was used as a tool to facilitate collusion amongst prospective bidders, who would find out who their supposed competitors were, contact them, and rig the process. We decided to eliminate this requirement, making it difficult, if not outright impossible for unscrupulous people to collude in the bidding process, because they did not know who to collude with.

The strategy of our DPWH: Undergo the right projects, implemented by the right people, for the right quality and the right price, to be finished, for the final hour or right on time, if not earlier. One example of this strategy in action is an underpass we inaugurated in the heart of Metro Manila in 2012. The original allotted budget that we inherited was at P694.2 million. We reviewed it and did a more realistic costing; a level playing field and the elimination of graft further brought down the price to the winning bid of P430 million. On top of this, the project was completed a hundred days ahead of schedule, accelerating the benefits for more than a hundred thousand travelers every day. It has been this kind of transparency and efficiency that has allowed our Department of Public Works and Highways to save more than P27 billion as of May this year.

As one would expect, our good governance efforts have breathed new life into our economy. In 2013, the economy grew by 7.2 percent, making us one of the fastest growing economies in Asia. The business community—both domestic and international—has also noted the sea change in our country. The investments are pouring in; just look at our Philippine Economic Zone Authority. This was established in 1995—or 19 years ago—and yet, 41.9 percent of all the investments in these economic zones occurred during our administration, while the remaining 58 percent took 15 years to accumulate. International organizations have also noticed our comeback. Moody’s, Fitch, and Standard & Poor’s, for example, have unanimously declared the Philippines investment grade. Moreover, according to the World Economic Forum’s yearly Global Competitiveness Report, we have been the most improved country in terms of competitiveness since my term began. From 85th in 2010, we rose to 75th in 2011, to 65th in 2012, to 59th in 2013, and most recently to 52nd in 2014.

It is clear: the country formerly known as “the Sick Man of Asia,” is on an upward swing. Already, publications are calling us “Asia’s Bright Spot” or the “Next Asian Tiger.” And we are poised to sustain our momentum. This is why we have continued to increase our infrastructure spending—from around P200 billion just three years ago, to over P400 billion this year. On top of this, we are also set to enter a demographic sweet spot in 2015, with a majority of our population entering their most productive years; this we are told, will last for around 35 years. Just to give you an idea of how significant this is: Countries who have hit such a sweet spot averaged a yearly growth of 7.3 percent in the following ten years. Massive investments in education, both formal informal; the expansion of our national health insurance system, both in terms of the number of people and the diseases covered, will enable our countrymen to maximize being in this demographic sweet spot. They are now becoming more empowered to participate in economic growth.

Of course, we plan to take full advantage of this with more strategic investments in education and training. One can see this in the budget increases we have given to our Departments of Education and our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority. This has allowed us to eliminate the classroom backlog we inherited by building 66,813 classrooms in a short span of time; we did this while also erasing the 2.5 million backlog in school seats and the 61.7 million backlog in textbooks. We were also able to pass a law that expanded our basic education cycle, putting our educational system at par with global standards. TESDA, or the tech-voc sector, through its Training-for-Work Scholarship Program, has also been able to efficiently equip our people with the proper skills to find quality jobs. A recent study recorded that 68.5 percent of 2012 TWSP graduates found employment in an average of six months. Compare this to the figures from 2006 to 2008, when only 28.5 percent found jobs. Note that we have done all of these, without raising taxes, except for for the sin taxes, which are specifically geared towards health initiatives. These are the initiatives that are necessary in our pursuit of inclusive growth, so that the benefits of good governance and reform do not simply trickle down the social pyramid, but are felt immediately by each and every Filipino.

Indeed, our country’s momentum is stronger than it has ever been in recent memory, and we will not sit idly by; we will build on this momentum. I am here today to invite all of you to be part of our story—take a closer look at our country, study our prospects, and ultimately, take part in the Philippine renaissance that continues to win the admiration of the world. France and the Philippines are no strangers to each other; we only have to open a new, more vibrant chapter in commercial relations to expand on the people-to-people contacts we currently enjoy.

I remember, from when I was a child until my days in university, the principal writing instrument for students was the ubiquitous Bic ballpen. I was reminded of this when I met Prime Minister Valls; I was pleased to see that the Bic ballpen is still very prominent here, even if it has become less so, if not almost absent in the Philippines.

My mother also had a Renault 16 TX, a car that certainly had its own distinctive style and performance, and was such a pleasure to drive. Unfortunately, that brand is no longer distributed in the Philippines, though Peugeot has just been introduced.

I suppose the point of these recollections is to emphasize the reality: Yours is a matured, developed country, while ours has just been recently gaining momentum towards development. There is a natural synergy between our requirements and aspirations, and your strengths and capabilities. Together, let us maximize the opportunities before us, for the mutual benefit of our peoples.

Thank you and good day.

[ For more on the President’s European trip in September 2014, click here. ]