[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LrzqnZor0Do[/youtube]

[ Delivered at the Mandarin Oriental, Makati City on October 12, 2011 ]

Good morning. Please sit down.

Secretaries Ricky Carandang, Edwin Lacierda, Sonny Coloma, Ging Deles; Ms. Girlie Linao; Mr. John Meyer; Mr. Gabby Tabuñar; Excellencies and Members of the Diplomatic Corps; FOCAP Board of Trustees and Directors; esteemed members of the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines; representatives from the business sector and partners from international agencies; Chief of Staff General Eduardo Oban, Jr. and the major service commanders; fellow workers in government; honored guests; ladies and gentlemen.

It has been five years since a President has stood here to talk about pressing issues and to discuss key policies that will undoubtedly shape the near and distant future of this country. So I am pleased to be in attendance today—effectively ending the drought and reviving this important tradition.

Since its inception in 1974, FOCAP has stood firmly for freedom of the press. They did this at the height of martial law—a time when doing so had severe repercussions—when journalists who were choosing to do the right thing were being thrown in prison or, worse, murdered in cold blood. And yet this organization has weathered plots to gag reporters, or corrupt them. There were those who were much too ready to bend their ideals, and it would have been easy for FOCAP to follow suit and live fairly comfortable lives back then, but it came at the price of turning one’s back on the people, and they could not find it in themselves to do that.

Thus, allow me to say that I am deeply grateful for all this organization has done through the years, and that I will always respect what it stands for. It was very important to me that I attend this forum to have a good back-and-forth with reporters such as you. This is also a good opportunity for me to announce a few important things.

As you know, the global economy has undergone a bit of a slowdown recently; and there has been some question of how this will impact our economy. There are those who are worried, uncertain about what might happen, and perhaps with the rate at which some of the world’s economies are going, that’s perfectly understandable.

This slowdown is already making some impact on growth in the region, including the Philippines. Rest assured, the government is indeed working overtime to make certain that we do what must be done to maintain our economy’s momentum.

I have authorized additional expenditures of more than 72 billion pesos between now and the end of the year. This spending will provide added stimulus to our economy. Included here is a support fund for local government units, which I announced yesterday. This will be worth at least 6.5 billion pesos, which they can spend on infrastructure development, poverty alleviation, and other programs that can help their respective communities toward development.

This is only one part of it. This stimulus package will give an additional 10 billion pesos to resettle and relocate informal settlers and families in danger zones. We’re also allotting 5.5 billion on various infrastructure projects under the DPWH; and 4.5 billion and 1.868 billion will go to the improvement of the MRT and LRT respectively.

The criteria we used to choose these projects were simple. The stimulus will be spent on projects that will have high macroeconomic impact, and will help the poor.

The great thing is this: we’re not borrowing any additional money to fund these projects. The funds will come from the money we have saved and from our existing borrowing program. More than that, the effects of this stimulus package will be felt not just at the end of this year, but also in the first half of next year.

In addition to this stimulus package, we are also diversifying products and markets by strengthening trade with China and other BRICSAM countries, and other countries in the ASEAN to make up for slowdown in both the U.S. and Europe.

Many have said before that times of great difficulty also bring about great opportunity. Surely, one would consider at this point in time that the global economic slowdown is a formidable problem. But if history has taught us anything, it is that our capacity to become a great nation once more will be judged by how we confront these difficulties. So what I am saying today is we will not fold under the weight of these difficulties; and instead we will have opportunities to excel in. We will do what we can within the bounds of fiscal prudence to keep the economy growing and to make certain that the effects of this growth are felt more widely.

This is not the first time I have faced such difficulty. From the moment I stepped into office, I was faced with similar challenges. I looked at what I had been left with and I said: “Where do I start?” But true enough, those in our administration kept their focus, worked hard and honestly, took no shortcuts and pocketed no money, and eventually, after many sleepless nights, we found ways to turn challenge into opportunity.

While the current global economic climate is not necessarily conducive to growth, challenges such as this have not prevented us from progress before, and they will not prevent us from progress in the future. Yes, there are a number of causes for concern with how the global economy is doing, but the Philippine government is not afraid of acting on a problem just because it’s difficult.

Difficulty has never stopped the common Juan and Juana de la Cruz from striving to improve their situations. Any read-through of any history book tells us that much. Time and again in the past sixteen months, we have emerged triumphant from troublesome situations, and this economic uncertainty is no different. I know there will be long nights ahead, but if we stand under the banner of solidarity, work hard, and tap our creativity as Filipinos have been wont to do, then we will bring this country back to its rightful place in the sun.

Thank you. Good day.