Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During his visit to Romblon

Good morning. Please, let us all be seated.

I was a little nervous there, I thought my long-time colleague had forgotten who his friend was. [Laughter]

Secretary Babes Singson; Secretary Jun Abaya; Secretary Janette Garin; Undersecretary Renato Marfil; good Governor Lolong Firmalo; of course, also a long-time colleague in congress, Manong Budoy Madrona; Mayor Gerard Montojo; Vice Governor Jose Reano; those older than me in public service and in life, Governor Alfonso Boy Umali; [laughter and applause] most Reverend Narciso Avellana; local government officials present; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my beloved fellow provincemates:

[Applause] Good morning to all of you. [Applause]

My speech is a bit long today because this is my first time to visit Romblon. [Laughter and applause] My mother, as far as I remember, visited here especially during her term, but my mother had a policy back then: If the place to visit was an ally and a peaceful place, she would bring my younger sisters. If the place to visit had some problems, she would send me. [Laughter] So, to be honest, the marble table you gave to my mother is in our house in Tarlac, and until now it is still in good condition and still being used there—so thank you very much again. [Applause]

I already mentioned that: this is my first time to visit Romblon. Of course, I am excited to be with our beloved Romblomanons, [applause] first of all, of course, to personally thank you. Even though I haven't been here, your province trusted me and gave me the mandate to serve you—and on that note, I repeat, our heartfelt gratitude. Truly, with the warm welcome you showed, I feel like you consider us family—so again, thank you all. [Applause] I know that you deeply supported the straight path even during the 2010 elections, and until now, I still feel your trust as we reap the fruits of our reform agenda. Thank you very much to all our Bosses here, for your tireless cooperation and support.

Today's gathering is proof of the positive results of good governance. With the good relationship between the national and local governments, meaningful services are delivered to our countrymen. Let's look at the inspection we did earlier of the Romblon-Sawang-Agpanabat Provincial Road. What are its benefits? The former one-hour trip from the town proper of Romblon to Brgy. Sablayan will now be reduced to 30 minutes. It also provides additional benefits for fishermen who can transport their products fresher to the market. Just imagine the ordeal of our fishermen if the road is bumpy. Perhaps their freshly caught fish, before even reaching halfway, are already spoiled. It is not far-fetched that when they arrive at the market, the fresh fish they were supposed to sell will just be used as fish sauce. That's why it's good that Babes Singson is finishing all our roads and bridges. With a good road leading to the market, our fishermen can maximize the price of their catch. Aside from that, students going to school, our countrymen seeking medical attention, and other services for the advancement of the community can also travel faster and safer.

There's more good news about this road: The approved budget for it is P61.89 million. But because of a proper and honest bidding process, we estimate that we will only spend P56.63 million. The benefits are worth it, and we even saved money – which can be added to the projects that Manong Budoy mentioned earlier. [Applause] Our DPWH's target, by March, is for this to be usable by the people of Romblon.

Aside from this project, we are also finishing the rehabilitation of the Sibuyan Circumferential Road, which we plan to complete in May. We are also improving several parts [applause] of the San Jose Circumferential Road, [applause] and the road leading to the Sta. Fe-Guinbirayan Provincial Road [applause] to speed up access to the beaches of San Jose Island. Earlier, Babes Singson mentioned to me that San Jose and Santa Fe are quite close to Boracay. Bohol will be the next Boracay, maybe we'll be in Panglao – and after Panglao, maybe this one in San Jose and Santa Fe, and in 2016, perhaps because we have many infrastructure projects underway towards tourism; maybe I'll be a tourist there in 2016. [Applause] Perhaps around July 5th.

We are also nearing completion of the concreting of the Romblon-Cogon-Sablayan Road.

We ensure the high quality of the projects we are undertaking. We will not allow them to be easily damaged by disasters. In connection with this, it is admirable that zero casualties were recorded here in Romblon despite the onslaught of past typhoons, including Yolanda and Ruby. And again, we commend your leaders here under the leadership of Manong Lolong Firmalo and Manong Budoy Madrona, and all our colleagues in the local government. [Applause] This good news reflects the unity and good relationship between the government and the people during times of calamities. We truly salute the leadership of proven leaders, as we have mentioned, Governor Lolong Firmalo and Congressman Budoy Madrona. [Applause]

The projects we mentioned are just a part of our extensive strategy to develop the infrastructure sector. The P175.4 billion fund that your government allocated for infrastructure in 2011 more than doubled in 2014, when we poured P442.3 billion into these projects. This has increased further in 2015, where the budget for infrastructure nationwide has reached P562.3 billion. [Applause]

Under the leadership of Secretary Babes Singson, the reforms in the DPWH are being effectively implemented. The money from the people goes to the people, and not into the pockets of a few opportunists. [Applause] Due to the transparent bidding process and proper implementation of projects, the DPWH’s savings from July 2010 to October 2014 have reached almost P39 billion. [Applause] Truly, in the fight against corruption, and in implementing reforms, we are empowered to promote widespread transformation in various sectors.

Earlier, we launched the marker for the improved Romblon Provincial Hospital, which now serves 17 municipalities and 350,000 people. We built new buildings here and added modern equipment for broader and more effective medical services. The improvement of this hospital is part of the Health Facilities Enhancement Program of the Department of Health. [Applause] Since 2010, the funds we have allocated here amount to almost P264 million.

You know, earlier, Governor Firmalo mentioned that you already have four doctors. I know that Romblon has three large islands. So, it seems we have almost one doctor per island [laughter] who will work 365 [days] 24/7. It’s forbidden to get sick; forbidden to rest; and forbidden to eat so they can attend to patients. The 25 is a considerable help, but think about it, in four years—half of our term—we managed to bring and convince those 25. So, the suffering of our bosses has probably been lessened, which is really what we should aim for: to lessen and lessen the suffering.

Of course, we also have our Sitio Electrification program. Through this initiative, we are bringing light to thousands of sitios across the country. For example, we received news here in Romblon: Of our target of 454 sitios, we have already lit up 315. [Applause] You can rest assured: we will complete the electrification of the remaining sitios as soon as possible.

You know, I will ask for a little forgiveness, there are only a few sitios that we need to light up – the ones I inherited were only 36,000 sitios throughout the Philippines. One million pesos, as I recall, per sitio to be lit up. So you do the math as to how long that will take. At least here, we are at more or less 70 percent. When I get back, I will ask the NEA, “When will the remaining ones be finished?” Of course, we don’t want to pass on to our successor the headache that was passed on to me, and it should instead bring relief to the people. [Applause]

We are also continuously improving the Tablas Airport in Alcantara, as well as the ports in Magdiwang, San Fernando, Sta. Fe, and Alcantara again. In agriculture, we have completed the repair and rehabilitation of the irrigation in San Fernando in 2013, and in Looc last year.

We can confidently invest funds in infrastructure because we know that it is a source of economic growth. When roads are better, the flow of products and services to the market is faster; businesses grow, which in turn creates jobs, and generates widespread development.

Another sector that is a source of opportunity here in Romblon is tourism. That's why, in addition to improving infrastructure, we are laying out programs to further attract tourists. These include conducting Capacity Building Programs for our tourism officers and frontliners, improving tourism parks, and projects that further enhance the beauty of your province.

I would just like to emphasize that in tourism, you don't need to study a lot to participate. As they say, every tourist who comes to our country creates one job. So, what we are aiming for is to really make it appealing for tourists to come here to speed up the creation of jobs for our countrymen who are currently lacking employment.

Let me be clear: In every project we implement, we consider the welfare of the majority. This is a strategic action of the government to deliver benefits to those who need them most, and to empower them to contribute to development. Important here is the good relationship between local and national government. In this way, we can identify the real problems in the province, and provide the right solutions. You know, I was with Governor Lolong and Congressman Budoy in Congress before – but of course, they were slightly ahead of me. [Laughter] Even if we sometimes have different views on some issues, even if we have our own advocacies, we accept this because it is just part of our democracy. Despite this, we never fought. That's why we have full trust in their excellent service for the benefit of the Romblomanon people. [Applause]

There are people, especially now, who were already attacking me even before we took office. If I don't speak, they speak for me, then they criticize what they say I should have said. But, here with our leaders here, let me repeat, we never fought. We could debate on the issues discussed, but we never fought; not even once did we resort to personal attacks.

Of course, we also have colleagues in the service who, even if they are not politicians, are really doing their best for Romblon. As I mentioned, this is my first visit here. What I know about Romblon is based only on the Romblomanons I've met. There's our frequent companion, your capable fellow provincial, Usec. Rey Marfil, [applause] whose real name is Renato. As a journalist, Rey is the one in charge of coordinating with our colleagues in the media. Sometimes, I feel like he's also a sideline reporter for you at Malacañang [laughter]; he always talks about the beauty of your province, and he always reminds me of your needs.

We are impressed by Rey's life story. His beginnings were simple; life wasn't luxurious back then. His parents worked hard and he helped himself reach where he is now. As the youngest of five siblings, he helped his farmer father take care of their water buffalo. I was also told that he would fish just to have something to eat. When he went to Manila for college, Rey didn't hesitate to become a working student. After graduating, he became a well-known journalist and commentator. And now he's also a TV personality, serving with us in the government and for the country. [Applause] He used to be on the side of those criticizing bad governance. Now, he's the one defending against relentless, and often meaningless, criticisms. He told me: it's easiest to complain, and hardest to promote what is right. That's why sometimes, even though he's younger than me, I notice my hair is getting thicker than his. [Laughter]

You know, Rey is a pleasant person to talk to, but he's serious when it comes to work. He is truly skilled and reliable in his field. He won't give you a report as thick as a PLDT directory just to say what he wants to say, especially in response to a question. When he reports, his analysis is simple and accurate; there's no beating around the bush and his statements are clear.

To be honest: He could have stayed in his industry, where the income is higher, the responsibilities are fewer, and there's more time for himself and his family. But Rey chose not to be selfish, and to join us in fulfilling the reform agenda. [Applause] As you know, we have what is currently called a campaign-politics style, which they call mediacentric. What that means is that to effectively convey the message, it's important not only what you say, but also how you look when you say these meaningful words. That's why Rey isn't just our helper in the media, sometimes he also becomes our fashion stylist. [Laughter] We are really that resourceful in the government, we don't have funds for a fashion stylist.

Let me reiterate: Everything I told you is not just fiction, but my true experiences with Rey. That is why, if people like him become leaders in the future, [applause] we will really not doubt his ability to advance your interests and the progress of your province, or even the entire Philippines. That is why it is not surprising that someone like him is blessed by God with an exemplary spouse.

I heard that there is a fiesta here today, and today marks the start of the parade for your miraculous Sto. Niño. There is nothing wrong if I also hope: If only I could free my beloved. [Cheers and applause] It needs to happen within an hour – I only have about an hour here. [Laughter]

Before I finish, let's go back to where we started. Because I wasn't invited much in the past, and I wasn't able to do house-to-house campaigns here during the presidential campaign, perhaps you only heard my platforms in short commercials. There were also criticisms against me, just to discredit us and prevent us from winning. And even if we are not partymates with some of your leaders here, you still helped and trusted me to push for meaningful change.

Now, with your unity in honest governance, we are able to lay the foundation for opportunities not only for Romblon, but for the entire country. Our economy continues to move forward. In total: we have achieved 21 positive credit rating actions since we assumed office. This includes being granted investment grade status for the first time by three of the most prestigious credit rating agencies in the world. The benefit of this: We operate with a deficit but we can now borrow at a lower cost because our credit rating has increased and our risk has decreased; more businessmen are encouraged to invest in the country, which creates jobs for many Filipinos. With the continued growth of our GDP, we are given the ability to deliver immediate benefits to our countrymen.

There is the clearing of the backlog of textbooks, chairs, and classrooms we inherited; the thousands of TESDA scholars who were helped to secure decent jobs; the expanded services and increased beneficiaries of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program; the pouring of funds for the modernization of our military; and the promotion of lasting peace in Mindanao. Those who do not hear the good news in our country are deliberately deafening themselves. Those who do not see the change are deliberately blinding themselves. And those who do not progress with advancement are pretending to sleep.

Some are asking us: Do you have any apprehension about stepping down from office? My response: None. On the straight and narrow path, we have reached a better state of the country and our fellow Filipinos. You created this opportunity, and we, the 100 million Filipinos, will ensure that we do not return to corrupt practices. Through unity, we have achieved change, so even if I leave office, the transformation of society will surely continue as long as our Bosses lead the fight. [Applause]

All of our achievements on the straight and narrow path in the past four years and more were not achieved in an instant. This is the result of tireless compassion, trust, and contribution. Now, what was once thought impossible is happening. Those who once lorded over others and abused their positions are now being held accountable. The change that was once elusive is now being enjoyed. In the remaining time in our term, we will continue to serve our Bosses, the people. And if you believe that we are on the right path now, it is in your hands to ensure that the straight and narrow path continues even after our term. Let us not gamble with our welfare and the future of our children with leaders we doubt, with people who are all show and all promises. Let us choose those who will surely continue what we have started well. With the participation of every Filipino, with our commitment to promote positive change, we will further concretize our collective aspiration: To make widespread progress permanent, the progress we are now enjoying.

Let me repeat: Here in Romblon, my peace of mind is truly strengthened. Even though we haven't met, I believe you made the right choice in 2010 and the change here, I suppose you can look in the mirror and say, “We are the reason for this change.” [Applause] You have done it; there is no reason why you cannot do it again.

Good day. Thank you very much to all of you.