Good evening.

Standing amongst you today, I cannot help but recall an instance from earlier in my life, when I and my lone security staff member decided to cook for ourselves. Being a typical Filipino male, who did not grow up in the kitchen, you can imagine that this was quite a daunting task. The first thing we prepared was instant soup, which, in our country, is normally found in powdered form. The instructions, if I remember them correctly, seemed simple and complete: Pour contents and dissolve thoroughly in a cup of water, pour mixture into a pot of boiling water, stir continuously, and add an egg if so desired.

However, my aide and I ran into trouble: the water kept boiling over, so we spent half the time changing to bigger and bigger pots, and cleaning the gas range due to all the spills that took place. Of course, we also got burned here and there. Eventually, we were able to sit down and enjoy our meal, starting with the soup. To this day, for the life of me, I could not understand why it tasted burnt,  especially when the mixture was 80 percent—or 90 percent—water. This tells me that I should be collecting plenty of calling cards tonight to try and seek education from the brilliant chefs present today.

In all seriousness, whether in ancient or present times, food has been a fundamental part of the Filipino identity. In typical Filipino households, for instance, meals are sacrosanct, and you better have a very good reason if you are absent during mealtime, especially when you are growing up. Even when you have your own families, you are still expected to go to large family reunions not just with your immediate family, but with your extended family, in which the meal is the central activity. Even during our fiestas, one is expected to invite those they do not even know to their houses to partake in a meal. And one trait that I find really unique to us is that, during any of these meals we have together, part of the discussion always deals with food: whether it is about dishes we consumed before, dishes consumed at present, or dishes one would want to consume in the future.

Any thorough analysis of our cuisine would reveal it as an amalgamation of various influences, whether it is Spanish, Chinese, Mexican, Japanese, American, and given the Filipino diaspora, so many other influences. During your stay here, you will find that the gastronomic vocabulary of every Filipino is very cosmopolitan: from paella to shumai, from cheeseburgers to arroz a la cubana—which doesn’t exist in Cuba.  Perhaps for this reason, Filipinos have become one of the most adventurous in terms of creating and consuming new dishes.

This is the context in which we welcome Madrid Fusion to the Philippines. Each day, when we read the newspapers or watch news programs, we receive what seems to be the normal fare of conflicts, pandemics, and tensions in so many different places. In a world where so many seem intent to divide us, food allows us to engage one another in a positive manner. After all, can we ever imagine a scenario where good food has produced a hostile reaction that led to violence, except maybe among chefs?  Is the reverse not true; that partaking in a good meal normally sets a good tone and a good mood? Food is one of the most accessible ways of exchanging cultures, which leads to greater understanding and cooperation between our peoples. It is for this reason that we thank Madrid Fusion for choosing to hold their first event in Southeast Asia here in our country .

I am hopeful that, in the coming days, all of you can enjoy everything our country has to offer. In fact, I invite all of you to please stay a little longer after the conclusion of your work-related events. After all, 2015 is Visit the Philippines Year, and I am certain that the Secretary of Tourism himself—the Honorable Mon Jimenez—will gladly prepare an itinerary so that you can truly see why everything, including eating, is more fun in the Philippines.

With your indulgence, may I try a little Spanish, in honor of my grandmother, who hopefully will not visit me later tonight.

Now, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, I have the pleasure of inviting you to partake in the most important and beautiful part of this evening, the food and cultural program, highlighting the best of the Philippines. Enjoy your meal to all! Good evening.

[And now, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, I have the pleasure of inviting you to participate in the most important and  pleasant part of this evening, the food and the cultural presentation, highlighting the best of the Philippines. Enjoy everyone! Good evening.]