Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during his visit to Tawi-Tawi

We learned that “Tawi-Tawi” comes from the Malay word “jauh” or “jaui-jaui.” Apparently, it means “far, far away.” [Laughter] Like in a fairy tale my mother used to read, in a land far, far away. In a way, that’s true: this is one of the most distant provinces in our archipelago. However, that does not mean that our Bosses here will be far from the service of your government. We believe: wherever you are in the Philippines—in Luzon, Visayas, or Mindanao, in the cities or in remote areas—whatever the needs of our Bosses are, that is what we must address.

Just a while ago, we passed by and inspected three bridges in Barangay Sanga-Sanga and Barangay Lapid-Lapid. As I said, your province is truly progressing. The only question that lingers in our minds: why are the names of your places doubled and repeated? [Applause] In Tawi-Tawi, there’s Sanga-Sanga, Lapid-Lapid, and there’s also Batu-Batu. [Laughter] I said, it’s a good thing that your government is also working doubly hard, [applause] so that your problems here won’t be repeated, and the progress of your province, and of the entire ARMM region, will be continuous.

I spoke with Gov. Nurbert Sahali earlier: he said that the supply of clean and potable water in Panglima Sugala has been a long-standing problem. So, on the Straight Path, we strived to find a solution for it. Your good former governor was very diligent, he gave me a study, as thick as a dictionary. The plan is here, the water source is here, the method to solve your water problem is here. But when he gave it to me, he was very diligent… You know, when I entered this office, what was left in our budget was less than seven percent. That means, more than 93 percent was used by my predecessor in the first six months of 2010, so I had to make do with the remaining six percent. I asked him then, “Gov, how much do we need there?” He said, “Just a little. About P400 million.” I said, “Let’s save up first, Gov.” [Laughter] My father taught me, if you make a promise, whether it’s difficult or easy, you must fulfill it. [Applause]

Under the leadership of DPWH Secretary Babes Singson, we are implementing the Integrated Tawi-Tawi Water Supply System Project. Its Phase 1, worth P126.4 million, is in Panglima Sugala. The delay in its construction was brought to our attention, due to the lack of two water pumps. Sec. Babes and Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA) Administrator Andres Ibarra have already discussed this. Good news: LWUA has committed to releasing P8 million within two weeks to install the pumps and generator sets, [applause] so that it can be utilized. I would like to apologize for this administrator of LWUA; like me, he inherited a huge amount of debt. On his side, LWUA had many cash advances that he encountered. According to COA, before you are given additional funds, you must first liquidate all of that. But he didn't make any advances, so he is worried about how to liquidate what didn't pass through his hands. But he was able to find a way with the help of our local government together with Gov. Nurbert, so I believe we can expedite our need for that water supply.

Phase 2, worth P173.6 million, is here in Bongao. According to LWUA, they will be completing the program of works, and as soon as possible, its construction will also begin. Someone might tell you: You asked for P400 million, you gave P300 million? That P400 million was measured by someone else. The one with the sharper pencil, Babes Singson, said we can do it for P300 million.

In addition to this, we also have Bottom Up Budgeting projects that aim to address the problem of drinking water supply here in Tawi-Tawi. In 2013, we implemented six projects worth P26.24 million. In 2014, we are now implementing six more projects for the supply of clean water, with a total value of P25.7 million.

I also mentioned earlier the three bridges we went through. These are along the Sanga-Sanga-Lapid-Lapid-Saldang Road, [laughter] where we have completed two sections, and only one is still under construction. The Panglima Sugala-Kapatagan Road is also finished; the Batu-Batu-Tarawakan Road, and the Lapid-Lapid-Kamagong-Bacung-Maraning-Languyan Road, are being built. [Applause] Aside from the roads and bridges, we are also focusing on your airport and ports. We aim to develop your Sanga-Sanga Airport, to facilitate transportation here in your area and boost your tourism.

You know, during my mother’s time, she brought me here to Tawi-Tawi. When I look at it, I say, “I remember that mountain.” You can see it from Zamboanga, Tawi-Tawi. But this airport, I don’t remember it. I remember it being just grassland. It’s really showing my age. But what I can say is, earlier… Sec. Abaya, it looks like you did a good job there. Because at NAIA, when you go to Manila, our runway feels like it has many humps. Here, your runway is very flat, very level. [Applause] We will send the MIAA administrator so they can see that this is how a runway should be.

We will buy additional land for your airport expansion, including runway widening and extension. [Applause] The total cost of the project is P826 million. P248 million of that is already in our 2015 budget; the remaining P578 million, we have already submitted to the 2016 budget. Of course, it will be up to you to ask the landowners that since it is certain that the land will be bought, they shouldn’t raise the price.

We will also continue the development of your ports. This includes Mapun Port, Bongao Port, Sitangkai Port, and the famous Batu-Batu Port. All of this is to boost commerce in your province and region, and to increase the income of our countrymen.

Let’s add this: Under the leadership of the Department of Energy, we are continuously looking for alternative sources of energy. That’s why we are pleased to have installed a Solar Panel System at Batu-Batu National High School with the help of the public and private sectors.

The difference between then and now is truly significant. And this isn't just talk: If you total the infrastructure funds allocated by the DPWH and ARMM from 2006 to 2010 for Tawi-Tawi, it will only amount to P914 million. Under our current administration, for five years from 2011 to 2015, it has reached P3.81 billion. The magnitude of the change is even more evident when we look at the data for the entire ARMM region. In the same category and period: The previous administration allocated only P8.75 billion in funds for ARMM infrastructure; under us, it has reached P37.67 billion. More than four times as much. That's what we mean by difference and change. We increased the budget without raising taxes.

As Sec. Babes also told us, we have reached the physical limitations of building new projects. He said that with the length of the list of projects we are undertaking, the contractors are already stretched; even carpenters, plumbers, and electricians are in short supply, as are other specialized skills. The roads that have been cleared also need to wait to compact before being paved with cement. You may have noticed, especially the approaches to the bridges, they are still sandy. Why is that? You know what that was before, swamp lands. We need to strengthen the foundation first. It needs to go through two rainy seasons to become stable, then you can apply asphalt first before concrete because we believe that when vehicles pass, there will still be some settling. It’s easier to repair asphalt than concrete. But after it has really settled, we will use concrete. Now you will say, “When will that happen?” Well, I probably won’t be around to see it because I only have about nine months left. So, I’ll just whisper to whoever replaces me, especially if they are my friend. But if they are my critic, our whisper might be useless. If we just add to it, there’s a chance it will just be destroyed. That’s why, instead of rushing, we choose to do what is right, so that we don’t pass the problem on to others.

Regarding the welfare of our Bosses in Muslim Mindanao, we also ensure that no one is left behind. When we entered office in June 2010—just a reminder, it was the end of June, June 30—there were 109,973 beneficiary households of Pantawid Pamilya in ARMM. Since August of this year, this number has not only doubled, but has increased fourfold: we now have 441,782 beneficiary households. In terms of health: According to data from the Office of the Regional Governor, the 1.08 million PhilHealth beneficiaries we found in 2010 has increased to over 4.4 million this year.

Recently, I spoke with Gov. Lala Talino-Mendoza and Gov. Angel Amante-Matba. They were right about what they told me: the local areas and the national government are very different now. Lack of funds is no longer a problem now; local governments are truly important in our Daang Matuwid campaign. You are lucky here in Tawi-tawi because of the leadership of Gov. Nurbert Sahali. I said he really inherited something from his father. We all know former Gov. Sadikul Sahali Sr. who was always ready to help others. [Applause] We also know that when it comes to governance, he always sided with what is right and the welfare of the majority. And in front of you—and this isn’t just because I’m in Tawi-tawi—frankly, I believe that Gov. Sadikul during his time was the easiest to talk to in the entire ARMM. [Applause] If my hair has thinned, he had nothing to do with it. [Laughter]

As I said in my last SONA: This is just the beginning. These achievements are just a glimpse of what the people can accomplish as they traverse the Straight Path. The question now is: Is there anyone who wants to stop progress and the rise of roads, bridges, buildings, airports, ports, and other infrastructure in your region? Is there anyone who wants to halt the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, and deprive our poorest countrymen of education and healthcare? Is there anyone who will oppose the advancement of the Straight Path, and maneuver the country back to a crooked system, where the corrupt reign, and the people are left behind?

Just now, our council member for tourism mentioned that the number of domestic tourists you had here in Tawi-tawi before was very high: 200 people. 200 per year. That means you didn't even have one tourist per day. Now, I heard 60,000 from you, is that right? And that’s just the beginning. Once the BBL is passed into law, you might have a new problem – too many tourists here. [Applause]

I was just thinking. Once I find mine, I might become a tourist here, if that’s in the next ten years. If it’s in the next thirty years, it might be too far when we’re already in wheelchairs.

The direction we will take in the coming year is clear: Continue, defend, and expand the Straight Path. This is the path where no one single person conducts the country—we are all part of it; we all have the ability to contribute to the progress of each other and of the entire nation. And because you are the Boss, you made the change, and you will also continue all of this.

Indeed, “Sama” is what you call yourselves in your local language. It is truly only through unity that we can uplift our fellow countrymen; [applause] only through unity can we fulfill the promise and maximize the potential of Mindanao; only through our unity as Filipinos can we achieve our collective dreams. So, Bosses: Let's work together to achieve this goal, let's all be Filipinos so that together we can progress. [Applause]

My nervousness is gone. I said, ‘If I make a mistake here, maybe the person I’m praising will come out looking bad, and a cheap one at that, and you will be better.’ But it seems we understood each other.

Let me repeat: Earlier, when I was a little hesitant, they kept saying to me, “Thank you, thank you, thank you.” Why are you thanking me? I should be thanking you because we have truly changed society because you gave me the opportunity. [Applause]

Let me repeat: In English, there’s a song that says, “You ain’t seen nothing yet.” Imagine, before you would ride a ferry maybe once a day, sometimes it wouldn’t even run. Now you have a road; you have an alternative, a better flow of your products to commercial centers. Tourists were 200 before, now there are 60,000, and that’s even without the BBL. The point is, we are really starting to have opportunities. In all my travels around the country, I’ve heard so many people say, “Back then, it was just a dream to have a road. Back then, our hospital was like the Mona Lisa.” I asked, “Why the Mona Lisa?” I told my mother that. My mother said to the congressman who said that, “Mr. Congressman, how’s your hospital?” The congressman said, “It’s like Mona Lisa, ma’am.” My mother continued, “I don’t understand.” “Well you just lie there, and you die there.” [Laughter] That’s what it meant.

When I went to Apayao, someone told me that if someone gets sick, they have to walk for two days through the forest to reach the hospital. And this wasn't 100 years ago, it was recent. Many have reportedly been buried in the forest because they didn't make it to the hospital. Even the governor told me, “Here, the trend is to have a beautiful ambulance before you get sick.” A beautiful ambulance? “Of course, we don't have a hospital to go to here, so you have to rush to Ilocos or rush to Cagayan. So if your ambulance is ugly, the person really has no chance.” Now, they say that neighboring areas are sending patients to them. They no longer go to neighboring areas themselves.

Let me repeat: I told you at the beginning that when I step down from office, we should have gone far. We have already gone quite far throughout the Philippines, but I will repeat: This is just the beginning. It's like we are only in the first grade. And as was said: Choose wisely. The changes in our society, you might be surprised by the speed in the next administration if we choose correctly.

And before I finish, to those of you wearing t-shirts with the “Liberal” brand, thank you. You may have noticed mine, I don't have one. This is because it's leftover from the 2010 election. Actually, even our Party President doesn't seem to have one either. When we get home, that's the first thing we'll do, we'll look for t-shirts so we can match.

Good afternoon to all of you. Thank you very much.