[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btobG5cRO0M&[/youtube]

Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the Philippine premiere of “Rescue in the Philippines: Refuge from the Holocaust”

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañan Palace on August 7, 2014]

Allow me, first of all, to welcome you to Malacañan Palace. For a few of our honored guests returning to the Philippines on this visit, it is a very different building from the Malacañan you may remember before the Second World War, and even after it—when the Bombing of Manila devastated our capital, and left the Palace as the only major government building still standing.

We are told for instance that out of a population of about 12 million, we lost about a million of our countrymen because of World War 2.

Today, Malacañan Palace is a far more extensive structure: One that has witnessed the development of a nation—from being a place where foreigners ruled, to being the home of our own elected leaders; from the Marcos dictatorship and the eventual restoration of democracy, to the present, where we are seeing the positive transformation of the Philippines. The story of Malacañan Palace will always be tied with the story of the Filipino people—and also, though unbeknownst to many, with the story of more than a thousand Jewish men, women, and children of Europe.

In the mid-to-late 1930s, the Nazis were only beginning to display the violence against the Jewish people that would later become manifest, in its terrible entirety, as the Holocaust. Though the Philippines was thousands of miles removed from these events, our forefathers knew that oppression like this could not go unnoticed. Large crowds participated in public protests against Nazi actions—and the solidarity of Filipinos did not stop there. Through the leadership of then-President Manuel Quezon, the work of the Frieder brothers, and the help of High Commissioner Paul McNutt, and then-Colonel Dwight D. Eisenhower, it became the policy of the Philippine government to allow the immigration of Jewish refugees into the country. I am told that the Philippines was prepared to accept thousands of refugees but due to circumstances beyond control, only around 1,200 were able to arrive and make new lives in Manila.

It must have been difficult for these refugees to start anew so far from their homeland—in a country that, I am told, many of them were unfamiliar with. In a sense, my family and I know what this is like. We left our home in the Philippines, which was then under the oppression of the Marcos dictatorship, and found sanctuary in Boston. However different the situation may be, the sadness of being torn away from familiar surroundings can be tempered by the warmth and friendship you encounter in a strange environment, which our countrymen demonstrated to our Jewish friends. Here in the Philippines, strengthened by the hospitality they received, these refugees were able to start fresh—to work, study, worship, and live alongside Filipinos.

In fact, in a book written by the Jesuit historian Fr. Horacio de la Costa, there appears a letter from an unnamed Jew, addressed to the then-Mayor of Manila. In this letter, this man makes an appeal on behalf of the hundreds of children who were wandering the streets at the time. Let me emphasize: This was in the middle of war. Just like anyone else, this man would have had to contend with hunger, with illness, and with the oppression of the ruling forces—but still, he chose to look beyond himself, to propose ways to help feed those starving children, and to volunteer himself to assist in this endeavor—ready to sacrifice whatever he had in those very difficult times. He was motivated by nothing less than the solidarity that Filipinos had earlier shown him and his people, and in his own words, “I am still a foreigner, a man without a country, but my gratitude and love to the Filipinos encouraged me to send this letter to you.”

I believe that this man’s letter distills into a few important lessons the story of the Jewish escape to Manila. First, that it is the imperative of all men to take a stand against wrongdoing, wherever it may be. Second, that we must do our part to provide a new life, a better life, to all those who would be deprived of life, whether by tyranny, or by poverty. And last, that the measure of our humanity is our ability to give of ourselves, even, and perhaps most importantly, when it hurts.

A few of our guests have already lived through this story and have seen its lessons in practice in their lives. The rest of us can be heartened by the fact that, as we look back on our shared history and rekindle old friendships, we can see striking similarities to the relationships we are forging today. I take this opportunity to extend our gratitude to Russ Hodge, Cindy Scott, Dr. Barbara Sasser, and Peggy Ellis, the rest of the team behind “Rescue in the Philippines,” and other Jewish organizations for their generous assistance, especially after typhoon Haiyan struck our country—from arranging for the donation of, my writers tell me, $2.5 million worth of prosthetics, to raising around $1.4 million for the survivors of the typhoon.

I believe that, in this aspect at least, history comes full circle. Today, we pay tribute to that remarkable time in Philippine history within the walls of Malacañan Palace, the seat of Manuel Quezon’s presidency—that which ensured that those who fled Nazism could find a home in our country. We Filipinos, who once extended a helping hand to our Jewish brothers and sisters in the face of oppression, now receive the same, as we work to build back better and overcome emerging challenges in the wake of Haiyan. Thus, it is my sincere hope that all those who watch this documentary, whether here today or in classrooms and homes in the coming years, will continue this virtuous cycle—will continue to make the choice to always help their fellowmen, whatever the future may bring.

Now I get to the part where I beg your indulgence of ad-libbing a little, hopefully my writers will not be too scared. [Laughter] Martial law was declared when I was a boy of 12-years old, and our world turned topsy-turvy. And I have to confess, this was the point in time—emerging, or just starting to be a pre-teen—when my love for reading, for instance, really got nurtured.

And to be honest with you, amongst the books that I was truly interested in, were a lot of the books by an author called Leon Uris, who talked about the Jewish struggle. And of course, the movies—like Exodus, and Cast a Giant Shadow, which I tend to watch every now and then—they tell of the struggle; they tell of doing with very little and accomplishing so much. Also later on, probably when we were already in Boston, I got to see a film talking about the uprising in the Warsaw ghetto.

Especially in the darkest moments of the Martial Law Era, when I, at some points, I asked my father, “Why is it that if we are fighting for the truth, and for that which is right, there seems to be too little of our countrymen joining us?” And we do see in the experience of people facing oppression a commonality of what they have to undergo, the sufferings that they have to undertake, and the strengthening of the character and the resolve that eventually leads to the triumph of right over wrong. And perhaps I can say publicly, that it is all of these books, these movies, these discussions, truly were very significant influences on me and perhaps it also gives me insight on how to govern these days.

For instance, in the film on the Jewish uprising in the Warsaw ghetto, the very significant portion of the film dealt with all of the conflicts between those who were pacifists, those who were aiming or agitating for armed uprising, and everybody in between who couldn’t decide which way to go to. It does tell me that our process of consensus building really is the process that we have to undertake, if we are to have the solid foundation to have long lasting changes in this country.

Perhaps, I can end by a quote, attributed to Pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer who’s a German Lutheran pastor and also a concentration camp victim. And this, I believe I first heard it from my father, really set the tone for a lot of directions that I also try to live by: “First they came for the Communists, but I was not a Communist so I did not speak out. Then they came for the Socialists and the Trade Unionists, but I was neither, so I did not speak out. Then they came for the Jews, but I was not a Jew so I did not speak out. And when they came for me, there was no one left to speak out for me.”

And you know, perhaps not just about the Jewish people, but growing up in a household we had a Russian descendant, and it turns out, I asked my father, “Why are there so many Russians in our country.” Then he tells me that after the Russian Revolution, a lot of the white Russians made the Philippines their home, and a lot of them actually wound up in Central Luzon.

Later on, after the Vietnam War era, the Philippines again became host to a lot of refugees—the so-called Vietnamese boat people.

It is ironic in a sense because our immigration laws are some of the most stringent, but whenever there is an emergency it seems our country—through various decades and various epochs, has always stood up to address the needs of their fellow men. This we hope to encourage further, and hopefully rekindling our memories of the history, or our farthest shared history, will enliven the dedication of the generations present and to come, that this is really a shared responsibility.

Thank you for your patience, good afternoon.