Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the gathering with local government leaders of Cebu.

Let us all be seated.

I practiced earlier, I was going to practice it in front of you. But we are short on time, it’s no longer appropriate.

Of course, first of all, good morning to all of you. [Cheers] But I am also prepared if it becomes: Good noon. But there are still about eight minutes left.

This is a bit long. I need to read this. Excuse me. Kapampangan is not easy to translate into Cebuano. So if there are any mistakes here, it’s my fault. If this is correct, Agnes taught me how to say this properly, especially JunJun Davide.

That was a while ago (is that right)… you laughed. It seems wrong right away. During the campaign, I already knew that there were many beautiful people here in Cebu. But now, there are even more beautiful people here. [Cheers] Do you agree with that? Thank you very much.

Of course, I will first greet our governor, Agnes Magpale, and also thank her for her proper management—Cebu is peaceful, our countrymen here are taken care of, although there are other sectors who want to create drama and say that it is tense in Cebu. It doesn’t seem right.

Of course, we wouldn’t be here if our provincial party chair, JunJun Davide, hadn’t worked hard. I think I can guarantee to you how humble he is now, he might be even more humble after the election.

Secretary Mar Roxas; Secretary Jun Abaya; Secretary Edwin Lacierda; of course, Mayor Jonas Cortez; our congressmen, Luigi Quisumbing, Tommy Osmeña, of course, Red Durano; our honorable Senator Koko Pimentel; honorable representative, Sonny Angara;

Our allies and companions on the straight and narrow path: led by Jun Magsaysay; Jamby Madrigal; Risa Hontiveros; honorable Mark Villar, representing his mother Cynthia; former Chief Justice Hilario “Jun” Davide; our strong and always able local government officials, allies from before to now and hopefully in the future; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my beloved countrymen; my dear relatives (we have more Cebuano speakers now):

We went to Cebu, first of all, to inaugurate the Austal Philippine Shipbuilding in Balamban. This is their third shipyard in the world, and they chose to build it in the Philippines because of their trust in the diligence and skill of Filipinos. We attend many inaugurations like this, and each one is a symbol of the fruits of our efforts in recent years. It reflects the positive results of taking the straight and narrow path: the entry of businesses and the creation of jobs and livelihoods for Filipinos.

There is a big difference in the confidence they show now, compared to the fear and anxiety that prevailed when they only heard about corruption in our country. Therefore, the decision of the people to unite in our pledge that without corruption, there will be no poverty, is truly bearing fruit.

And I thought: I can't visit Cebu without meeting our party mates here, right? Because if it weren't for the Cebuanos, we might not be president now—there might have been martial law and we would have been imprisoned. You remember, we were in the opposition back then. But because you trusted us, you gave us the opportunity to change our society.

It's simple what I want to convey to you: every success of the government; all the good news that the nation receives—from forging a peace agreement in Mindanao to the successive rise to record highs in the stock exchange; from the influx of tourists and the successive endorsements of international magazines that truly say “It’s more fun in the Philippines” to the historic one trillion collection of the BIR—all of this, every member of the Liberal Party and our allies, including all of you, are part of these successes.

It seems like only yesterday that we chose to take the straight and narrow path, and in just two years and six months, we have already achieved so much. Despite this, some still say that life in the Philippines is difficult—that the prices of goods are still high or that there are still not enough jobs. I do not question this. I just don't fully agree and we are not perfect. And we still have a lot to do together, and it is clear that we are still far from the finish line.

Perhaps what they forget to ask: is there anyone who will question that we are moving forward in the right direction? Do they even remember where we came from and where we are now?

2013 is important for our country. In May, elections will be held again; candidates will once again face the Filipino people. Behind the left and right speeches, the countless photo opportunities and handshakes, this is what I want to impress upon the minds of the citizens this election: The election, above all, is a crossroads where Filipinos will once again have the opportunity to decide.

The question: Will we continue on the straight and narrow path of progress? Or do we want to make a U-turn back to the corner of corruption and the road of poverty?

I have been saying this repeatedly: our journey will only be smooth if we have allies who will not only go against the flow on the straight path but will truly work together to push our reforms.

With us now are some of our candidates for Senator; public servants whom I personally chose and trust. I am telling you myself: we need them to continue advancing the nation.

They, like us, have chosen the righteous path of public service. We support them, because aside from being incorruptible, they are clear about what is right to fight for and what is wrong that should be rejected by society.

Isn't it that we choose our public servants because we trust them to truly serve the Filipino people? It's not fair that you are the one in office, and you yourself will violate the law, don't you think? Whether you are a simple citizen or a government official, Liberal or from another party, the law should not change or be inconsistent. It is not acceptable for those in office to simply choose which laws they will follow. The law should be fair for everyone.

In the coming May, Filipinos will once again hold the power to shape the future of the nation. It is once again in our hands where we will lead our only country.

It is true that we have already started a beautiful change, but it is important that we join hands to continue moving it forward, towards a brighter future for Filipinos.

Before I conclude: Of course, as long as people live, there are problems. Because when the time comes that we no longer have problems to face, that itself becomes the problem—no more challenge, right? What I can say is, perhaps it's better to have a problem like: What should we do with the dollar and peso exchange rate. It's also a good suggestion to think that we can borrow [in] peso bonds, which are even oversubscribed. But the Central Bank is asking us if we can borrow dollars here in the Philippines so that we can somewhat reduce the excessive volatility of the exchange rate. Right? It's better to have a problem choosing where to borrow than to have a problem where no one will lend to us. It's good to have a problem when we are mentioned regarding the traffic on EDSA. That's right. Because many people are on the road and our economy is very much alive. Rather than no traffic on EDSA because no one can afford gasoline to run their vehicles.

Now, the elections are coming, notice that, right now, I haven't heard of any wrongdoing on our part here or there. They can't say that the Conditional Cash Transfer is wrong, where we are helping 3.8 million families this year to keep children in school and to have the ability to improve their lives. Usually [during] elections, when someone is not in power, they say that so-and-so is bad, so-and-so is unclear, the policy is wrong. Is that right? We received a suggestion here. Can we have a super coalition? They will all join us. I said, “Thank you. You're joining us. I hope you're serious about joining us in walking the straight and narrow path.”

I would just like to ask: We can speed up the change in society, but we are a democracy. That's why it is said that “our vote will shape the future.” If we vote because someone sings well, I don't know if their song will take us to where we want to go. If you hear this as a jab, “It's embarrassing for my friend,” even if it goes against his desired policy. We should really be able to face ourselves that everything we choose is something we believe will accompany us on our journey along the straight and narrow path because the welfare of the next generation, we will shape it not tomorrow. We will shape it now, when the elections come and if I may boast to you—as thin as my hair has become, my face hasn't thickened, but I will also ask you: let's work together to speed it up. That will happen, maybe it can be more than just a vote. Let's also help those who deserve to be placed in power. All the changes we have made are in your hands because of you. We can speed that up even more, again, because of you. So to everyone, when we are praised and these successes are said, I always say, “You did this.” So let's continue what we have done. Let's intensify our efforts to truly change our society and our country for the good of all our countrymen.

Good day. Thank you all, and although no one invited me, Viva Pit Señor.