[Read this in English.]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, to the Coalition of the Straight Path: The Introduction

Just this Monday, we collectively introduced to our Bosses the tandem that undoubtedly will continue the Straight Path: our future President, Mar Roxas, and his Vice President, Leni Robredo. [Applause] Two public servants who have already demonstrated great sacrifice in responding to the call of the people. They are the ones we will present to the referendum for the Straight Path next year.

What we emphasized: In the Liberal Party, in our coalition, in the Straight Path, the country always comes before self. [Applause] It is clear: All that we have achieved, all the successes we have attained, and all the impossible things we have made possible, are the result of our contributions and the good beginnings of those who sacrificed for us.

Today, we introduced twelve individuals whom we believe truly represent the principles of honesty, sacrifice, and steadfastness—those who will join Mar and Leni in promoting broader reforms in society. They are the candidates of the Straight Path coalition for the Senate in 2016.

Our desire is to truly increase our allies not only in the Senate but also in the entire Congress and even in other branches of government. In my mind, the branches of government are like an orchestra. If we have one melody, wouldn't we convey a better message to our Bosses? But if everyone has their own approach, and everyone needs to be a superstar, we will be discordant and the tone that comes out will not be good, just noise. I think that if the government continues like this, we will really delay the achievement of our aspirations.

Now, we know that we have important proposals in Congress that have not yet been passed. Primarily for me is the BBL, whose sole purpose is to keep pace with our progress with our countrymen in Muslim Mindanao.

Just imagine: If the BBL is not passed, we will only continue the cycle of conflict; our brothers and sisters will continue to be mired in turmoil and poverty; and we will only prove the shortcomings of the ARMM, where even just one wrong person is placed in a position, the future of everyone is affected. We should be thankful that we had a trustworthy ARMM Governor like Mujiv Hataman. [Applause] The painful part of this is, who can guarantee that we will always have someone like Mujiv, who, when placed in office, truly restored service to the people?

The change in the BBL is that instead of someone saying, “Just give me all the opportunities,” now it says, “Give the opportunity for everyone’s voice to be heard.” In what we are pushing for, those in leadership truly serve the people; their aspirations are conveyed through their representatives. This is far removed from the situation we are used to where a warlord dictates the fate of the majority, while he only focuses on the progress of his clan or tribe. In the BBL, from the very beginning, the point is to address everyone. Those within its scope have equal rights and their own voices. The Chief Minister implements the care for them; and because the people are part of the governance system, the system is broken where someone is excluded. Isn't this a better situation?

I heard news: Someone from the Senate claimed that the BBL has no chance of passing. Frankly, he doesn't propose anything better, and I think he doesn't propose anything different—period. He just wants to oppose what we are promoting. I think he misunderstands the meaning of “public service.”

In this gathering, I remember what was said to us when we ran in 2009: Just start the change. Now, we wouldn't be exaggerating if we say we've gone further than expected. You yourselves are witnesses to this.

Now, in introducing our candidates for Senator, our first criterion for inclusion in the slate is the willingness to continue the Straight Path. In this way, we can surely accelerate the achievement of our dreams. Those who will continue what we have started will come from a better and far higher level. But let me remind you: We can only do all of this if our companions are not off-key and contrary.

On the Straight Path, our style when it comes to decisions is to arrive at them through consensus. And what you see now is the result of meetings of the Liberal Party, allies, and our colleagues from civil society and various parties. It is not our habit to simply fill a list just to have candidates. And I think, no one can say that our colleagues are contrary to our agenda of good governance.

Our entire slate has already been introduced. Our candidates are offering themselves for important positions, and I am confident that our Bosses will see their readiness for the Senate. From this point, until election day, the people will further see what our coalition can offer. My instruction to our candidates: Eat as much as you can now. [Laughter] Because when the campaign begins, all that will be served to you is “memo rice”—only memories of eating rice. [Laughter]

But truthfully: I think this campaign will be easy, because it is very clear that the Straight Path is facing those who will lead us down the wrong path. It is even coming to a time when we are reaping the other fruits of the Straight Path, our opponents will rush to claim [that] they are the father or mother of all the good things happening to us, even if they haven't really contributed anything.

Now, how will we know who our true allies are? Let's look at the characteristics of the opponents of the Straight Path. First, there are empty promises, saying they will give everything, but they always forget to say how they will fulfill those promises. [Applause] I think, when the time comes that a promise is broken, we will know why. I emphasize that, when they were still supposedly on our side, there were many opportunities for them to have helped in finding solutions.

Secondly, there are those who outright lie. I shake my head when they make statements; as if they weren't among those who made our lives difficult before. While I respect my Bosses who gave me a mandate, there are those who hope that the people have become forgetful. Their line is: It's time to move on. But my mother says: “Reconciliation with justice” is what is needed. You know, in the Church I belong to, repentance is to God and to the community. My question is: How can we trust those who haven't asked for forgiveness, and don't see the need to apologize? [Applause]

Thirdly, those who clearly admit to their terrible track record, so they attempt to present themselves as if everyone is just as bad as they are. They follow the saying of an old politician: If you can't rise above, drag others down. [Laughter and applause]

It's true: The campaign will be noisy. But for those with open eyes and ears, the choice is very easy. And here they are before you now. [Applause]

I've had a long career in politics, but not three decades formally. [Laughter] Sometimes I was just an opportunist. I've seen how the Filipino perspective on those who claim to serve them can change. We saw this in 1986, when we ended a dictatorship; in 2010, when we chose to take the Straight Path and break the cycle of cheating, stealing, and deception; and we witnessed it again in 2013 when it became even clearer to our opponents that Filipinos no longer want the old ways.

The political climate in the country is changing: In my view and for our Bosses, principle is more important. And the LP and our coalition, let me emphasize: There is proof, there are still principles. [Applause]

It is clear that while the groups of others are piecemeal: We have the real tandem. We have the real record and platform. We are on the side of principle and reform. We are the Straight Path. [Applause]

Under the leadership of Mar and Leni, the force that will continue, expand, and fight for our Bosses, the Filipino people, is complete. In my remaining time in office, with the guidance of God Almighty and with your continued show of strong support, expect that I will wholeheartedly and firmly lead the campaign for the reelection of the Straight Path, [applause] the campaign to make what was once only dreamed of more possible, the campaign that will continue the great story of the Filipino race.

Thank you very much. Good day to all of you. [Applause]