[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5M_FgfjGqLY[/youtube]

Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the 2014 Eid’l Adha celebration

[ Delivered at Malacañan Palace, Manila, on October 15, 2014 ]

I had to ask about both Yasmin and Mujiv. I understood when I was asked to host this dinner, that this is a celebration. And looking around the room, I wonder why is everybody so sad, and so stiff, and so serious. [Laughter] So I thought I misread the briefer. But please, do relax.

Tonight, we come together once more to celebrate Eid’l Adha by recognizing the strong fellowship that binds all of us as children of the Almighty. We remember the great narrative of sacrifice of Ibrahim, who, in obeying the will of Allah to give up his son Ismail, demonstrated what is asked from all of us: the absolute trust in the Almighty. This is the essence of Islam, and it is, I believe, expressed more concretely through actions founded on humility, selflessness, and sincere regard for our fellowmen.

It is this kind of faith that guides us, as we tread the straight path towards a shared future characterized by harmony, justice, and inclusivity. This finds expression in the universal call to compassion and charity, the imperative to uplift those in the margins, and the determination to realize peace and progress, not just today, but for generations to come.

As Filipinos, we have already begun to make great strides towards this objective. Earlier this year, the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro was signed by the government and the MILF. The Agreement contains our collective vision of a Mindanao finally freed from the shackles of conflict, injustice, and poverty, towards a Mindanao that is indeed the Land of Promises Fulfilled. Once passed, the Bangsamoro Basic Law will represent another concrete step towards the realization of that vision.

The gains we have made in the pursuit of peace show what can be achieved when we are able to restore trust and mutual respect. Indeed: They mirror precisely what the entire Philippines has achieved these past few years, because of a people who have rediscovered their trust in government, a government that is determined to do right by them, one that will continue to stand for them.

With the benevolence of the Almighty, I know that we will be able to overcome the challenges set before us, and take even greater strides along the straight and righteous path to peace, ushering in a brighter future for the people of the Bangsamoro, and consequently, for all Filipinos.

So thank you. Assalamu Alaikum!