[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CzV3TT40HDE[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the 36th anniversary of the International Church of Jesus Is Lord

Brother Eddie Villanueva; of course, Sister Dory Villanueva; Secretary Joel Villanueva; Senator Sonny Angara; Congressman Sherwin Tugna; Officials and followers of Jesus Is Lord Church Worldwide; fellow workers in government, honored guests, my beloved countrymen, good evening to all of you. [Applause]

If Joel’s hair is turning gray, I share in that.

Three years have passed since I was with you in celebrating your anniversary here also at the Quirino Grandstand. We were only a little over a year in office then; we were still in the first stage of repairing the broken system that was left to us in government. Today, I am pleased to be with you again to celebrate your 36th anniversary; [Applause] now, when we are reaping the positive fruits of the reforms we have sown, and are still continuously watering. In the times that have passed, and in every day of our progress on the straight and narrow path, we truly prove the power of praying together to ask for guidance from the Lord in facing the challenges.

Once again, we gather to give praise and thank the Lord for another year of successes of your organization. Likewise, we gather with the desire for peace and holiness to prevail in our hearts, towards our effort to reach the Kingdom of God.

Of course, we cannot refuse the invitation of Bro. Eddie Villanueva, who is truly our partner in promoting good governance. [Applause] In every action and decision he makes in life, the Lord is clearly at the center of it, and he is always focused on the welfare of his fellow man. [Applause] Bro. Eddie brings all those he meets closer to the presence of God. Likewise, he demonstrates responsibility to his fellow man, bravely opposing and fighting the oppressive system during the Martial Law era. Even though he was imprisoned twice during the dictatorship, he continued to advocate against corruption in government, injustice in society, and the widespread poverty in our country. When the time came when many of our countrymen seemed numb to the corruption and abuse of power of our replaced administration, Bro. Eddie once again led the call for real change. He was among those who awakened the people to the truth, and confidently fought for what is right and just. [Applause] During those times when many of us had closed our hearts to change, Bro. Eddie and the Jesus Is Lord Church actively participated in prayer rallies for reform, and turned to God to guide our country.

Of course, there is his partner in life, Sister Dory, who is also his partner in realizing good advocacy for God and for the country. [Applause] It’s no surprise: the good example of Bro. Eddie and Sister Dory is lived out by their children, starting with Secretary Joel Villanueva. [Applause] You can see Secretary Joel’s dedication to public service since he was our colleague in Congress, and now, as head of TESDA. The agency has truly come a long way under the leadership of Secretary Joel. [Applause] Think about it: According to the Department of Budget and Management, only 28.5 percent of TESDA scholars found employment from 2006 to 2008. With good management of the agency, it recorded a general average employment rate of 68.5 percent [applause] among graduates of the Training for Work Scholarship Program of TESDA in 2012. If we look at the data of graduates of tech-voc training under TESDA and Semiconductor and Electronics Industries in the Philippines from April to September 2014, almost 96 percent have an employment rate. [Applause] What does this mean? Under the management of our colleagues who are walking the straight path, the funds from the people are truly delivering benefits and opportunities to many of our countrymen.

Let’s also include Congressman Sherwin Tugna, who is part of Bro. Eddie’s family. [Applause] He serves as one of our pillars in Congress now, and is our partner in promoting honesty and accountability in government.

We greatly admire the advocacy of the Jesus Is Lord Church, which for more than three and a half decades, has deepened the faith of our countrymen in various parts of the world. [Applause] Your mission: To guide and lead others to the Kingdom of God, regardless of their origin or status in life, as long as they have a strong faith in the salvation offered by God. You strengthen the faith of many of our countrymen so that they become stronger in facing the trials of life.

We are aware: As time progresses, new challenges arise that test our beliefs and faith. The call for us to care for and understand others deepens, especially as we become aware of the social factors of sin, such as poverty and injustice. With the help of the Jesus Is Lord Church Worldwide, many of our countrymen have been given hope despite the suffering they face. Your congregation strives to guide your members in their life decisions, and to find good ways to address problems.

Likewise, I thank the Jesus Is Lord Church for your trust and solidarity in the government’s initiatives to break corruption in government, to improve the living standards of our countrymen, [applause] especially those who are most in need. You can count on your government to double its efforts to deliver widespread and lasting benefits to more Filipinos. [Applause]

With the help of your growing organization, I believe in the increase of Filipinos who will live out the great teachings of the Lord. As faithful followers of Christ, may we always make Him the center of our lives, always make Him our guide [applause] in reaching our collective goals for the country. By following His example of endless love for humanity, everyone will reach a future full of glory and abundance.

Before I end, perhaps you could join me in the suggested prayer that I think is very appropriate:

Our Father in heaven, allow me, Your servant, as father of the Philippines, to kneel with my countrymen. We know the truth that apart from Your Great presence we cannot achieve true peace. Peace that we have long been striving to achieve for our country.

But reveal to you, our Lord Jesus, the evils that are trying to steal this peace—hunger, poverty, and various kinds of sickness; even division in society, theft, murder, struggle for power, and various evils caused by greed.

Therefore, we kneel before Your presence to ask for a great thing—bless our country with true peace. True peace that comes from Your great love that binds, that can ease the burden of our country, that can give hope to our countrymen, and that can strengthen our arms so that we may work together even more towards the straight path, the path of holiness, the path of true success.

We claim all of this in the Name of our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Good evening to all of you.