This is the last Bulong Pulungan that I will attend as President. And though Donnie is not here, I am sure there is one burning question foremost in your minds. Since its perpetually asked, I think I have been trained enough to be confident to answer. Especially in the fact that the answer is still the same . Mamimiss ko ho siguro ng kaunti ‘yon.

In all seriousness though, your annual Christmas gathering has always been an opportunity for me to engage friends and partners from the media. All of you are highly respected… Individuals only, because there is a description here that you might not like, who are considered institutions in the industry – you might not like that. But given that this group has a significant composition of women, you might suddenly find fault and turn negative if I describe you as the “senior institution.” In lieu of that, let me then say that you are an exuberant group of journalists and media practitioners, and this is the more important part, filled with vitality and never-ending youthfulness [applause and laughter]. It is my hope that this sets the context for the kind of questions that you will put forward by and by. That means, I am getting insights from you. This is our last gathering, perhaps you could expedite the questions as a Christmas gift as well.

I have known the members of Bulong Pulungan as professionals who strive to have a balanced take on the issues of the day. You have constantly proven the belief that I have long held: Bad news is not the only thing that sells in our country, and that there is so much room to celebrate the daily triumphs of the Filipino. For all the hard work that you have put in to situate the news in its proper context, to report the right information at the right time, and to be as fair and focused as possible in giving the right angle of a story, please accept my gratitude and that of our countrymen.

On a more personal note, if I may point out: Just as Tita Deedee stood by my mother during her administration, all of you present here have stood by us in encouraging our people to view things in a more positive, more inspiring light. In contrast to a few naysayers, you have not only given me a fair hearing, but you have also helped raise the level of discourse and awareness through your reportage. In the case of Tita Julie, it appears that she has gained a new audience with the latest movie of Kris , a film which as I understand is based on your book.

This much is true: All of us here witnessed the dark days of Martial Law, and went through the lost decade under my predecessor. You saw for yourselves the sacrifices our countrymen had to undertake, as well as the suffering that in one way or another left a negative imprint on our national consciousness. But you have also seen firsthand the meaningful change that has taken place within our shores these past five years—a change that has truly transformed the mindset of our people from being apathetic, to being participative and sometimes unreasonably demanding. There is so much good news and so many testimonies of success from our people; and you have played your part in advancing our message of hope: That the Filipino is worth dying for, worth living for, and definitely worth fighting for.

For the longest time, our countrymen, particularly those in the farthest and most neglected regions, saw government service as akin to an impossible dream. Now, allow me to present to you what Daang Matuwid means, what it has brought to the lives of our countrymen, and what it is to them:

[VIDEOS OF APAYAO AND DAVAO BENEFICIARIES]

These are just some of many testimonials directly from the people. They, along with the rest of the population, will subject Daang Matuwid to a referendum in 2016. It is a campaign that I will personally lead, and I am mindful that there are those who will be relentless in making sure that they retake the reins of powers, in effect setting us back to the old days where personal gain rather than public interest held sway over governance. They are the same individuals who cannot afford another defeat. Still, there are others whose intentions are belied by their propensity for offering the moon and the stars, without actually putting forward any sort of context or plan for our collective future. In short, there are those who are certain about their ambition, but are much less certain about its implications on the rest of the country.

All of you are veterans and luminaries in the world of media. Throughout every election, you have probably seen every possible character: the false prophets, the wannabe messiahs, the corrupt patrons, and the well-intentioned but ultimately ill-equipped candidates. In May, however, for the first time in memory, there is a valid call to continue the upward trajectory of our country. We finally have someone selling a vision—with a track record that proves that this vision is not only achievable but very much probable through the continuity of reform. We can now legitimately put forward to our people: Their dreams do not have to expire after only six years.

I trust that, as exemplars of your profession, you will continue to do your part to speak the truth and deliver our message of hope­—not only in the next six months, but even long after I leave office. It is that very message that enabled all of us to stand up against a dictator in 1986; dismantle the system of lying, cheating, and stealing in government in 2010; and in turn lay the foundations for a Philippines that now works, a country where no one is left behind.

It has indeed been an honor for me to participate in Bulong Pulungan. It is an event that I will surely miss. I am now ready for your very easy, rigorously selected questions,  which undoubtedly can serve as your parting gift this Christmas to me.

Thank you, and merry Christmas to everyone.