Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of thanksgiving and National Transformation Assembly of the Tarlac First Baptist Church

The welcome you give me is truly wonderful, that's why I always try to come home to Tarlac. I was able to come home now, I was given two hours. [Laughter] Sometimes the trip to NLEX is longer than the stop in Tarlac.

I just noticed the bonsais. You know, Christmas is near. Sometimes we get sentimental. I remember, my mother's hobby was making bonsais. We remember again. If she were here, she would say that this tree in the middle is beautiful.

We are here in Barangay San Vicente where I also started campaigning; one of the most difficult house-to-house campaigns we did. You know San Vicente, there's an urban part, a sub-urban part, a rural part. Once, the elders told me, when you campaign house-to-house, when you talk to someone and ask for their help, it's important that the person you're talking to says something. Because here in Tarlac, we are too conscious of the feelings of our guests. So when asked who the candidate is, “Help me,” is the answer we give, “Yes” even if inside we think, “You are a little difficult to help.” But we don't want to say no. So it's important, they say, when you say “yes,” you need to add something. “Well, yes. Why wouldn't I help you because of this…” “Yes, I'm already campaigning for you because of this…”

So it happened here in San Vicente, we were doing house-to-house visits. I came across a man who seemed to be in poor health. So I approached him, introduced myself, and asked for his help. He just said, “Hmmm.” He seemed hesitant. So I talked to him a little more, hoping to convince him. But that was all the response I got: hmmm. I guess that’s just how it is, some people will like you, some won’t.

I had a companion during the house-to-house visits, a Board Member who was running for office. He also approached this man and got the same response. “Help me out.” “Hmmm.” “This is a waste of a vote.” He talked to him for at least ten minutes. And all he got was: hmmm. Eventually, the village captain at that time, Captain Quintos, arrived and tapped this man on the shoulder. Then when the man spoke, we realized the person we were talking to was mute. [Laughter] I didn’t want to imitate what he did because I didn’t want to be accused of making fun of him, you know. But that’s why we weren’t getting any answers – he was mute. And after that, as we walked away from their area, this mute man tapped everyone we passed, pointing at us. He campaigned for us. It turns out it’s not true that if someone just says “hmmm” to you, it means they’re not interested. Sometimes, it actually means the opposite.

Now, as we are nearing the end of the mandate you have given us, it would be good to return to our roots. We are grateful, of course, to Bishop Jonel for his invitation today, along with Engineer Garon and the First Baptist Church, who gave us a reason to return here to our origins, and on this day of rest, we were given the opportunity to mingle with people who undoubtedly care about our country. I am pleased to be a part of your celebration.

Over the past five years, I have told you how difficult the job has been as President. Allow me to share some examples of this with you.

Recently, at a gathering I attended, someone asked us: What should be done about our severely lacking infrastructure?

And I remembered again when I was a new congressman and during that campaign period. Let me go back to San Vicente. There used to be something called Rubber Bridge. Why Rubber Bridge? Because it was all tires. There was accumulated water with whatever animals lived there, because the water was really stagnant. Then the only way for people to cross was with old tires without inner tubes. Of course, when you stepped on them, they would sink. So when we crossed it, we felt like we were doing tinikling, or a children's game of “step, no.” I was just waiting to fall into what was like a sewer. When we became a congressman, that was one of the first projects we did.

Here at Junction too, right, near McArthur going to the Capitol, whenever it rained, just after Lando. Didn't it used to be that there was water there for two, three weeks even when the sun was high? We worked together on that, and we fixed Masalasa Creek.

We went to a barangay, not here in Tarlac City, and when I arrived there, there was a listed road. It was supposedly a cemented road. This was when I was newly seated as a congressman. When I got there, “What is this road we’re on, it’s all dirt road, all stones and sand? Where is the listed road?” When I got to the Captain’s house, I found the listed road. The road that was given there was just enough for the Captain’s service vehicle. It was a parking lot, not a road that was given to that barangay. Just one lane. You might think cars could pass each other. Exactly. Look at a typical multicab. That was the size of the road in that entire barangay.

Now, you are hearing and seeing that in various places throughout our archipelago, we are building ports, airports, improving our trains, roads, bridges, schools, and many others left and right. Here in Tarlac, many of our countrymen are already benefiting from the completed Section 1 of the Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway or TPLEX, and the opening of other sections is getting closer and closer. Even the planning to extend the TPLEX all the way to Ilocos is being studied. In the improved Subic-Clark-Tarlac-Expressway (SCTEx). When we inspected the areas hit by Typhoon Lando, we passed by the road traversing Pura and Guimba here in Tarlac. We saw that the road was cracked. We asked Secretary Babes Singson about this, and his answer was, “Sir, the road we are passing through is a provincial road. We cannot yet interfere with it because the budget of Congress only covers national roads and tourism-related roads.” You know, I cannot allow what I leave to the people of Pura, to all our countrymen, is a road that is about to become just a memory. It was said to us when we reached Nueva Ecija: Here in Nueva Ecija, that part of the road is good. The problem is in your Tarlac province. Of course, it’s embarrassing. We immediately instructed the good secretary, Babes Singson, to coordinate with the local government to repair the Pura-Guimba road as soon as possible. And in addition to that, we are creating an alternative road especially going to Region II. The route it will take: Aurora-Quirino-Nueva Ecija so that it will no longer pass through Dalton Pass, which, as we know, has a high possibility of landslides. There is also a planned expressway that will connect to the SCTEx from La Paz Tarlac. It will pass through San Jose to Cabanatuan. It is now in the detailed engineering design stage, and will be funded by the Japan International Cooperation Agency or JICA. [Applause]

We are also building the Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3, as well as the planned NLEX-SLEX Connector Road. And I would just like to remind you, those two were promised to us as early as the 1970s, and now, they are being built. There are also bridges like the Lullutan Bridge in Isabela. Our countrymen there didn’t have to wait too long, they only waited two decades for the bridge and it was also made beautiful. The Jalaur River Multi-Purpose Project in Iloilo, I have mentioned this several times, when my mother gave birth to me, this was first thought of. And I’m still relatively young, but that’s how long it took before this stage of the project, which was thought of as early as 1960, was started.

In addition to that, Secretary Babes also said that we have reached the physical limitation in building new projects, like in the province of Apayao. He said we are reaching our capacity in building infrastructure that can be done now because sometimes there is a shortage not only of cement, steel, but also of contractors, plumbers, electricians, carpenters, and sometimes even aggregate. I asked, “What is aggregate?” Rocks and sand. I said, “How can we run out of rocks and sand?” That’s how many infrastructures are being built simultaneously, so there really is a limitation in supply.

Two governors from Mindanao said that their projects are really different now. Before, they were really begging for scraps. Now, they say they are overflowing and are having difficulty putting in their [counter party]. They are proof that our projects are focused not on the dictates of politics, but on where there is a real need.

At the same time, of course, we are also thinking about other needs that need to be addressed. In Metro Manila, there is no sewerage system and septic system, except in the City of Manila and some parts of Makati. Of course, the construction of flood control projects is also included there.

In addition to this, there is the necessary construction of the Guadalupe Bridge, which is exceeding its daily vehicle capacity. When we conducted a survey here, coinciding with the earthquake in Japan, the analysis showed that it needs to be retrofitted because it could collapse in the event of a strong earthquake. We cannot simply have the bridge repaired and close it. What if you close it, where will those traversing EDSA pass? The proposed long-term solution: Build a new bridge that will cross the Pasig River near the Guadalupe Bridge. In this way, the volume of traffic on the Guadalupe Bridge will be reduced, we will have the opportunity to repair it, and when the second bridge is finished, they will share the traffic passing through it. Reduced traffic on EDSA. But you will really be amazed: When we ask if it needs to be fixed, everyone's answer is: We need to fix it. But they say to build it somewhere where they won't be disturbed. Since we are not dictators, we have instructed the relevant agencies to conduct a dialogue to resolve this issue. But think about it, whatever infrastructure is put in place, it needs to be placed somewhere. Everyone who was asked said not here, somewhere else. Where will we put it?

All of this came to mind when I was asked about our severely lacking infrastructure. I was even tempted to ask him: What other infrastructure can be done that we haven't done yet?

This also: There is Salary Standardization 3. It states: equal pay for equal work. It also states: Every three years, the compensation package in the government needs to be reviewed to see if it is still appropriate. Although the salary at the entry level in the government is higher than in the private sector, the minute a government employee is promoted and his equivalent in the private sector is promoted, the gap in their salaries gets bigger and bigger. What this proposed Salary Standardization Law 4 aims to do is to bring the salaries of those in government closer to those in the private sector. To reach at least 70% of the salary in the private sector. Why do we need to catch up? Of course, for any organization to be effective, it needs skilled people. Isn't that right? If we don't give the deserving salary to the skilled, he might run out of love for the country and think about himself and his family. It is reasonable to equalize the salary that can be earned elsewhere as much as possible in order to retain them. [Applause]

But of course, there are issues that need to be addressed. One group said that if we implement this, it will be pitiful for those at the bottom. Why prioritize those at the top? Actually, it will be done simultaneously. There's more: They say that if I approve this, it will cause inflation, and the prices of goods will increase. The same person said on another day: If I don't approve this, then I don't care. In other words, according to him, I shouldn't approve it. That's why we are studying this so that it will be reasonable for everyone.

This is how difficult our job is. We are doing everything we can to fulfill the mandate you have given us. But in all my decisions, there is always a group, some people, who want to ruin everything. It's as if their job is to sow negativity. No matter what I say, I'm always wrong. But as I said, we're used to being greeted by negative commentators at breakfast, insults at lunch, insults at dinner, intrigue as a midnight snack. That's why someone once wrote to me, saying: “Thank you for taking on a job that no one in his right mind would accept.” When I first read that, I said, I think I was called crazy. But really, if you go through this, you'll wonder why so many people want to replace me in office. About one hundred and thirty of them, I think.

That's why, to our colleagues at K4Phil, and to our countrymen who support us, from praying for us, to your contributions to help those affected by Typhoon Lando, that's where I draw extra strength. And thank you very much. [Applause]

In our Constitution, the separation of Church and State is stated. According to it: Along with freedom of religion, the State should not favor any religion. This is where what is stated in the book of Mark, Chapter 12 Verse 17 comes in, where Jesus said: “Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” And they were amazed at Him.”

There are others who used this as a reason to shrug off the reality of society. In the church I belong to, during the Spanish colonial period in the country, the response when someone complained about their situation was: “It is your destiny to suffer in this world, your reward awaits you in heaven.” If this is what is taught in the face of widespread poverty and oppression, nothing will really change.

Therefore, I agree with the teaching of the Second Vatican Council of the church I belong to. According to this, it is important to intervene in life in this world, because it guides us on the path to eternal life. I was once asked when I was younger: Who is more sinful: the one forced to steal because they cannot feed their family no matter what they do, or the politician who, despite a comfortable life, still manages to steal from the public treasury? [Applause] The challenge to us from the Bible: Instead of being content with giving alms, we must fight the system that is the root of injustice and the suffering of others.

I am truly impressed with Bishop Milan, K4Phil, and the Tarlac First Baptist Church. You are actively contributing to fill the needs you see, not only in your church, but also in the larger society. You truly live by: “We are our brother’s keeper.” [Applause]

I also sincerely thank Bishop Jonel, who is one of my spiritual advisors. In times of trials, he is one of those who generously helps, and his concern never fades. Thank you very much for your prayers that the leaders and the people may continue to follow the Straight Path.

Through our collective efforts on the Straight and Narrow Path, we have truly come a long way. The scope of the positive change that you—my Bosses—have made and continue to make is immense. Whether in the fields of economy, education, health, tourism, infrastructure, and social services, we ensure that: in progress, no one is left behind. We empower those on the margins to rise from poverty and keep pace with progress.

I know: I am not perfect. But I believe that in all the decisions I have made, what is best for my fellow human beings and my love for Filipinos have prevailed. In every trial I have faced, I did not succumb to emotion; what is right and just for our nation prevailed. [Applause]

In the book of Ephesians, Chapter 5, Verses 8 to 10, the apostle Paul said: “For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live as children of light. For the fruit of the light consists of all goodness, righteousness and truth. Try to discern what is pleasing to the Lord.” [Applause]

Now that our country is illuminated by light, may we always live by the great teachings of the Lord. I believe that with trust and compassion for others; with the guidance and sincere love of God, we will reach a brighter and more promising future.

You all know Leni, perhaps you noticed earlier she was a bit late. Please excuse her, she came from quite far, just Cagayan de Oro. That really is literally north to south. Yesterday, Mar also came from the Mindanao area, from Agusan, traveled through the Visayas but is here with us in Tarlac to be with all of you. [Applause]

In conclusion, I read in our Constitution that a sitting president cannot stand for election. It’s not because I’m connected to it, I said it seems that those who wrote it really made it better. I believed that my decision was correct. No matter how strong you are, no matter how good your intentions are for your fellow man, if you are already exhausted after six years dealing with problems both within and outside the country, human and otherwise, there is really a point to needing fresh blood that is more zealous, stronger, and can go further. We in our organization are really saying, “We’ve come so far.” I believe, to those people who are open-minded and have their eyes open and can see the changes that have happened. And it is within your power, just like when you started, to continue this. I suggested to you who should continue the path we are taking, and with God’s grace, we will truly reach all that we aspire to.

Good afternoon. Thank you very much to all of you.