Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the commencement exercises of the Philippine Military Academy “BAGWIS” class of 2012

[ Translation of the speech Delivered at Fort General H. del Pilar, Baguio City, on March 18, 2012 ]

General Vicente Lim, in a letter to one of his sons, offered some insight into democracy in the Philippines, saying, “Our democracy in the Philippines is unilateral. It is only for the benefit, for the freedom, for the rights, comfort and happiness of each individual member of the nation… . I venture to say that 99.9 percent of our people believe in that kind of democracy. They do not know their obligations, their duties and the sacrifices that they should give to the state… .”

The point that General Lim–one of our bravest soldiers, who laid down his life for his country–wanted to make is clear. The freedom we enjoy comes with responsibilities; the progress we aspire for requires effort. This is the very idea enshrined in the First Rank Insignia, or the “Lieutenant’s triangles” bestowed on each graduating cadet—an act institutionalized by no less than General Lim’s wife, Mrs. Pilar Hidalgo Lim. Having been bestowed with the blessings of democracy, are you ready to rise to the challenge of paying it forward with good will, integrity, and the willingness to sacrifice?

I have faith in your ability to respond to this challenge. After all, these are the lessons that PMA has taught you, and perhaps these are also the lessons you have learned from your parents, who have dedicated their time and resources so that you may finish school. In fact, I had heard of the story of Mang Mario Puertollano, who worked tirelessly as a carpenter so that his dream of giving his children an education might be achieved.

Today, after four years, Mang Mario will be able to breathe a little easier as his son Nonoy, your class valedictorian, graduates. To Nonoy, and the whole BAGWIS Class 2012: after successfully passing those grueling mental and physical tests, I hope you will not be shocked when I say: Congratulations, your four-year vacation here in Fort del Pilar is done. Practice time is over; today, you begin to face the real challenge in your chosen field: to respond to the real problems in our society. Today, all of you arrive at a crossroads, where you will be truly tested as soldiers, as Filipinos, and as human beings.

Outside Fort del Pilar, you will not only fight against armed groups in the mountains, or lawless elements in the cities. There is also the temptation of corruption. For example: if you find yourselves assigned to a far-off province, and a truck full of lumber drives by, what will you do? It is clear to you this is against the law. Will you accept an envelope and stare off into the distance as they slide the logs into the river? You know very well the damage that these massive logs can do when carried along by floods; they plow through bridges, engulf houses, and take the lives of our countrymen. Do you have it in you to say, “I will not accept that, because my own momentary comfort would mean lasting damages to my fellow men.”

You must remember: as shields of the state, you should be the first refuge and the first protectors of our people. If they feel that they cannot turn to you—that nothing will come of seeking your help—they will seek out those who only pretend to be their defenders. But if you are able to live up to your responsibilities and fulfill your mandate, the Filipino people themselves will become your most loyal allies. Do not forget that in any fight, those who have the support of the people will always emerge triumphant. Do not forget that in any fight, those who have the support of the people will always emerge triumphant.

This is the reason why, each year, the Commander-in-Chief confers each class valedictorian with the Presidential Saber. My conferment of this saber signifies the true source of power: from myself, a civilian, to a uniformed soldier.

Indeed, our strength comes from our bosses: the Filipino people. I remember once asking my mother: What do those who subvert and steal from the people gain? If you steal, you have to think about where to hide it. You will never be at peace, fearing that what you stole can be stolen from you. And what will you do with a luxurious lifestyle if it brings you the lifelong censure and the disapproving looks of your countrymen? You amass millions and millions of pesos, yet you cannot spend it because it might become the cause of your imprisonment, so you hide it away. Why would you allow your name to be tainted in the first place, if you will never be able to benefit from the money you stole from the nations coffers? My mother’s answer: “We will never understand them, because they think differently than we do.”

What makes the heart of a true public servant beat is very different: honesty, integrity, and concern for others. It is by these characteristics through which the people you have sworn to serve will measure you. As Filipino soldiers, you carry on your shoulders the responsibility of ensuring they have a peaceful future. It is very clear: doing the right thing is the key to the nation’s strength, and to our shared success.

And is it not true that your sacrifices are reciprocated with compassion and gratitude? This is indeed proof that the reforms we have been laying across the straight and righteous path have been felt by your brothers-and sisters-in-arms. We know how difficult your job is, which is why, in your relentless fight against lawless elements, your ready response in times of calamities, and your maintenance of the peace in our country, your government is implementing programs left and right to ensure that our soldiers and policemen no longer have to do with meager resources. We are focusing on your needs to make sure that you will consequently be able to fulfill your obligations to the nation.

At present, we have constructed 21,800 housing units for our soldiers and policemen in Luzon. The NHA has also laid down its plans to construct an additional 31,200 housing units for the second phase of our program. The scope of this program has also widened: the members of the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, and the Bureau of Fire Protection, who had seemingly long been forgotten, will soon be able to benefit from this program as well. And, even better news: this program will also be expanded to cover your comrades in Visayas and Mindanao.

Let us remember, before we were elected into office, it took fifteen years for the government to release a 33 billion-peso fund for the AFP modernization program. We wasted no time: in the space of only 18 months, we have already allotted 28 billion pesos, and we have successfully completed eighteen projects under the current modernization program. From the acquisition of our first Hamilton class cutter—the BRP Gregorio del Pilar—to the brand new Combat Utility Helicopters that will make their rounds in our skies, we are indeed making sure that you are provided for, so that you will be further motivated to do your jobs well, and in so doing, be able to help more Filipinos.

And to make it easier for you keep watch over lawless elements, we have also electrified thousands of sitios. Take note: based on the data of the Department of Energy and the National Electrification Administration, the previous administration left us with about 36,000 sitios still without light. To see if it was indeed possible to complete their project, we allotted 814 million pesos to bring light to a target of 1,300 sitios. But because of careful planning and efficient implementation by the DOE and NEA, our initial target of 1,300 sitios to be electrified became 1,520, and we completed this in a span of only 90 days. What cost one million pesos per sitio before, we were able to achieve with only 600,000 per sitio. This is proof positive that, on the straight and righteous path, we can answer the needs of Filipinos, not just in due time, but in record time.

I know that the path you have treaded to fulfill your aspirations has not been easy. I invite you to join me in making sure that the path we leave behind for the next generations is easier to follow. Yes, there are times when the temptation to pull one over your fellow men and stray from the straight and narrow path may knock at your door. Yet, what must remain foremost in your minds is the idea that, when you gain things unjustly, it can be guaranteed that you are also harming your fellow men. And when you do good, you can be sure that good will come to you and to our nation.

Let us remember: we will only reach our dreams if we are ready to fight for them. To all the members of PMA Class 2012 BAGWIS: cherish, and never forget this day. So that whenever you face a crossroads in the future, you can return to this memory, to remind yourselves of why you chose to be a part of this institution; why you chose to be Filipino soldiers; why you were able to surpass and gain victory over all the challenges in the Philippine Military Academy.

God willing, after decades have passed and it falls on you to greet the new cadets of the PMA, you will be able to look them in the eye and say: “The circumstances in which you find yourselves are better, and soldiers are now more successful and respected, because, to the best of our abilities, we have devoted our spirit and our strength to fixing the wrongs in the system—not only some of the time, but all of the time—all in the name of a brighter future for our true Bosses: the Filipino people.”

Thank you, and good day.