[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tL9PTX06Qw4[/youtube]

Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the 70th anniversary of the Leyte landing

[Delivered at Palo, Leyte, on October 20, 2014]

Seventy years ago today, at 10:00 a.m. sharp, Allied soldiers began to climb down from their ships using rope ladders. They boarded a landing craft and swept unto this very beach where, a few hours later, at 1:00 p.m., President Sergio Osmeña, Generals Carlos P. Romulo and Basilio Valdes, and General Douglas MacArthur would wade ashore. By reclaiming these shallow waters, the Allied Forces would begin to unfurl the sails of freedom for the Philippines.

They had embarked in Hollandia, New Guinea, a week before. They entered Leyte Gulf at midnight, and dropped anchor at 7:00 a.m. The real journey, however, had started two years earlier, when from Corregidor, in the darkness of defeat, the Voice of Freedom had broadcast, “We, too, shall rise.” Some time before, in Brisbane, Australia, MacArthur had vowed, “I shall return.” Finally, here, at Red Beach, unfazed by sniper fire, he once again broadcast a simple statement, which was repeated around the world, “I have returned.” By October 23, 1944, a mere three days after they have landed on Red Beach, the Philippine government was re-established in Tacloban, resuming the journey to independence interrupted by the onset of war. In four more months, Manila would be liberated.

As we gather here to mark perhaps one of the most crucial turning points in the war, it is only fitting that we recognize the courageous leadership of General Douglas MacArthur, who reminded the world of the need to reclaim the freedom the Philippines had lost. At the same time, we gather to reaffirm that the story of the Leyte landings, and of the Philippine liberation, was woven not just by the resolve of an individual. It also consists of the stories of thousands upon thousands of brave men and women of different nationalities who came together in the Philippines  in defense of freedom. Thus, on this occasion, we likewise pay tribute to the generation of GIs, sailors, Marines, airmen, and guerrillas, who fought to get here, and who continued the fight until the end of the war in 1945. Their numbers are very few today, and we are reminded of the reality that, in time, what was so vivid to the wartime generation will pass from living memory.

The Leyte landings made up the largest amphibious operation in the Pacific; the Battle of Leyte Gulf would later be known as the largest naval battle in recorded history. Neither side doubted the importance of the fight. The Japanese Imperial General Staff saw Leyte as “the defining battle” that would decide the outcome of the war; their actions were proof enough of this belief. It was in this battle where the first kamikaze units were organized and deployed from Mabalacat, Pampanga, with the mission of crashing their aircraft into American ships. Allied forces likewise saw it as a battle to win back the future of the Far East, and its gravity was reflected in the terrible cost that humanity paid in this battle: The American soldiers and allies struggling to advance in the torrential rain and mud at the Leyte Valley, and Breakneck Ridge on the way to Limon; the sailors on aircraft carriers and cruisers in Leyte Gulf and Surigao Strait; the Japanese kamikaze airmen who vowed to turn their aircraft into the instruments of a Divine Wind; the thousands of Filipino guerrillas under the command of Ruperto Kangleon; the civilians in surrounding communities: All of them paid the price. Spanning 100,000 square miles of sea, this battle would claim around 13,000 lives on both sides. The campaign for the island of Leyte would add to that number, with 3,500 American and 48,000 Japanese casualties.

These numbers encapsulate the idea that in war, it is the ordinary soldier and the unarmed civilian who suffer the most profound consequences for decisions made by those in power. The soldier is expected to demonstrate valor and to lay down his life, if need be, while the civilian must find ways to survive, from day to day, in the face of bombs, bullets, and wartime shortages. At the end of the conflict, when all is said and done, leaders may rise or fall, but the veterans and the civilians are left with the task of rebuilding their lives and their nations.

It is this common experience that, in many ways, provides the opportunity for reconciliation based on shared privations. It lays the foundation for a solidarity based on a common resolve: To never again allow humanity to undergo the same terrors and losses.

As President, I have always been conscious that my decisions today will have a bearing on the lives of my countrymen tomorrow, and for the generations to come. Looking back on the past, and on how previous leaders faced the supreme challenges of their times, I have always felt it incumbent upon me to seek out the lessons that will keep us from having to call on our people to make such sacrifices, and from having to embark on the path of disaster that led to so much suffering and loss.

Today’s ceremony, I believe, gives us an opportunity to engage in this kind of reflection: to pay tribute to our forefathers who fought and died here, and to recognize the good will we now extend to those who were once our enemies. Beyond cataloguing the horrors of war, let us honor the peace that has reigned among our nations for close to 70 years. Let us renew our commitment to the strong and enduring friendships between the Philippines and its wartime allies, and perhaps most meaningfully, the countries that were once its foes.

Through these friendships, we saw, just last year, vessels bearing the proud names of those that had fought at Leyte Gulf, once more journeying to the Philippines: Ise from Japan, Washington and Denver from America. Seventy years ago, ships with these names engaged in battle, seeking to eliminate the threat of the other; last November, they came here as partners, to demonstrate their unity with the Filipino people at a time of such massive loss and tragedy. Typhoon Haiyan saw countries who belonged to the Allied and Axis Forces, all once characters in a great war, united as friends in their desire to help the Filipino people.

Today, we are bound by the determination to help each other, to echo General MacArthur’s own words, “For our homes and hearts, for future generations of our sons and daughters,” and in the name of all those who made the ultimate sacrifice so many years ago. Indeed, there is no more fitting tribute: to show that, from strife, not merely reconciliation, but genuine, meaningful solidarity is possible.

Thus, today, as we salute those who gave their lives here at Red Beach, and as we continue a pilgrimage of memory that began in Bataan and Corregidor, and which culminates in Manila next year, we remember the brave; we mourn the dead; and most of all, we commit to peace as the true legacy of a conflict that should never be repeated, and look to a shared future, founded on the trust we now extend towards each nation of good will, and nourished by the freedom we so cherish.

Thank you. Good day.