VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=43DHs7gF0tU[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the joint graduation ceremony of Major Services Pre-Entry Officers’ Courses

[Delivered at Camp Aguinaldo, Quezon City, on November 25, 2013]

Good morning. Let us all be seated.

Secretary Voltaire Gazmin; Secretary Sonny Coloma; Chief of Staff Emmanuel Bautista; Service Commanders; Lt. General Lauro Catalino de la Cruz; Lt. Gen. Noel Coballes; Vice Admiral Jose Luis Alano; graduates of the Major Services Pre-entry Officers Courses; family and friends of the graduates; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my beloved countrymen:

Good morning to all of you.

Excuse me, really, first, I was thinking about the time when I graduated—grade school, high school—college, that was a different time: my father didn't attend all of those graduations. And all of our faces are very serious today, as well as your families’. I told Secretary Gazmin: ‘When you see your photo from PMA, you look like a tiger. You finished your service, you still look like a tiger as the commanding general of the army. You became Secretary of National Defense, you still look like a tiger.’ So I said, why are the people here so serious, it looks like there’s a sign outside that says, “No smiling.” I remember, graduation should be happy. Let me tell you about our own experience first. C.A.T. only. We had classmates when we were in third year, they were training. Then they trained, they were chosen as our core officials. And it was really a great hardship for them for a year, during our junior year. So sometimes, we wondered: Is what they’re making us do teaching us something or are they just getting back at us? Because when it started—well, it’s not much of a problem now—but when it started, of course, long hair was a little bit in style then. They said, “Get a haircut, one by two.” The following week, it became two by three, became three by four, became four by five, became five by six, they really did it gradually. So we had one classmate, he said, “My allowance is running out with this little by little.” So he did, he had it all removed. So, all of our officials came out, with long hair, he didn’t. The officials said to him, “You don’t know how to follow orders. We need to have unity of purpose. So next week, your hair needs to be as long as ours.” He was growing his hair, we were all getting it cut short.

As Commander-in-Chief, I know the weight and scope of the responsibility that rests on the profession you have entered. As soldiers of the people, you cannot be absent from the scene in times of need and unforeseen events. When there is fighting, you are there ready to face bullets, just to keep your fellow Filipinos safe from danger. During disasters, you are also expected to respond. Whether in the midst of an earthquake or in the middle of a raging storm, the soldiers of the people immediately respond: unwavering, and proudly answering the call of duty.

Just recently, Yolanda struck: the strongest typhoon ever recorded in our history. There are no words to equate the total damage it caused. Aside from the destroyed houses, infrastructure and buildings, the thousands of lives claimed by Typhoon Yolanda are even more heartbreaking. In times of tragedy like these, it is important that you, the soldiers, serve as pillars of stability and a support to our people. You cannot succumb to any sadness; you cannot show any form of weakness. We know it is not easy, but in the face of tragedy, you are there to respond to comfort, and to give strength and hope to the victims. Together with the police, firefighters, as well as volunteers, you dug through the mud to give the deceased a more dignified burial. You cared for the victims who needed first aid. You carried sacks of rice that needed to be delivered to the affected towns. You were the partners of families looking for something to hold on to, to guide them to rise on their own feet, and overcome the past tragedy. That is why we sincerely thank all the members of our uniformed ranks who really do not back down from the coming calamities. The entire nation pays tribute to your diligence and professionalism.

As our 140 graduates enter the service today, the strength of our soldiers who are ready to face any threat or challenge will surely increase. And even now, I thank you for your readiness to risk and serve your fellowmen and the flag. To be honest, there are so many professions you could choose from, especially as opportunities in the country are expanding due to our reforms. You could enter the private sector, and live a quiet life. But you chose to become a member of the Armed Forces. Therefore, you set aside personal interests for the welfare of the larger society. That is why we do not hesitate to recognize and give due recognition to our soldiers who serve with skill and integrity at all times. Wherever you graduated from, there is an equal opportunity to rise in rank and recognize your unique contribution to the service.

If you think about it, you are fortunate because you are in a time of meaningful transformation in our Armed Forces. More than the modernization being promoted in your equipment, and the development of your skills, you now have a government that fully cares for your welfare.

As you graduate, you are also stepping into reality. And even now, I tell you: The path you will take is not easy. Sometimes, there will be news that will plant doubt in your minds, and try to dismiss the efforts of the state. I hope you do not lose heart; I hope you do not run out of compassion. Whether Army, Navy, or Air Force, I am confident that you will live up to your sworn duty. On every occasion, prove that you deserve to be part of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; bravely face any challenge. And for our new officers this morning: the entire nation believes in your service and integrity; never fail them. The people should always be on your side; let us serve them with dignity, principle and accountability.

Thank you very much, good morning to all.