[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7arLmuUKDhI[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT:

I understand how difficult things have been for you. Is the practice of straight duty at PGH still common? That has been asked for a long time. I ask, if your doctor hasn't slept for one, two, or three days, are they still prescribing the right things to you?

When we ask the youth what they want to be when they grow up, many will say they want to be doctors—especially when they are very young and haven't met anyone from PGH yet. When you ask them why, they will say they want to heal the sick. Perhaps some of you had that answer when you were young, and today, you have fulfilled your long-held dream.

You worked hard for this success, but it is also important to acknowledge the doors that opened for you—the opportunities denied to many of our countrymen. You have achieved your dreams, but the sad truth is that there are Filipino children who can't even dream. Children who, when asked, 'What do you want to be when you grow up?', can only offer a sigh. Instead of going to school, they are confined to a hospital bed, and brought down by severe disabilities. Children who learned to count, not because of what is written on the blackboard, but because of the number of needles and tubes stuck in their arms. Little ones whose first lesson in writing is not the alphabet, but the names of the medicines they need to take every hour.

What's worse is, if you think about it, they are lucky if they even reach the hospital. Imagine this: four out of ten Filipinos have never seen a doctor or any health professional in their entire lives, and have never even been to a hospital. We have some countrymen in remote areas whose only idea of treatment is applying all sorts of leaves to the body, and whose idea of a doctor is their close neighbor who is a traditional healer.

And now that there are 263 new doctors trained by the UP College of Medicine and Philippine General Hospital, we have 263 more partners in providing relief to the health needs of many of our countrymen. Even now, I am confident that the 153 who graduated from the UP College of Medicine, along with the 110 who trained at the Philippine General Hospital, are aware of their responsibility to the Filipinos. The question now is: tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, will you still be able to serve them? They are counting on you.

Whatever service I ask of you today, we will reciprocate with honest and meaningful service. When we say good news, this is not a quick fix, or just a headline in tomorrow's newspapers. Our good news is long-term, and we ensure that it will be felt and reach our countrymen in need. One of these is 3.5 billion pesos for the health insurance premium of poor families, and to enroll them in our National Health Insurance Program, which was chosen using the National Household Targeting System of the DSWD. That means it wasn't distributed for the election; it was distributed for the need. In addition, PhilHealth will also have a new case payment mechanism so that instead of PhilHealth covering only thirty-four percent of the hospital bill, the government will contribute more than double to reach seventy percent. And because of the savings we are making from the careful allocation of funds, we will be able to provide free medical services for common illnesses of the poorest Filipinos in the near future.

To encourage you to work even harder, we have allocated 7.1 billion pesos for the Health Facility Enhancement program, with 5.7 billion of this to be used to repair rural health units and barangay health stations, while the remaining 1.4 billion pesos will be for the rehabilitation of DOH-retained hospitals. We have also deployed nearly ten thousand nurses to poor communities covered by the Conditional Cash Transfer program under the RN HEALS program. We are not only providing medical attention to our countrymen in remote areas, but we are also providing income for our nurses who often find themselves forced to look for jobs that do not match their course of study.

We don't make a habit of leaving people hanging, and if you participate in our agenda of proper public service, you will see that we are also working hard to clean up the system. This is the system that often causes doctors, and other Filipino professionals, to leave. As we repair the bureaucracy, we hope to encourage you to stay here in our country, and become our partners in pushing our nation towards a straight and brighter future.

Of course, we can do this faster if you will support us. That is why I encourage you to participate in the Doctors to the Barrios program so that there will be someone to respond to the complaints of poor municipalities. You can help many of our countrymen in remote areas, and you can also use and hone your profession.

I hope that in addressing you today, I can at least convince some of you. I know that even now, some of you are looking at plane tickets, and job offers from prestigious hospitals abroad. I understand your situation. I know you also dream of a comfortable life, not just for yourselves, but for your families—families who also sacrificed to get you through school; families who mortgaged a piece of land, or parents who also worked abroad to finance your medical education.

I'm not saying you should become martyrs. Given the sacrifices you've made, you certainly deserve to enjoy a more comfortable life. My only request is that when you start earning a lot, and choosing where to build a house or a hospital, or what color car to buy, you can still spare some time and attention to serve in remote rural health clinics, or provide free medical check-ups in poor municipalities. And of course, please don't forget to pay the correct taxes.

Join us in ending the cycle of suffering. Let's not allow the number of young people who dream of becoming doctors, but end up failing and sweeping the hallways of the hospitals you work in, to increase. Let's fix this now. We hold the fulfillment of the dreams of future Filipinos in our hands.

As doctors of the present time, you are not only treating physical ailments, but also the long-standing illnesses of our society. Your success will be measured by your ability to offer time and intelligence in giving hope to a child who wants to leave the hospital to experience going to school, to a mother who wants to give birth to a healthy baby, to a father who wants to make sure he can work without worrying about illness to support his family's future.

You are now at a crossroads. On one side, this is the scene: A patient in a car enters the emergency room—perhaps with a battalion of aides following, or perhaps with blue eyes and money in his wallet, able to pay a large sum for immediate treatment. On the other side, a mother who walked ten kilometers, crossed seven rivers, carrying her convulsing baby, and hoping that the few coins in her pocket will be enough to pay for your service.

Who would you rather choose to serve? You alone can decide on the dilemma you face. My only request—the request of almost one hundred million Filipinos who contributed to your education, to give you the opportunity to fulfill your dreams—their only request is to include them in your aspirations.

Thank you very much to all of you. May your future be bright. Long live!