Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, before his attendance at the 26th ASEAN Summit in Malaysia.

The progress enjoyed by the countries in Southeast Asia proves the positive results of the united Association of Southeast Asian Nations or ASEAN. Through strong relationships among neighboring countries, including the Philippines, order and prosperity are achieved in the region. An example of this is the continued growth of our states, during a time when the global economy is sluggish. Therefore, the challenge to each member of ASEAN is: Continue to contribute, show concern, and maintain unity to sustain our excellence in various fields.

As we go to Malaysia today to attend the 26th ASEAN Summit, we will take the opportunity to further strengthen our foreign relations. Together with the leaders of other countries, we will discuss issues affecting the region, collectively formulate an agenda, and build consensus to raise the standard of living of our citizens. Among the topics to be discussed are our initiatives to develop trade, improve people-to-people relations, address the effects of climate change, and promote security in the region. We will emphasize: Complete order is needed for us to truly progress; any disagreements should be addressed calmly and peacefully. And we believe that an important pillar of the path we must take is contained in what is called ASEAN Centrality. Instead of going our separate ways, unity is the key to achieving goals that benefit everyone. It is clear: The legitimate problem of one is also the problem of all. After the ASEAN summit, we will also participate in the Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA) Summit. These countries are united with us in promoting long-term peace in Mindanao, and are also strong partners in growing our economies. We will focus here on the importance of transport connectivity for thriving trade, investment, and tourism. We will also present initiatives towards food security, and promote other measures towards development in the region.

In attending this ASEAN Summit, we will take the opportunity to continue our efforts to help our fellow Filipino, Mary Jane Veloso. There, we will try to talk to President Joko Widodo of Indonesia to appeal her case.

Our Bosses, both here and abroad, can rest assured: We are doing everything we can to address our current problems, and we will not pass them on to those who come after us. Let us continue to live out compassion for our fellow citizens and contribute to good governance, and the change we are now experiencing will surely be permanent.

It is clear: We have achieved a broad transformation of society because of the participation and unity of more Filipinos. This is also the path we are taking in strengthening our relations with other countries. We know that when more people contribute, when organizations are more orderly, and when unity is stronger, we will achieve even greater successes.

Thank you very much.