VIDEO:

[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o-HGq3oVBC0&[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT: [ Read this in English ]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the graduation of the Philippine Military Academy “Siklab Diwa” 2014

[ Delivered at Fort del Pilar, Baguio City, on March 16, 2014 ]

Today, our cadets cross the threshold to becoming officers of our uniformed services. And as leaders, a heavy responsibility rests on their shoulders. As stated in our Constitution: “The Armed Forces of the Philippines is the protector of the people and the State.” Its purpose is to ensure the full power of the State and the integrity of the national territory.” Only to the uniformed services, such as yourselves, does the state entrust the possession of arms. Therefore, you are expected to use them not to abuse and become an instrument of violence, but to protect and defend our fellow citizens and our flag at all times.

I am fully confident that all members of Class Siklab Diwa will live by this principle, and that you will remain true to your sworn duty. I know that: Honor is one of the pillars of this institution—the honor of being a soldier, of wearing your uniforms, and of saluting our flag; the honor of having an Armed Forces that has truly regained the admiration and trust of our citizens.

Therefore, the challenge to all of us is: If it is our duty to uphold the Honor Code within this institution, let us also uphold it outside of the PMA. If lying is prohibited in class and to fellow cadets, shouldn’t we also prevent anyone, whether a fellow soldier or a civilian, from deceiving and manipulating others and the Constitution? If cheating on exams is strictly condemned, let us also avoid taking advantage of the procurement of arms and equipment. If there is punishment for stealing from classmates, help hold accountable those who steal from the funds earned through the sweat of the people.

For four years, this institution has molded you to embody courage, integrity, and loyalty. But the real trials of being a soldier will only begin when you leave Fort del Pilar. Like those who came before you, you will face a crossroads; your principles will be tested by some who are manipulative, they will dazzle you with wealth and power. As Commander-in-Chief, I hope that just as it is automatic for you to apply the theory and tactics you have learned in actual combat, so too will be the strength of your principles to reject what is wrong, and to side with what is right. Because more than any wealth and power, accountability and integrity are what our Bosses value. Isn’t it true that if you allow the rights of the people you have sworn to protect and serve to be oppressed, you are also allowing your own rights to be oppressed and trampled upon?

Your government knows that you are part of the society you protect. The needs of the ordinary citizen are also the needs of our soldiers. This is in addition to the equipment that you should have in fulfilling your duties. And in response to these needs, I can say: We have come a long way from the old system where those on the front lines of defending the country are the last to be prioritized by the government. Our goal is to empower you to develop yourselves and your families. We continue to lay down measures to ensure that you are not left behind in terms of skills as a soldier and the ability to build a good future.

Just look at the rifles used by our soldiers; many of them are from the Vietnam War era. The good news is: we expect 63,000 rifles for the Armed Forces to be in your hands in the coming months. Through this, we can finally retire the rifles that our soldiers were using even before Siklab Diwa was born.

We are also benefiting from modern ships, eight Sokol combat utility helicopters, three Navy helicopters, and other modern vehicles. In addition, the purchase of 12 lead-in fighter trainer aircraft for our territorial defense operation is also finalized. We are also targeting to have an additional eight combat utility helicopters patrolling our skies, which will also be used for search and rescue and disaster-relief missions by 2016. Bidding will also begin for the purchase of two twin-engine naval anti-submarine helicopters.

Aside from the modernization of our armed forces, there is also the housing program that we are promoting. As of now, we have built 54,449 affordable homes for members of our uniformed services. Governor Salceda is probably looking for a share in Albay. We will get there. Through the combined efforts of the Department of Agriculture, Department of Agrarian Reform, Department of the Environment and Natural Resources, Department of the Interior and Local Government, the Department of National Defense, our livelihood program for our active and retired soldiers is also progressing. In this project, the lands in three military camps—Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija, Camp Kibaritan in Bukidnon, and Camp Peralta in Capiz—will serve as a source of livelihood for soldiers, such as bamboo plantations, coffee, cacao, and palm oil. Truly, as the economy of the country improves, we are given more opportunities to reciprocate the service of our soldiers.

In the end, what brought us to this point is clear: the willingness to sacrifice ourselves for the good of the many. In every transaction you enter into as leaders, I believe your principles will not be shaken by temptation. In times of turmoil or severe calamity, I know you will serve as a pillar of strength and stability for the Filipino people. In times when you are close to danger, and far from your families, I hope your resilience and professionalism and trust in God will prevail.

This is my call to every member of Class Siklab Diwa: raise the level of service and integrity of our Armed Forces. I am confident that in the future trials that our country will face, the Soldiers who will be honored by the Heroic Race in Pure Spirit—caring, serving, and walking with us towards lasting peace and development for all—will be there.

Thank you very much, and congratulations to all of you.