Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the 118th Anniversary of the Philippine Navy

As your Commander in Chief, this is now my last speech before our valiant Philippine Navy. As we traversed the straight and narrow path for almost six years, I cannot help but look back on what we have been through.

One of the first crises we faced as President was the rising tension on the Korean peninsula in 2010. This was a result of the sinking of a South Korean ship, as well as the alleged shelling of one of their islands.

The challenge before us: There were 50,000 of our countrymen there who needed to be removed from danger. We asked: What assets can be used to ensure their safety? The first mentioned: A C-130. We asked about its capacity. It can carry 100 people, they said. How long does one trip take? More than 10 hours. When we calculated: 50,000 divided by 100. It comes out to 500 trips. And if each of those trips takes 10 hours, to evacuate them all it would take 5,000 hours, or about 208 days.

Of course, we inquired about other assets. What else do we have? The answer we received: One ship, capable of carrying 1,000 people. However, a single voyage would take 10 days. We didn't even ask if that was for a one-way trip or a round trip, because it was clear we would still run out of time. The fighting might be over before we even finish the evacuation.

To complete the story: We have an allied country that we asked to accept 50,000 of our countrymen. This country is much closer to the Korean peninsula. Because of this, it will be easier for us to retrieve our citizens. Fortunately, the Korean ambassador returned and gave us a briefing. According to their estimate, tensions are easing and the conflict seems unlikely to happen.

The point of this story is: The situation we found in the Philippine Navy and the entire Armed Forces was not easy. The mandate of the people on your service is very heavy; but it seems you were neglected by the government that preceded us. We didn't need to wear uniforms to know the deficiencies in your vehicles and equipment, as well as your other needs.

I know that with limited capabilities, it is still your duty to guard our 36,000 kilometers of coastline day and night, as well as our exclusive economic zones and territorial waters. As a soldier, before you can be promoted, you also need a lot of sea command experience, but the painful part is, it seems you have nothing to command.

Now, after almost six years, I believe you yourselves can say: We have strengthened your ranks. We have revitalized your surface fleet, our air arm has improved, we are developing our anti-submarine capability; and all of this, we are now using in national security operations.

Didn't you, in the past, feel compelled to carry out missions relying only on courage and ability? Now, the tools and equipment that you yourselves identified are being provided, to make you more effective in fulfilling your sworn duty.

From July 2010 to this May, for the AFP Modernization and Capability Upgrade Program, your government has already released a total of 60.14 billion pesos. This is almost double the combined funds allocated by the previous three administrations. During the same period, we have completed 68 projects, compared to 45 of our three predecessors.

For the Navy, we now have five Naval Helicopters and three Multi-Purpose Attack Craft. In addition to these, other assets are also arriving, such as two Frigates, two Anti-Submarine Warfare Capable Helicopters, and our third Weather High Endurance Cutter.

Earlier today, we formally commissioned the BRP Tarlac, our largest naval vessel, and the first Strategic Sealift Vessel of our Philippine Navy. Compared to our previous ships, this is faster, more reliable, and can carry a larger load. This will be a great help in serving our armed forces. It will serve as a multi-role vessel, which can be used not only for military operations, but also for humanitarian assistance, disaster response, sealift and logistics, mobile government administration, search and rescue, and mass evacuation. Next year, we expect the arrival of another ship like this one.

We also commissioned today the Landing Craft Heavy vessels Agta, Iwak, and Waray. We now have five of this type of ship, which will also help in our humanitarian assistance and disaster response. This June, the RV Melville, a general purpose oceanographic research vessel, will also be arriving, which will help us in mapping our seabed and ocean floor.

We also addressed your other needs. We signed Executive Order No. 201 last February, which increased your Monthly Hazard Pay, Provisional Allowance, and Officers’ Allowance. Let us also add your Monthly Combat Pay, Subsistence Allowance, and of course, the AFP/PNP Housing Program.

Now, are we saying that all your needs are complete? No. Our point here is: In almost six years, we can proudly say that we have truly exhausted all our capabilities to improve our uniformed personnel. From the World War II era, we have advanced the Navy to the modern era. If before, being in the Navy felt like you were being oppressed and were the last to be noticed especially when there were no issues, now, I think we can say that the citizens and the state who care for you, truly care for you now.

Furthermore, I can say this: Along with your government's strengthening of your armed forces, you also matched it with genuine service to our Bosses, the Filipino people. From focusing on our internal security; to the intensified patrolling and guarding of our territory, particularly in the West Philippine Sea; to assisting our Bosses, especially during disasters and calamities. Faced with layered problems, the Philippines has also seen layered wisdom, skill, and resilience from you. Therefore, on behalf of every Filipino whose peace of mind you maintain and who you protect from danger: Thank you very much.

As our term ends, I can truly say I am fortunate for all the Flag Officers in Command that were assigned. From Rear Admiral Danilo Cortez, Vice Admiral Alexander Pama, Vice Admiral Jose Luis Alano, Vice Admiral Jesus Millan, to Vice Admiral Caesar Taccad—all of them, in every mission we assigned, were always ready and dependable. They never faced me with excuses and reasons. Of course, they could not have performed their duties well without every soldier and personnel who shared the burden of their service. To all of you: Thank you very much.

There are only 29 days left, and I will be stepping down from my position. We have served as Father of the Nation, and your commander-in-chief, for almost six years. Until my last days, I will truly never forget this time, when the Armed Forces of the Philippines rose up and demonstrated unparalleled service and compassion for our fellowmen and country. I am confident that: If we continue on the path we have started, the service to you, and your service to our country, will surely improve.

To all of you: It is a great honor to lead you. It is an honor to serve our great race, the Filipino people, with loyalty and truth.

Happy anniversary to our Philippine Navy. Thank you very much.