Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the ASEAN Business Awards Philippines 2014

[Delivered at the Shangri-la Hotel, Makati City, on September 9, 2014]

If there is a common denominator among history’s greatest success stories, it is that they happened not just through sheer luck, but through overcoming challenge and adversity. In an ever-changing world, those who have imprinted their names in our history books are the ones who proved that success is always a frame of mind—that if we believe in our capacities, and if we work hard, then we can do more than cope with the impact of external shocks; we can use it to our advantage.

If I may give an example: Back in 2010, the global economy was in flux. Countries and companies alike were in a constant state of uncertainty; citizens in certain areas around the world were protesting the growing inequality in their regions. Here, when our administration stepped into office, we found a bureaucracy in shambles—a result of an entrenched system of patronage and corruption. Despite the circumstances, we did not lose faith. We knew that we had a winning hand in the Filipino people, who are some of the most hardworking, creative, and loyal people in the world; and that all we had to do was give them an opportunity to shine.

This was the idea behind all our reform efforts—to create a regime of opportunities in our country, and to empower our people to fully utilize their skills and talents, and regain authorship of the next chapters of their lives. To do this, we had to foster a business climate that was more conducive to investors, and we did just that. For instance, we made sure that registering a business in the Philippines did not involve constant navigation through a maze or mazes of bureaucracy. We set up the Philippine Business Registry, which gathered the business registration processes of several different agencies into a single shop. Now, a process that formerly took from four to five days can be done in 30 minutes—with the added benefit of minimizing the opportunities for corruption.

The Department of Public Works and Highways, under the able leadership of Secretary Babes Singson, is another good example of reform. They optimized the bidding process, cutting down the required bidding documents from 20 to just 5. Simply by plugging the leaks in their system, their agency has saved nearly P28 billion, on the way to building, upgrading, and improving our infrastructure, like the 12,184 kilometers of national roads—which, if they were put together, is equivalent to four roads connecting Laoag to Zamboanga City.

Our message to investors is clear: The Philippines is once again open for business. We have leveled the playing field, and are giving the investors the assurances that matter—that as they deal with the commercial risk that naturally comes with enterprise, our government will do its utmost to minimize regulatory risk.

The results of our reforms have been stark. Last year, our economy grew by 7.2 percent, making us one of the best performing economies in Asia. In the second quarter of this year, with some sectors still feeling the effects of the spate of disasters we had late 2013, our GDP has grown by 6.4 percent. Naturally, the international community has recognized our turnaround. All in all, credit rating agencies from all over the world have announced a total of 20 positive credit ratings actions for the Philippines in the past four years—with the most significant upgrades coming last year, when Moody’s, Fitch, and Standard & Poor’s declared us investment grade. On top of this, we have consistently climbed global competitiveness ranking, with the latest development being our leap to 52nd place on the World Economic Forum’s 2014 Global Competitiveness Report—this is a 33 place jump from our ranking of 85th in 2010.

All this was a result of our belief in our people, and in our efforts to put them in the global spotlight. The resurgence of the Philippines is a result of striving for success in the face of challenge.

As we welcome ASEAN Integration in 2015, our country—and our companies—will face another new development in this increasingly globalized world. We expect competition to increase, putting more pressure on businesses to provide even better products and services to the people. Some have begun wondering: Can we keep up with increased competition from the region? We find the answer in events such as this. The nominees and awardees here today are those who will ensure that in the era of globalization, the Philippines will not merely stay afloat, the Philippines will excel. All of you here today are the individuals who, in the coming years, will carry our message to the world that the Philippines works, and that the Filipino is world class.

Ladies and gentlemen, we have reached a point in our history where the world is finally taking notice of our abilities and our potential—and this is not just in terms of business or economics. In fact, one of the most prominent recent examples of this is a small group of Filipinos who, just last week, managed to inspire the entire Philippine nation. I am sure you have heard of them: They go by the name of Gilas Pilipinas. [Applause]  They took on the world in the FIBA Basketball World Cup in Spain. They raised our hopes; they raised our collective heart rates in their close games; and perhaps most important of all, their hard work and passion served as yet another reminder that, in the global milieu, the Filipino can excel.

As we welcome an integrated Southeast Asia, your companies, and all companies around the Philippines, are entering a global competition of their own. I am hopeful that those of you here do not rest on their laurels—that this recognition of your excellence only further inspires you to pursue even greater heights. I am likewise hopeful that companies across the archipelago can follow the examples that our nominees and winners today have set, so that we may show our countrymen, the Southeast Asian region, and the entire world, the skill and talent that runs through the veins of every Filipino.

Thank you. Good day.