VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TYddo5i9x-g&[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the launch of Project NOAH (Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards)

[ Delivered at Barangay Nangka, City of Marikina, on July 6, 2012 ]

Good morning to everyone. Please, let us all be seated.

Secretary Mario Montejo; Secretary Sonny Coloma; of course, the “father” of Marikina, Tatay Del de Guzman; our esteemed representative—Frederico, is that right, Miro; Congressman Biazon; Mayor Karen Villanueva; Dr. Cesar Saloma; Dr. Alfredo Lagmay; Dr. Nathaniel Servando; of course, former Representative Risa Hontiveros-Baraquel; proponents of Project NOAH; other local government officials present; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my beloved countrymen:

Good morning to all of you.

Before anything else, I really want to thank you, the people of Marikina, for such a warm welcome. There were so many people outside who greeted us; and it reminded us that during Martial Law—1978 to be precise—my father was there with a group called LABAN or People’s Strength. And if you remember, throughout Metro Manila, there were only three areas won by my father and his allies because “block voting” or “rotten” voting was in style back then, right? Marikina was one of them. That’s why we shouldn’t be surprised that until now, we are still allies.

I will remember that, when I am sad, I will just visit Tatay Del here. And maybe our day will get better.

Back then, during the rainy season, wasn't it common to hear from Juan de la Cruz lines like 'Let Batman handle it,' 'I'm ready to take risks,' or 'Let's leave it all to God?'

In recent years, this seems to have become the habit of Filipinos near the path of a typhoon: When the sky darkens, start to worry; when thunder rumbles, don't expect to sleep soundly.

Given our long history with typhoons, shouldn't we Filipinos be used to it by now? According to the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council, about twenty typhoons pass through the Philippines each year. Imagine: of the five hundred flood incidents recorded from 2000 to 2011, almost one million and seven hundred Filipino families were affected. The damages reached over one hundred and sixty billion pesos. It's clear: the damage caused by floods to the lives, homes, and livelihoods of Filipinos is no joke.

When we started our term, we focused on the problems caused by typhoons. One of the things we pushed for was to improve and increase our equipment. The four locally-assembled water level monitoring sensors we found in 2010, we increased to nine in 2011 and twelve now in 2012, and 2012 isn't even over yet. We assembled one hundred automated rain gauges last year, and now, a total of eighty-six of these have been deployed in various regions of the country. Since 2010, our six Doppler radar stations in Baguio, Subic, Tagaytay, Virac, Mactan, and Hinatuan have also been operational. We expect three additional Doppler weather radars to become operational in Tampakan, Aparri, and Baler before the end of 2012.

Despite these successes, we are aware that widespread change will not happen in just a moment.

Today, we are gathered to launch Project NOAH, or the Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards of the Department of Science and Technology. Let us move forward together towards our collective goal: to have a more accurate and reliable system to keep our countrymen safe from danger, and to avoid or reduce the damage caused by disasters in our country.

Project NOAH will serve as the ark of Filipinos against disaster. Let us end the accustomed suffering every rainy season. 'Let it be' is no longer acceptable, we are tired of fear. With the right and sufficient knowledge, we will train Filipinos to be fully prepared.

This project aims to provide sufficient lead time for flood warnings, especially for communities near our eighteen major river basins. Using local technology and modern equipment, we will empower and enable local and national governments to further improve their operations and response during heavy rainfall events.

And now that Project NOAH has been launched, we are confident that our tools and equipment will be increased and improved. The DOST target: six hundred locally-produced automated rain gauges and four hundred water level monitoring sensors to be installed in selected locations across the country before the end of 2013 (Mario, 2013 huh?). That means next year, Mario. And all of these will be made right here in the Philippines; made by Filipinos, for Filipinos. With the enthusiasm of Secretary Mario Montejo, we are confident that this will be achieved. It might even be finished in 2012, I wouldn't be upset if it was finished by 2012. But 2013 is okay too.

If you could take a look at the Project NOAH website at (for those who didn't study computers, I'll go slowly so you don't misspell the address) the Project NOAH website at noah.dost.gov.ph , (is that correct?). You will be impressed by the convenience brought about by the technology we are using. Just type in your location, and using our Doppler radars and other equipment, you will know the weather conditions, and how heavy the rainfall will be in your area. We will no longer have to ask. We will no longer have to wait for news; it can be accessed anytime and information can be obtained.

With the many modern equipment we have mentioned, the question is: what changes will this bring to the ordinary Filipino?

Now, the palm of the hand is no longer the measure of rainfall intensity. We will obtain accurate data from our rain gauges. No longer will we use knee-deep, waist-deep, and head-deep as our measure of water level; water level sensors provide us with exact measurements. We will also no longer rely on guesswork to determine the weather and where the rain will fall; Doppler radars now provide us with real-time data and information.

Under Project NOAH, we can improve and consolidate all relevant and timely information needed during disasters. All of this will strengthen the operations of our agencies when heavy rain and flooding are imminent. Now, there is no more working in silos, and our initiatives have been combined and unified to prepare for disasters.

No miracle happened in this project; it is the result of the collaboration of the Department of Science and Technology led by Secretary Mario Montejo, together with Dr. Nathaniel Servando of PAGASA, the University of the Philippines, and other partner agencies. You are proving that it is not true that “life is just weather-weather” [laughter and applause]—it is in our hands whether a bright tomorrow will dawn, and it is also in our hands whether we will forever hide from worry. Using science and technology, coupled with enthusiasm and sincere service, we can protect the welfare of the Filipino people.

In the Bible, Noah built an ark that served as a refuge against disaster. Project NOAH is our response to the deluge caused by fear and misfortune, and it will steer the Filipinos towards preparedness and peace of mind. This will row us towards safety.

Let us always remember that we Filipinos are all in the same boat. Let us continue to work together and remain united, and I am confident that we will reach our desired destination: a Philippines that is safer, more comfortable, and with wider opportunities for development for all.

Good day. Thank you very much to everyone.



To learn more about Project NOAH, click here

