Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, in tribute to TESDA scholars.

From the very beginning of our term, it was clear to us: We are not content with the concept of a “trickle-down” effect. This was the belief in the past, where we only focused on economic growth and waited for its benefits to flow down to the fringes of society. Because here, we are just relying on luck; we also know the length of time it takes for its positive effects to reach our countrymen. If our countrymen also lack the ability to contribute to progress, economic growth is meaningless to them.

That is why our vow is: inclusive growth. On the Straight and Narrow Path, no one will be left behind. We have thought of and launched various programs to empower our citizens to participate in the progress of society. Today, together with TESDA, one of the agencies promoting what we call inclusive growth, we celebrate the success of the Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) program. We also pay tribute to the transformation in the lives of our scholars. To all of you, congratulations. [Applause]

When we took office, we identified one of the reasons why many of our countrymen are unemployed and left behind. This is the jobs-skills mismatch, or the lack of alignment between the skills of graduates and the needs of our industries. Consequently, many end up in low-quality jobs with meager salaries. In this situation, how can one care for a family and secure their future? If we simply allowed this problem to persist, we would have allowed the cycle of suffering for many of our countrymen to lengthen and worsen.

That is why we immediately spoke with the industries; we asked them what their needs were. They responded with cooperation, where they themselves accepted trainees in their companies. Now, there are 8.4 million course graduates of TVET. [Applause] Let me clarify, we are referring to courses here; and the graduates, there are some graduates who take more than one course, so it is not 8.4 million people.

One part of TVET is the Training for Work Scholarship Program or TWSP. With the help of the private sector, we train our scholars in various fields such as IT-BPM, semiconductor and electronics, agri-fishery, tourism, general infrastructure, and automotive. This August, the number of graduates here was 877,943. What’s even better is, according to a study, 71.9 percent of them immediately found employment [applause]—a far cry from the 28.5 percent employment rate previously. If we look at some industries, the employment rate of TESDA graduates and the Semiconductor and Electronics Industries in the Philippines or SEIPI reaches 91.26 percent—almost 100 percent, or every graduate here can find a job. [Applause] I would like to guarantee that. But, if the graduate doesn't look for a job, they might not find one.

Among the beneficiaries of TWSP are Merryll, Renji, and Cristina. We heard their stories after training at TESDA. This is just proof that what we promised, we are fulfilling not just in words, but more importantly, in deeds. Through training that lasts for a few months, we can immediately provide decent and dignified livelihoods to so many Filipinos. That is the principle of the Straight and Narrow Path: benefits are given not tomorrow, but now. And if possible, as Linda Baldoz said, yesterday. [Laughter] When a program is this good, and we see the positive results, it should be strengthened. The fund for TESDA in 2010 was at P2.8 billion; by 2015, we almost doubled that to P5.3 billion. [Applause] Thank you to our colleagues in the Legislature.

Aside from TWSP, there is of course our enthusiastic graduates of the Sari-sari Store Training and Access to Resources or STAR Program of TESDA and Coca-Cola. [Applause] In this program, we provide training for women on professional business management. Imagine, it teaches bookkeeping, inventory management, accounting, and other skills to grow their income. For example, instead of selling raw ingredients, they sell cooked food, which adds to their income. Even how to ensure that the additional income goes to the right place is taught in the STAR program. This June, it reached 35,000 graduates, and Coca-Cola and the government are targeting 200,000 graduates before 2020. Thank you to our partner, Coke. [Applause]

I often recall what Sec Joel told me. As he said, there's a sari-sari store owner who used to earn P800 a day; now, P4,000 a day. This is five times his income thanks to the STAR program. [Applause] It reminds me that our salaries are now the same, but he has no complaints, no stomach aches, no thinning hair. [Laughter] He has no “other benefits.”

Another significant program of TESDA is the Special Training for Employment Program or STEP. This is free training conducted in barangays focusing on entrepreneurship and community service. Beneficiaries are provided with starter toolkits to serve as capital for their livelihood. Since its implementation began in July 2014, the number of beneficiaries of the program: 43,800 graduates. [Applause]

I once shared the story of one of the STEP graduates, Ms. Jennifer Noble of Batangas City. Before she trained at TESDA, she only sold refreshments and had no permanent job. Back then, she was lucky if she earned P300 a day. After receiving free training from TESDA, and completing the Beauty Care and Wellness Massage course, after one year, Jennifer had two salons. Now, she earns at least P2,000 a day. [Applause]

They, along with scholars like you, are just part of the thousands of our countrymen who have been and are being helped by TESDA, and are now helping their families and communities. These programs are truly worthwhile and meaningful. Because of the success you graduates have achieved, your government is able to continue them. The taxes you contribute to the national treasury also help provide opportunities for many more of our countrymen.

It's really different when the leader is like Secretary Joel Villanueva. [Applause] His predecessor, despite having already done a lot that you know, even wanted to file a demand now. Joel is a loyal, hardworking, and reliable public servant. Even when he was still studying, Joel was already a well-known athlete. Wherever he was on a team, Joel was considered a star player. Of course, you can only become a good athlete or player if you pour in hard work and dedication; if you have discipline and are willing to sacrifice in training. Joel really worked hard to achieve what he wanted. That's why we are sure that whatever he supports and teaches, he isn't just pretending. He isn't content with just reading books, simply learning the theories and concepts of a field isn't enough for him; he actually does and tries them. Now, Joel is even a certified barista. [Applause] He uses his talent and experience to further improve the programs offered by the agency.

Let me repeat: Before, perhaps, a TESDA administrator would be satisfied as long as we had graduates, that was enough. Joel, in collaboration with our DOLE, our DepEd, and other government agencies—first, what is being studied has meaning, second, he ensures that the graduates have a future. [Applause] I remember Joel reminding me of a movie I watched called “Thunderstruck,” starring NBA player Kevin Durant. I was struck by what he said: “Hard work beats talent when talent fails to work hard.”

Joel certainly didn't lack skill, hard work, and enthusiasm, which is why he reached his potential. And it's clear: Joel demonstrates the same qualities in his public service; he maximizes every opportunity to help Filipinos progress. I'm not surprised that many believe in his abilities, because frankly, he has already proven a lot and will prove more. [Applause] I have full confidence: Joel is the leader the country needs, [applause] who we are sure will help and improve more livelihoods, once he is elected to a higher position. [Applause] It seems like your applause is weak. You probably don't agree. [Applause]

It's clear: TESDA is proof of the positive transformation of our institutions. Your agency is a model of how the Straight Path addresses the needs of our Bosses, and in having a government focused on delivering long-term benefits, especially to those who need it most.

We have already attended many gatherings of TESDA, which is concrete proof of the increasing opportunities in our country. If activities like these will fill our schedule, I think, even if we celebrate every day, that's okay. [Applause] As I said, we are used to, when Secretary Joel Villanueva and TESDA invite us, there are no questions, no hesitation in going. [Applause]

Truly: On the Straight and Narrow Path, we exhaust all that we can to improve the condition of our Bosses. We continue to invest and pour support into education, health, and our social services. And because of our contribution, we are now reaping the fruits of our collective effort.

As I said during the SONA: We have only just begun with all the successes we have achieved. According to experts, if the Straight and Narrow Path is not derailed, within a generation, we will apparently be a first-world country. If good governance that drives economic growth continues, it won't be long before we equal, if not surpass, developed countries. [Applause]

In the remaining time of my term, we will continue to do what is right and just to lay down more opportunities in our country. But as my father said before, “I can open the door for you; but it is up to you, if you keep it open.” It is truly up to you if you will step inside; in the end of all our efforts, the maximizing of opportunity is in your hands, the progress is in your hands.

In 2016, the people will once again face a crossroads, where we will choose the next leaders of the country. The question is: Will all that we have worked for, all that we have achieved, simply vanish because of one election? May we unite once more and walk in the same direction; let us continue the reforms that will make the changes we are enjoying permanent; let us continue the leadership that has done and will do what is right for the Filipino; let us continue to walk the Straight and Narrow Path—the path where no one is left behind in progress. [Applause]

In closing, to you graduates and those currently taking courses, I earnestly appeal. Opportunities can indeed be given to you, but your success is in your hands. Every success of yours, in English there is a saying: Failure is an orphan, success has many fathers. When asked, “Will others be given enough opportunities?” The answer is, “Yes.” Especially if you show that the resources, time poured in to give you the opportunity to bear fruit were truly worthwhile. That is my earnest appeal. Let us improve and take advantage of the opportunity you have received so that you can pass it on to others who will follow in your footsteps.

And just finally, I saw Gladys, I remembered Joel. How about when he really had something in mind that he should pursue. Back in 2013, Joel was thinking of running for senator. I told Joel, “I don’t think so, brother, let’s pass on 2013. Maximize what you can do at TESDA.” And I think when he agreed, many really benefited because we have Joel Villanueva steering TechVoc. [Applause] In five years, he changed the face of TechVoc. From before, it was like a destination for the hopeless. Now, it is the path to earning a bigger salary than the President of the Republic. [Laughter and applause]

I remember when Joel was courting Gladys, Joel seemed to know that Gladys was really the one for him. [Laughter] Joel went through a long trial, if my memory of the story is correct. That’s why I, I look at Joel’s life and I say, “Joel went through a long trial. Maybe my trial is also about to end.” [Laughter and applause] And Joel gives us only one inspiration.

So my colleagues, let me reiterate, the future – it’s not true that there is already a predetermined fate for us. We create our own destiny, now, with the help of God, He will give us the path to achieve all our dreams.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.