[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ha6sxnqQCB0&feature=related[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT:

Recently, we delivered a message to the graduates of PMA. Yesterday, we went to the graduation of Ateneo. Today, I face a new batch of outstanding students from the PNPA Batch Masaligan. I congratulate you on your success, along with your parents who worked hard, the teachers, and the institution that molded the new generation of defenders of the nation.

You underwent difficulties in the past four years. Aside from the exams that sharpened your minds, you were also strengthened by trials such as crawling in the mud, or being exposed to the scorching sun. However, I must emphasize that you will face more and bigger trials after this occasion. The theories you learned are no match for the realities you will face upon leaving the academy. As you enter society, failing grades or demerits will not be the consequence of your mistakes. Every citizen you defend against crime, or rescue from fire, or guard within prisons, cannot be equaled by any reward or medal. A life you save cannot be compensated by a grade.

Aside from the knowledge and intelligence shared with you by the PNPA, you will also need principles to overcome corruption and poverty in society. You will be offered large sums of money to compromise your honor; you will be offered a lot of power to reverse your stance. In these temptations, I hope you will not give in, and remain trustworthy. Now that you are in a position to enforce what is right, do not forget it and abuse it; do not ignore it. Fulfill your duties with all your heart and honesty. Be a partner of our administration in burying corrupt practices.

Please do not take it against me if I am frank with you. In the past decade, many have doubted the ability and integrity of our police force. But I know there are clean and honest individuals among your ranks. I know the good deeds the police are doing. Even if it is not widely reported in the media, I assure you that you are heroes in my eyes, and heroes to the families you help.

I also know that there are police officers who are desperate, not because of inherent corruption, but also due to lack of salary increases and benefits. How can you be enforcers of the law if you do not have sufficient training and your equipment is from the time of Magellan? It is unfair to place the welfare of the people on your shoulders if you cannot even provide a sufficient dinner for your own families. Do not worry; this practice is over. I will not allow you to bear the shortcomings caused by the mismanagement of the previous government. While you faithfully serve the Filipinos, I am with you in improving your situation, and in fully restoring the dignity of this institution.

Because of our reforms, our police force is already showing its capabilities. Before, the case of car theft in the country was serious. With focused attention on these cases, including the designation of responsible PNP leaders, we reduced the case of car theft from almost five hundred cases in the first semester of 2010, to almost two hundred cases in the latter part of last year. Of course, we will not stop until there are no more cases of car theft.

Our police immediately clarified the case of the murder of a media member in Malabon, Marlina Sumera Flores. They also resolved three other media killings involving Gerardo Ortega, Jose Daguio, and Miguel Belen. In these cases, the perpetrators were identified and arrested due to the diligence and dedication of the PNP. We truly have nothing to boast about regarding these efforts.

The renewed vigor of Filipinos is clearly visible due to the changes we have brought about. And while you continue to provide service to the nation without fail, the government will also not fail to provide corresponding reforms and support to your ranks.

We will continue to conduct training to further hone your skills. You should no longer be a hapless cowboy venturing into battle without sufficient equipment. That time when the hapless cowboy had a sickly horse and a gun that didn't fire is over. We will pursue those who steal and take advantage of funds that should benefit many of you. We are reviewing the procurement process in the police and other services, and we have established the Internal Audit Service in your agency to prevent corruption. In this way, we have saved almost 400 million pesos. This is where the 10,000 peso Christmas bonus that our police recently received came from. [ Light applause ] It seems few received it… we might investigate those who spread the word about additional bonuses.

This is the first time the government has fully provided this benefit to the PNP. (Apparently, there is also a “drop-drop” in the PNP.) We are also streamlining the bureaucracy to ensure the success of the Modernization Program of the agencies that protect the safety of the nation. We will no longer be stuck in outdated methods; we will keep pace with the times.

We also did not overlook the fact that the lack of decent housing is still a problem for our police. This year, we will build at least 20,000 housing units for the military and police, at a very affordable price. Their previous rent of three to five thousand pesos will be reduced to 200 to 500 pesos to own their own homes. In addition to this housing program, we also launched additional educational assistance programs for the children of our police. Of course, the “Fire” and “Jail” [agencies] will follow. From July 2010 to March 2011, more than three hundred children of police officers were able to study with the help of PNP partner agencies. We will strive to have at least one member of each family in our services be able to study.

In your studies, you were taught to uphold honorable service to the nation. I am confident that the foundation inherited from this institution is strong. May you be the basis of good deeds, and be allies of just and honest governance. Let us save the people from the greedy in society—which is also the name of your class.

We are revealing light from good governance to the nation. We will not hesitate to fight and punish those who continue to indulge in wealth and power. Even if we go through the eye of the needle in resolving the countless problems we face, there is no doubt that we will overcome them because I have all of you, the entire Batch Masaligan, with me in this crusade.

And a piece of advice to those who are older among you: You were nurtured by your parents and the State, not to take advantage of others but to help our fellow citizens. In your decisions, let us make this the basis: Did I help my fellow citizen or was I among those who caused suffering? Let us choose to help and surely we will end the time of lack in our country.

Good morning. Thank you very much to all of you.