Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Graduation of the PNPA Lakandula Class of 2015

Good afternoon to all of you.

Today, we mark the transition of 246 members of the PNPA “LAKANDULA” Class of 2015 into becoming members of our uniformed ranks. Together with your parents and relatives, as well as your teachers and leaders in the PNP, BJMP, and BFP, I congratulate all of you. [Applause]

The name you chose for yourselves becomes even more meaningful now that the heroism of the 44 brave members of the Special Action Force has become part of our national consciousness. The example they showed as “Brown-skinned people ready to offer their blood and strength to the country” is invaluable. I am sure that their sacrifice is with you in mind as you enter a new stage of your service to the country. As police officers, you will be placed in situations where the lives of our countrymen, as well as your own lives and those of your colleagues, depend on your actions and decisions. I expect that you will use your training and everything you have learned here at the PNPA, not only to succeed in your missions, but also to protect the welfare of everyone.

I am certain that you have been following the news and commentaries about Oplan Exodus. Some of these served as inspiration for young police officers like yourselves, and raised the Filipino people’s regard for the entire police force. But unfortunately, many of these also caused confusion, if not anger, among our countrymen.

Now, there are two reports that serve as sources of information regarding what happened in Mamasapano: The Board of Inquiry Report, and the Senate Report which was formed after their investigation. Many of the questions in the minds of our citizens will be answered by these reports. Both reports agree with our previous statements regarding the details of the operation. In fact, the two reports reinforce our position from the beginning that the lack of coordination with the AFP was a major mistake. What I regret is that, instead of asking me, those who made the report engaged in speculation. We might ask: How can speculation help clarify the issue if facts are not used?

Unless further clarification is needed from me by those concerned, this will be the last time I speak about this issue. Perhaps it is not an overstatement if I also express my point of view, to clarify to you the basis of the decisions I made regarding what happened in Mamasapano. You have the right to know the whole truth. It is often said: The truth shall set us all free. Perhaps the most important question I need to answer is the question of the father of one of the fallen SAF Commandos. He asked, “Why did you send my son there? Why did you let him die?”

I understand the source of these statements. I repeatedly revisit what I know about what happened, and think about whether I fell short, and if there was anything else I should have done. Let me emphasize: I will not allow anyone in our uniformed ranks to go on what is considered a suicide mission. When I see that an operation is extremely dangerous, I will be the first to say that it should not continue. But based on the version of the plan presented to me, I was convinced that it was truly well-prepared, and that its implementation would be smooth. We also assumed that all our orders would be followed, especially since we were talking to professionals about this.

For me, I hope you would also try to put yourselves in my situation. If, from the very morning I was first sent a message, I was told truthfully, “Sir, we are in a tight spot, we were not able to follow your coordinated instructions so the Armed Forces’ progress is slow. Can you help us expedite the response?” If I had known this immediately, do you think I wouldn’t have found a way to help our troops? But you know what happened. On the morning of January 25th, there was no sense of urgency in the texts they sent me. It even seemed to me that what was happening in Mamasapano was already over or almost over because our mechanized units and artillery were already responding.

That’s why I continued with my plan to go to Zamboanga. Let me also explain what happened when I went there. Due to the previous attacks by the rogue MNLF, we ordered that Zamboanga City be considered a “hardened site.” This means that security policies were strengthened to prevent terrorists from carrying out their evil plans. Upon my arrival there, I was shown photos of the car used in the bombing, as well as the house where this car originated. There was surveillance up to the area where the bomb was detonated. The question is, if this vehicle was tracked, why wasn’t the attack prevented? You know, no one could answer me that day. And in the following days, it was explained to us that our intelligence operatives did not see any overt acts that would serve as probable cause or reason to flag down the occupants. Furthermore, it has been almost two years since the Zamboanga siege. But the things that need to be fixed have not yet been fixed due to local issues. That’s why I want to use this opportunity to talk to Mayor Beng Climaco in detail to expedite the rehabilitation of the affected communities.

While I was attending to these matters, I thought that what happened in Mamasapano was already over or almost over. Let me just remind you, it was getting dark when I was informed of the true situation, not by the 55th, but by our 84th, which is known as the Seaborne Company. They told me that it was already difficult to link up because it was getting dark, and there was a risk of friendly fire. We did not agree that the link-up could only be completed the next day. I said to them, “Aren’t those in trouble our brothers? Shouldn’t we find a way?” I ordered them to create a plan to link up as soon as possible and save the 84th. The minimum I would allow was that they should be given aid such as medicine and ammunition resupply if it was truly impossible to link up. In the eyes of God, I am telling you the truth. But I know that some people are closed-minded and will not listen no matter what I say.

Now, I can give a long explanation about the danger that Marwan and Usman pose to our countrymen. I can also detail the problems and mistakes in the operation that was carried out. Now that I have explained everything I went through, and the information I had on that day, can anyone truthfully say that they could have surpassed what we did with the information we had during those days to address a situation they didn’t even know?

But I know: No words will suffice to explain the death of our brave police officers. No report or speech can contain the sadness felt by a parent who has lost a good child. All I can do after saying everything that needs to be said and doing everything that needs to be done: I ask for your understanding.

No matter how intense my anger is at the disobedience of my orders, no matter how much I regret trusting people who hid the truth from me, I cannot erase the fact: 44 members of our police force are dead. And this happened during my term. I will carry—and I repeat—I will carry this truth to my own grave.

Let me repeat to you: As President, I bear the responsibility for any outcome, any success, pain, or tragedy, that we may experience in seeking lasting security and peace. I regret that there are families who have lost spouses, fathers, siblings, children, because of what happened in Mamasapano. I regret that in my desire to give space to grieve to those who, for the first time, will see the remains of their relatives, some thought I was insensitive and lacked compassion. My intention then was to help in the healing. What I wanted, when someone asks “What happened? Why did they die? What will happen to us?” was to already have a clear answer. If my response to the questions was “I don’t know,” how could I help them heal? I also regret that our peace process is being affected by the sentiment attached to the result of Oplan Exodus. To every Filipino who was disappointed and hurt by the events related to this operation: I humbly ask for your understanding.

As President, I have so many issues that I need to focus on simultaneously, that require immediate response and decision-making. I am responsible for 100 million Filipinos inside and outside our country. Yes, I am the President, but I am also a human being. I cannot read the minds of everyone I talk to, and I cannot watch over everyone at all times. But as I promised, I will continue to do what is right and reasonable. I will continue to do everything I can to serve everyone, and to be true to my sworn duty. I didn't say I was like God who knows everything, but it is my responsibility to correct mistakes when they are discovered. So I assure you: We respect due process. Those who should be held accountable will be held accountable.

I understand why Filipinos demand so much from their leaders. They have long been robbed of the taxes they worked hard for. Their welfare has been ignored for years. For a long time, they were denied what was rightfully theirs.

When I ran for president, I told you: I will not steal. I invited you all to take the straight path, to change the old system. You gave me your support. When I took my oath of office, I said: No more sirens. We will end the system where only a few benefit, while our people suffer. After four and nine [months] of my term, you are already seeing the change. We have leveled the bumps in our system. We have pursued the corrupt. We have restored the people's trust in the government. The former label of our “Sick Man of Asia” has been replaced with “Asia’s Rising Tiger.”

With the progress of our economy, we have been given greater capacity to focus on the shortcomings in the skills and equipment of the PNP, BJMP, and BFP. In the past, the view of the police was that if you gave them weapons, the NPA would just seize them. In 2007, you could read in the newspapers, for example, that instead of being given caliber weapons and equipment, our police were only given pistols and batons, so that the NPA wouldn't seize them. The question we ask is: How can you fight back if those you encounter are carrying M-16s?

As we continue on the straight path, we continue to address the shortcomings we found in your ranks. Our goal: to further develop your skills for the so-called “shoot, scoot, and communicate.” As early as 2014, we had closed your shortage of pistols by purchasing 74,879 Glock 9mm pistols for your ranks. There are also 12,399 handheld radios, and 144 patrol jeeps that we have provided to the PNP from 2010 to 2014. This March, we were able to hire 4,859 non-uniformed personnel to focus on administrative work in your agency, to increase the number of police patrolling the community. Last year, we also filled 9,860 PO1 positions. This year, we have allocated P1.64 billion to add 10,000 more PO1 positions. For the Special Action Force: We are carefully studying the lessons from Mamasapano to further ensure minimal risks during operations. We will increase their training and equipment, and pour out all the care that is due [to you] as an elite unit of the PNP. The challenge to the next chief of our National Police: Develop a plan to further strengthen the unity of our police. Let's change the culture where it seems like there are separate tribes in the PNP; this one has a relative, that one has a relative. We must move as one to be effective guardians of our citizens.

Truly, it is evident: the government's treatment of our police has changed significantly. Now, their morale is high and the list of their accomplishments is long. An example of this is Senior Inspector Charity Galvez, who led her team in the face of an attack by 250 NPA members on their precinct in 2011 in Agusan del Sur. Our police also successfully defended their precinct in Mati City, Davao Oriental recently after an attack by an estimated 80 rebels. There is the story of PO3 Edlyn Arbo, who fearlessly chased a holdupper in the jeep she was riding, even though she was off-duty and unarmed. When Typhoon Yolanda struck, Inspector Marjorie Manuta walked six kilometers to help our fellow citizens affected by the disaster. Perhaps you also remember the story of our four rookie policewomen who bravely faced the Martilyo Gang at the Mall of Asia in 2014.

In the fight against crime, the results of the PNP's operations are also remarkable, under the supervision of Secretary Mar Roxas of the DILG and the Napolcom and those who comprise our PNP leadership. Since we tasked him to focus on suppressing crime, especially in the National Capital Region, and launch Oplan Lambat-Sibat last year: the previous 918 incidents per week of general criminality rate from January to June 2014, has been reduced to a weekly average of 471 in the past four weeks. This means that every week, 447 of our fellow citizens are spared from harm. Even better, we were able to lower the general criminality rate to 400 last week. Because we see that this initiative is effective, we will also launch Oplan Lambat-Sibat in other regions.

It is clear: while the state cares for our police, they are becoming even better at caring for our citizens.

The transformation happening in your ranks is just part of the widespread change happening in our society. Let me emphasize: I promised you change, and we are now reaping the benefits of that change. And I have no intention of stopping the advancement of reforms in the remaining year and three months I have in office. With the continued trust and cooperation of every decent Filipino, we can ensure that the old system, where so many suffer while a few indulge, will not return.

To the graduating class: You are fortunate because the PNP you will be joining is more modern and more complete in terms of skills and equipment. The challenge for you: Follow, if not surpass, the good example of those who came before you. With every criminal you apprehend, with every bribe you reject, and with every display of courage during times of disaster, you will contribute to the greater safety of society. In this way, you will bring honor not only to yourselves, but also to your loved ones, to your uniform, and to our Motherland. With full pride, you can say: You are indeed the “Brown race ready to offer their blood and strength to the country.”

Good day. Thank you very much. And again, I congratulate you all.



Read in English