VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skomt4gqmTI#t=225[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT:

Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino President of the Philippines At a forum organized by the French Institute for International Relations

[ Delivered in Paris, France, on September 18, 2014 ]

Separated though we are by great distances, France and the Philippines have a strong and enduring connection: the shared value we give to democracy and to defending it. The battle cry of your own revolution, “ Liberté, egalité, et fraternité!” spurred thousands to action around the world—including a Filipino clerk named Andres Bonifacio, whom we honor as the Father of the Philippine Revolution.

The links between our countries did not end with our respective revolutions; they would emerge stronger after a dark period in my country’s history. My parents were among those who fought against the Marcos dictatorship, and for that, my father, Senator Benigno S. Aquino Jr., gave his life. After his death, my mother, Corazon C. Aquino, and the rest of the nation collectively took on the fight for the future of the Philippines. Like their compatriots in France many years ago, millions of Filipinos took to the streets—this time, armed with only prayers and songs—in protest against their oppressor. Through the will of the people, democracy was reclaimed for the Philippines.

A true champion of democracy, France was one of the first countries that recognized the newly-formed democratic government of the Philippines after the peaceful People Power Revolution. Recognizing her achievements, and more importantly, the achievements of our countrymen, your government conferred on my mother the Legion of Honor.

A generation later, we are engaged in a different kind of fight: one against poverty and corruption; inequality and injustice; and the other threats that keep us from realizing in full the promise of democracy. As France proved herself a reliable friend in the days when the Filipino people most needed it, so too, do I believe that we can move forward and fight these new battles together, as partners focused on the well-being of our respective peoples.

After all, the fundamental principles we share—the values of democracy, the respect for the rule of law, the promotion of human  rights, and the attainment of social justice—have likewise been the principles that have allowed my administration to turn the tide in the Philippines. Perhaps you will allow me to share with you our transformation from a country mired in apathy and hopelessness, to a nation with a dynamic, emerging economy, whose people have a newfound hope and optimism.

When my administration came into office, we found a government in shambles and a people devoid of hope. Businesses were loath to invest in the Philippines because of the unpredictable environment. Economic and industrial growth were sluggish—if at all, and our countrymen believed that they had no choice but to seek greener pastures abroad. The root of the problems: a corrupt and inept government.

We knew that to move forward, we had to plug all the leaks and vastly minimize waste. In some agencies, the process was fairly straightforward. Secretary Rogelio Singson in the Department of Public Works and Highways implemented simple but crucial reforms. For instance: By cutting down the required documents for bidders from 20 to 5, opportunities for corruption were minimized; by removing the requirement to submit a Letter of Intent, collusion was eliminated because bidders did not know who they were competing against and thus could not rig the bidding; ultimately, by demanding professionalism at all levels and at all times, we were able to get what we refer to as the 5 R’s—the right projects, implemented by the right people, for the right quality and the right price, implemented right on time, if not earlier.  On a larger scale, we found it necessary to re-examine our budget. We could not allow the continuous funding of projects which had questionable or zero results. As such, we employed zero-based budgeting so that each and every peso would have an equivalent and tangible benefit on the lives of our countrymen.

Together with ensuring that government would no longer be a party to wasting our people’s hard-earned money, we introduced landmark reform to agencies once known as hotbeds of corruption. For instance, our Bureau of Customs was given a fresh start through the appointment of a new Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners. Such reforms made its way to the rank and file of the agency: we kept closer watch especially for those on the frontlines, previously security guards used to act as cashiers, and warehousemen became examiners—a sure recipe for thievery.

As we maximized the state’s resources by improving our systems and empowering the bureaucracy, we also put an end to the era of impunity, by making sure that those who committed wrongdoing in office will be held to account, regardless of how lofty their positions were. In fact, my predecessor in the Presidency, who was accused of crimes against the nation, is under hospital arrest right now as she faces two unbailable charges.

Our commitment to good governance is now bearing fruit. Money that once went to the corrupt now goes to massive investments into the Filipino people—as exemplified by our budget for Social Welfare, Health, and Education, amongst others, increasing in multiples.

The scope of our national health insurance program, or PhilHealth, was expanded, especially for the poorest of the poor. This means that they have access not only to treatment for common ailments, but for catastrophic ones as well—diseases like leukemia and breast cancer, for instance.

The number of households enrolled in the Conditional Cash Transfer Program, our flagship poverty reduction initiative, has grown by leaps and bounds: from covering less than 800,000 households when we assumed office in 2010, to more than 4 million households today. More recently, we expanded this to include households with children not only in the elementary ages but up to those studying high school. We did this because a study revealed that high school graduates earn up to 40% more than those who finished just the elementary level. For each of these four million households, the primary conditions asked of them was simple: keep your children in school. In exchange, they will receive support in the form of regular cash grants.

Filipino schoolchildren now have access to stronger foundations for learning, thanks to the K to 12 program, which puts our educational system at par with international standards. Enriching the quality of our basic education system includes meeting logistical needs: our administration has effectively addressed the inherited backlog in school seats, classrooms, and textbooks left to us by our predecessors. All this, of course, is in preparation for the education they will receive from universities, colleges, and technical and vocational institutions, which are all empowering our countrymen to be increasingly employable, and as industry and government cooperate to ensure that the courses students take will match the actual skills needed in the job market.

We are seeing our reforms bearing fruit. Look at the numbers: From April 2013 to April 2014 a study has shown that 1.65 million more Filipinos hold jobs. From 2012 to 2013, 2.5 million people have moved above the poverty line. Our first task was to help the poorest of the poor overcome poverty. Now, we are also capacitated to help those within the “near poor,” meaning those who have barely moved out of the poverty line. By addressing their vulnerabilities, they, and we hope, need not fear that a catastrophic event such as a major illness or a natural calamity will pull below the poverty line again.

All these investments were made to ensure that the Filipino people, who are our greatest competitive advantage, are enabled to make the most of opportunities borne of renewed confidence in our country. Indeed, good governance has redounded to a more capable and more active citizenry full of hope and optimism, and the combination of an increasingly-competitive population and a sustainable, prudently-run economy, has gained global notice.

This was affirmed by the three major credit rating agencies in the world—Moody’s, Fitch, and Standard and Poor’s—which gave the Philippines investment grade in 2013, the first time ever in our country’s history. Your own French Export Credit Agency also upgraded our country’s risk rating; and most recently, Korea’s National Information and Credit Evaluation Ratings, Inc. raised us to investment grade. All this happened at a time when agencies have been very conservative with their evaluations, due to an uncertain global economic climate. In fact, even in a period when various countries were being downgraded, the Philippines emerged as the world’s most upgraded sovereign. On top of this, since we took office, we have consistently climbed global rankings of competitiveness. Most prominently perhaps, from 2010 to 2014, we went from 85th in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report, to 52nd, making us the most improved country in that span.

It is clear: good governance is good economics. Again, let me emphasize that this is not an empty pronouncement. Our Business Process Management Sector continues to mark impressive growth; manufacturing has rebounded impressively; and tourists all over the world are flocking to our beaches and cities, seeing for themselves how truly it is more fun in the Philippines.

Given the unprecedented confidence enjoyed by our country, we expect 2015 to be a banner year. After all, the factors that can allow us to build on our momentum are in place. We will be entering a demographic sweet spot by 2015, which will last for around 35 years. We have been investing in our greatest resource—our people, resulting in an expanding, productive labor force now even more prepared to seize all the opportunities. We have a strategic location, and vast potential to be a crucial hub of trade, investments, and services.

Our economic turnaround is especially significant, in light of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations formally integrating as an economic community in 2015. This is a milestone in the evolution of ASEAN as we pursue the common prosperity of our peoples and foster the peace and stability fundamental to continued development. Naturally, this opens doors of opportunity to our European friends as well. As a leader in many cutting-edge industries, such as renewable energy, public transport, and aerospace, France, for instance, together with EU member states, will find far greater potential for enhanced engagement with our country and our region. This is a timely development; given the recovery of markets in the Western Hemisphere, increased cooperation can only redound to a healthier global economy, and the promise of further growth and development for all.

As individual nations in a diverse world, we have everything to gain when our relations are characterized by harmony and a healthy  respect—not only for each other, but more importantly, for the rule of law. This is in line with what my father once said, and if I may paraphrase his thoughts: if you tolerate the abuse of the rights of one, it sets the stage for the abuse of your own rights. As responsible members of the international community, it is our duty to uphold the rule of law in every instance, and to reject might and power when they seek to subvert the rule of law.

The Philippines has consistently expressed its concern on rising tensions in our part of the world, due to maritime and territorial disputes in the South China Sea. As has been reported by international news agencies the world over, there is an emerging pattern of aggression bent on establishing new realities at sea and in the air. These violations of international law pose a danger not only to claimant countries, but also to the entire international community, since freedom of navigation and unimpeded lawful commerce are threatened.

This is why we are advocating a peaceful resolution of the dispute. To do this, we are taking two tracks: first, through promoting the formulation of a binding code of conduct, and second,  through arbitration—a mechanism which is embedded in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. We continue to invite other claimant countries to join us, to accelerate the resolution of this very long standing dispute, which has lately caused much tension in our region.

The international community as a whole stands to gain when the rule of law is upheld—for only through such legal mechanisms can a truly just and stable world order be ensured. I believe that I share this idea with the European Union authorities and heads of government I have had the honor of meeting, who have manifested their support for the peaceful resolution of disputes based on the rule of law.

Indeed, history has shown us how events halfway around the world can have a profound effect on our shores; no one can deny that our destinies are intertwined. It is therefore in all our best interests to take an active role in forging partnerships that ensure that our peoples are not left behind on the march to progress, and in so doing, perhaps create opportunities for other peoples as well.

France has displayed a keen understanding of this belief, most recently and prominently in the aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan—recognized by some to be the strongest typhoon to ever make landfall and devastate a country. It left a large part of our country in shambles; lives were lost, families separated or displaced. The need for both immediate and long-term recovery was enormous. And in the face of that enormous need, the entire world, France included, gave an overwhelming response. All levels of society—from the French government, down to companies and nongovernment organizations, to ordinary French citizens—demonstrated their generosity to their Filipino friends, and we are truly grateful for this solidarity.

Ladies and gentlemen, climate risk and threats to the rule of law are only some of the challenges that today’s world sets before us. Whether in the experience of our forebears in the French and the Philippine revolutions—whether in our People Power Revolution, or the relief and recovery efforts immediately after Typhoon Haiyan, it has always been clear to me that our efforts are stronger, and that the opportunities we create are vaster, deeper, and have a greater impact when we find ways to increase cooperation. Whether in the political or economic sphere, we continue to find new avenues of positive engagement that may help us confront the challenges of the future. This is true in our work to promote inclusive growth and sustainable development; to enhance peace, security, and the rule of law in inter-state relations; and to combat climate change.

As a global community, we have a choice: Either we combine our strengths and tackle our shared challenges together, or fall individually to the problems that threaten all of us. Asia, Europe, and the rest of the world need to work together to ensure a stable environment and a brighter future. I believe that a reinvigorated Philippines-France relationship can contribute greatly to achieving this endeavor.

As partners who have worked together, though perhaps indirectly, for centuries, to preserve democracy and its fruits, the Philippines and France can continue to stand together, working towards the benefit of our citizens and of the entire world, through a renewed commitment to the values our nations hold dear: liberty, equality, and fraternity.

Thank you for your attention. Good evening.

[ Learn more about the President’s visits September 2014 ]