[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JntjR6TPX8U[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Joint Graduation Ceremony of the Officer Candidate Courses

Today, we mark the opening of a new chapter in the lives of 146 new officers of our uniformed ranks. From different branches of the Armed Forces, from different parts of the Philippines, you have gathered as a group bound by a single aspiration: To serve our Bosses, and ensure that their welfare is always defended. And now, as you graduate, you are taking another important step towards the fulfillment of this aspiration.

Of course, although each of you has exceptional abilities, we must truly pay tribute to those awarded the Presidential Saber, Secretary of National Defense Saber, and Chief-of-Staff Saber: Those of you who demonstrated extraordinary skill, intelligence, and courage in training. As your careers progress, you will become leaders of the military. May you hold the sabers that will be bestowed upon you today with honor, and serve as examples to your fellow officers and those under your command.

I am confident that during the time you all spent in the Officer Candidate Course, you learned the meaning of being a leader. Your job will not be easy: As soldiers, you are asked for great sacrifice and concern; even more is demanded of you as officers. There will be times when the lives of your fellow soldiers are at stake in your decisions. In times of need, your ranks will turn to you for direction and inspiration. Above all, before the people, you will be the face of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

A different kind of courage and honor is needed to fulfill your duties: You will face danger, in the face of bullets and even storms. We see this every time a calamity strikes: You are on the front lines in rescuing our countrymen affected by disaster; in cleaning roads, ports, and airports to further speed up the arrival of immediate assistance; and in ensuring order in affected communities. Before Yolanda or Ruby, or any storm, you are already there, on standby to fulfill any order or need. We also see your quality in dealing with bandits and terrorists who are trying to break the peace we have worked so hard to achieve.

Moreover, a different kind of courage and honor will also be required of you in facing temptations that you may encounter while serving the country. There will be those who offer envelopes filled with money in exchange for a signature. There will be those who try to make your life easier, in exchange for principles.

I know you will do what is right, because I am confident that you see the good results of our journey on the straight and narrow path. In cleaning up the bureaucracy, and in pursuing the corrupt, we have restored the people's trust in the government and in themselves, and we are patching the holes in the system. Funds that used to go only into the pockets of a few exploiters are now being directed to the needs of the country.

The Armed Forces are among those who benefit from this: From the housing units allocated and distributed to our uniformed ranks, to more modern equipment such as ships, helicopters, and weapons, we are truly proving that restoring integrity in governance has good and concrete results.

Your service will be long. Often, you will quietly carry out the orders given to you; the general public will not notice your sacrifice of sweat and even blood to live up to your uniform. There will be times when, despite your efforts, you will be showered with criticism.

But it is not recognition and praise that we seek when we enter public service, isn't it? As long as you can help, that is enough; as long as you can contribute to positive change, that is enough. So, to those who will graduate today: May you uphold the rank pinned on your uniform. May you remember that every action you take, every word you say, every decision you make at every crossroads you face, will give rise to many implications for the Bosses we have sworn to serve. And may you remember the lessons shared with you in the course you are completing today, and say, “I did everything to use this for the good of my fellow Filipinos, and I never failed to be true to my oath.”

Good day. Thank you very much.