Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, to the Filipino community in France.

Secretary Albert F. del Rosario; members of the Cabinet present; but I might as well introduce those whom you should blame when there are shortcomings. Let us begin with Secretary Purisima of the Department of Finance [Applause]; Secretary Proceso Alcala of Agriculture [Applause]; Greg Domingo of DTI [Applause]; the mastermind behind “It’s More Fun in the Philippines”, Secretary Mon Jimenez [Applause]; Secretary Jun Abaya of DOTC [Applause]; Secretary Arsenio Balicasan of NEDA [Applause]; Secretary Sonny Coloma of our Communications office [Applause]; Secretary Julia Abad of PMS [Applause]; the one to whom all problems are passed if not specified under a department, Secretary Rene Almendras [Applause]; Ambassador Maria Teresa Lazaro [Applause]; Msgr. Don Vito Pavilando [Applause]; the Filipino community in France [Applause]; honored guests; fellow workers in government; my beloved countrymen inside and outside this church.

Good evening to all of you. [Applause]

The name of the church is beautiful, isn’t it, Saint Bernadette. It sounds like I know someone with that name.

You know, every time I talk to Bro. Armin Luistro of our Department of Education, one of the things he always says is: He says the changes in our country's education sector are really huge. And rightly so, just recently, we received a text message. I think you all are heavy texters. [Laughter] This is the story in the text: A child came home from school. When this student arrived home, his father greeted him. The father's opening line was, “Why are you just coming home now? It’s already late.” The child reportedly replied, “Dad, please, I’m tired. Our first day of school was really heavy. The lectures were long, and there was a mountain of homework. I even got scolded by the Dean!” The father replied, “Stop it, you’re still in kindergarten.” [Laughter]

You know, we had 86 engagements when we left the Philippines. Because our secretaries are diligent, Secretary Domingo even found two more, so now there are 88. We’ve already completed 41 of these engagements, so almost half. And of course, we can’t avoid it, these trips of ours are a bit tiring. But thankfully you are here, as well as our brothers and sisters outside. When I see you, my battery is recharged, so thank you very much. [Applause]

That story I shared with you, of course, is a text joke we received. Perhaps many people care and want to reduce our stress at work, while we continue to deepen the transformation that the Philippines is enjoying. The Philippines is really very different now. Since the people decided in 2010 to reject the old and corrupt practices, and steer the country towards the straight and narrow path, we have really come so far. What we did: We cleaned up the bureaucracy; we appointed honest and competent public servants. We removed the culture of sirens in society, promoted good governance, and focused service on our Bosses: of course, that’s you, the people. The result: A booming national economy, and programs that truly care for and empower Filipinos—especially those on the margins of society.

I will admit to you: During our first three or four months in office, I think all of us in this administration, with the number of problems we inherited, really just sighed every Friday and said “haaay.” [Laughter] How could it be otherwise: We discovered corruption on all sides that was done by our predecessors. And of course, they did it, and we are the ones who have to fix the problems they left us. Just a short time-out on Saturday and Sunday—usually Sunday—and on Monday, we discover new foolishness again. You have probably already heard about these. Let me give you a few examples as well: Warehouses where rice is just rotting because the concerned parties imported too much; huge bonuses for some heads of Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations while their institutions are sinking in debt; overpriced coffee, overpriced and second-hand helicopters sold as brand new, billions of pesos in contracts just to play in the mud of Laguna Lake. You would really be in our shoes, you might not just sigh, but something else might come out of your mouths.

Now, how can we say that the Philippines is different? What is the difference between the past and our present? I believe it is significant.

For example: at the DPWH. Wasn't this agency known as a nest of corruption in the past? Almost no roads could be repaired, with layers of commissions and kickbacks within the agency. Now, under the leadership of Secretary Babes Singson, the face of the DPWH is different. Due to the reorganization and cleansing of the system, they have saved 28 billion pesos in funds, which are being used to implement further projects. The national roads they have built and repaired since we took office: are now 12,184 kilometers. To make it easier to visualize: it is said that this is equivalent to four trips from Laoag to Zamboanga City. This is just national roads, and farm-to-market and tourism roads are not yet included.

We also have our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, where 4.1 million families—let me repeat, 4.1 million families—are our beneficiaries. This is how the program works: The poorest families are identified. Then, they are given what is called a cash grant, but with conditions. What we ask of them: Ensure that their children are vaccinated and attend school, and that pregnant women have regular check-ups. Basically, we gave them an incentive to help themselves rise out of poverty. And this program has been expanded this year.

Regarding our graduating students: Wasn't it the case that studying in college was like gambling in the past? You would take a popular course when you enrolled—for example, nursing—but when you graduated, you couldn't find a job because the job market in that industry was saturated. Now, the story is different. DOLE, TESDA, CHED, and DepEd are working together in coordination with the private sector. The system: Identify the courses that are most needed now and in the coming years, and use this as a guide in training our youth. It is not an exaggeration to say that this initiative contributed to the increase in jobs in our country. Let's look: In a study, the number of employed Filipinos was compared from April 2013 to April 2014. In total: 1.65 million more Filipinos found employment between the two dates I mentioned.

At TESDA, let's also look at the difference. Before, the former leader was just focused on self-promotion. They even distributed scholarship vouchers—the problem is, the checks would bounce if there were any, and their agency went into debt because there were no appropriations. They distributed vouchers and vouchers, acted cute, and then left it to us to pay. Of course, what can you expect from this practice, but failing results: From 2006 to 2008, only 28.5 percent of TESDA scholars found employment. Now, in our study in 2013, 68.5 percent of the graduates of TESDA's Training for Work Scholarship Program in 2012 immediately found jobs. The average cost to us for each scholar in the TWSP is 7,155 pesos. For those who found jobs, for example in the BPO sector, their taxes in the first year alone almost recovered the tuition we invested. If they work for thirty years, the state's one-time investment will be repaid repeatedly so that we can take care of other Filipinos in need of help. Of course, each Filipino given the opportunity to contribute to our society will have a multiplier effect. Let me emphasize that: once you fund them, they pay taxes for 30 years; 30 people immediately have hope for the same opportunity. Those 30, in turn, will provide for 30 more.

The results are even better when we talk about TESDA scholars in industries that we are really focusing on. 91.43 percent of those trained in the field of semiconductor and electronics immediately found employment. We are still looking for jobs for the remaining ones or further enhancing their knowledge so they can finally get a job.

Just remember: We have expanded services without raising taxes, except for the Sin Tax which is focused on the health of Filipinos. We are achieving these successes now because of good governance—through prudent spending of public funds; through the hard work of government agencies to fulfill their sworn duties; through the government's focus on the welfare of our Bosses, the people. And of course, we have been true to our basic principle: If there is no corruption, there is no poverty.

Didn't we used to believe that only the rich and well-connected get justice? Now, no one is untouchable in government. Those who have wronged the people, the corrupt, the thieves: We ensure they are held accountable. In fact, I'm sure you've heard that some of them have already been charged by the Ombudsman and are now in jail. Those we replaced have also been charged and are now under house arrest. [Applause]

Despite every success we are now enjoying, I know that no matter what I do or say, there will always be critics. As I said: In this job, I'm used to having breakfast with slander, lunch with insults, dinner with abuse—with a bonus midnight snack. [Laughter and applause] This is important: a bonus midnight snack of intrigue. [Laughter] I think, if there was a way to tease us even while we sleep, they would have done it. If I say white is clearly white, there will always be someone who automatically objects and says, “You’re wrong, it’s black.” [Laughter] When we say forward, they immediately want backward. If it's like this, is there any point in discussing things with them?

For example: We once had a campaign called “anti-epal,” or against politicians who always like to take credit—those who have nothing to do but hang streamers for birthdays, or paint their names on walls or waiting sheds. We, on the other hand, have never been fond of showing off in this way. As long as the job is done, even without a streamer or anything, we’re okay. That’s why in all our projects, we prohibited attaching our name or face, because we were taught not to boast. Because I did that, [applause] others complained: They said they don’t see what I’m doing. I said: How lucky Filipinos are—no one is working, but changes are sprouting up like mushrooms. You really can’t help but shake your head and ask, “What is it really?” This, I think, is what they call, “Damned if you do, damned if you don’t.” [Laughter and applause] But it’s clear to me, I’m not the one at fault. [Laughter]

But we don’t waste time debating with those who are pointless to talk to, because their minds are closed. We no longer have time for critics who need to criticize no matter what we do. You gave me six years; I will make the most of every opportunity to deliver benefits to more Filipinos. [Applause] [People: “More!”]

Later we will have Secretary Almendras sing “More”. [Laughter]

It's truly heartwarming: Just this August, a young student wrote to a newspaper. Maria Francesca Santiago from Bacolod said she was worried about what she was reading and watching these days. She said that even people sincerely doing their best to advance the country constantly receive blame. Some even prefer to throw baseless accusations and worsen the situation of our countrymen, rather than contribute and help improve the country's condition. Honestly, I was surprised by the depth of her understanding of our society's situation. I was even more surprised to discover that this child is only 13 years old. I said: It seems her understanding is broader than that of many who are much older than her. Isn't it, if the next generation of Filipinos are like her—thinking clearly, judging fairly, and speaking truthfully—then the future of our beloved country will truly be beautiful? [Applause]

It's clear: All the changes our country is enjoying have been made possible because of your trust and unity, my Bosses. Some are asking: Will our initiatives continue? Who will continue them? My answer to that is—perhaps we are asking the wrong question. The question isn't “who,” because it's clear that we were able to do all of this because we united, we worked hard, and we rowed in one direction. Therefore—we Filipinos will continue what we have started; it does not depend on just one person or group.

Therefore, in every decision I make, I only think of one thing and I think of you—and I think of you. [Applause]

As the father of the nation, I will continue to do what is right and just; I will continue to fight for my fellow Filipinos.

As we move forward together, with every contribution from Juan and Juana dela Cruz for their fellowmen and country, with every decision to choose what is right—we further prove that “the Filipino is worth fighting for.” [Applause] We are getting closer to realizing our collective dreams. This is the opportunity we have been waiting for. Through our continued cooperation, we will one day look back on these times and say: “I was part of the transformation of society; I participated in the advancement of the country and the Filipino people.”

Before I conclude, let me share with you some information we gathered during our trip. Naturally, we reported on the strength of our economy. We said that on average, we experienced a 6.3 percent growth in GDP from 2010 to 2013. Now, that means, that was one of the reasons why our situation is getting better and better. The citizens of the Philippines—all of us—are entering what is called the demographic sweet spot. That means, according to research, in the coming years, most Filipinos will enter the working age, everyone will contribute, especially if we create opportunities. So, during this trip, we also spoke with businessmen. You suggest that it is not yet the time if you are looking for a place to put your investment to ensure a large profit, it seems that the Philippines is a good opportunity.

And many said they are already here and will add more. As I said, we have attended 41 engagements. But I thought I was already difficult to surprise. But I was surprised when a large bank told us that we should perhaps globalize the peso. I said, “Globalize the peso?” That means, it will become a currency like the dollar, traded by other countries. [Applause] Let me repeat that, maybe when we get to Manila, something else will come out of my mouth. [Laughter] I didn’t suggest that—it was mentioned to us. And I wasn’t amazed; I just raised an eyebrow and thought, “‘Wow, that’s a heavy suggestion.” [Laughter] But let me ask you: Has anyone of you ever thought that you would hear such a suggestion from a foreign bank that is very large and covers the whole world? Of course, Cesar Purisima and I talked, it needs to be studied.

But the point here is, I didn’t think anyone would suggest that the Philippines is so beautiful and fragrant, that someone would already invest in our currency because they have confidence in us [that] our economy, our country, and our finances are stable.

So, my brothers and sisters, let me repeat—I apologize if I seem a bit insistent: This achievement was not because I volunteered myself to be your cannon fodder. We reached this because we worked together to change what was happening in our country in 2010. And truthfully, when they saw our work, those who helped me during the campaign and elections to vote for us were joined by new members because they believed in the direction we were taking. [Applause]

Let me repeat: There was a saying when we were studying, especially our teachers, “Finished or not finished, pass your paper.” [Laughter] What we mean in this situation—let me repeat—is that we cannot rely on just one person, we cannot rely on just one group. What have we been through? Didn’t our elders say to us: To see the destination, or to reach the destination, look at where you came from. [Applause] We came from a place where we had almost no hope. We fought, and now there is a lot of hope in the Philippines. We just need to continue.

Good evening and thank you all very much.