VIDEO:

Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the ceremony for the construction of the Mactan-Cebu International Airport New Passenger Terminal Building

We were given lunch by Governor Davide earlier, and I said, “Junjun, when we retire, I’ve thought of a livelihood we can pursue.” He said, “Let’s put up a restaurant. What’s the name?” “I think, the best would be ‘Sogbu sa Sugbu.’” Sogbu, those who didn’t laugh, you weren’t in my batch. [Laughter] It’s just reversing ‘busog’ (full). Sogbu sa Sugbu, hopefully it can happen. For the appetizer, before you even order, it’s already chicharon. From Carcar. But ours is healthy. Because I saw Luigi, that’s what I thought of. [Laughter] Luigi, newly married, you look very happy. They say you have a beatific smile, and it looks like you [slept] a lot. [Laughter]

Today is exactly my fifth year in office as president; in one year, it will also be exactly the remaining time in our term. In this remaining time, we are truly pouring all our strength to maximize the change we deliver to the country. My only desire: When I step down from office, to look back at what we have accomplished, and to say that what we left is far better than what we inherited.

Now, we are gathered to celebrate another positive change for Cebu, and for the entire country—the start of the construction of the New Passenger Terminal Building, along with other developments of the Mactan-Cebu International Airport. In total, the estimated cost of this project is P17.5 billion, which we expect to be completed by June 2019. I think I’ll check that figure. It seems a little low.

What developments will we implement in this airport? First, an additional 20 aircraft parking stands will be built, each with its own aerobridge, 13 bus parking stands for vehicles picking up and dropping off passengers, and more than 550 private vehicle parking stands. Second, a link-bridge will be built connecting the domestic and international terminals. Third, we will add 100 counters to the domestic and international flight check-in counters: from the current 49 counters, to 149 counters. The result of this: Space will expand and the flow of operations at the airport will speed up; and the headache caused by delayed flights will be avoided. Because of these, we expect the annual passenger capacity of the airport to increase, or the number of passengers it can accommodate each year—from the current 4.5 million, to 15 million. All of this is part of our goal to make the facility itself, and your overall service for passengers, of higher quality.

We always say: On the straight and narrow path, we aim for inclusive growth. This means we are promoting the upliftment, not of a few, but of everyone. Tourism is one of the sectors that helps us achieve this. And very soon, imagine: For every tourist who arrives, an estimated more than 1,000 dollars enters our economy. Tourism is called a low-lying fruit, because you don’t need a lot of diplomas, you can immediately participate in the opportunities created by this sector. When there are tourists, of course, they have a hotel to stay in, a restaurant to eat at, souvenir shops to buy from; plus the services they need from drivers and tour guides. The point is: In tourism, we create many jobs, not tomorrow, but, as my brother says, now.

In developing your airport, we are really investing for the future. We will increase the number of flights and passengers that the airport can accommodate; we will make the travel experience more convenient for travelers. As a result, we will attract more tourists to visit you. And when tourists return to their respective places, they will tell stories—not of a difficult experience—but of a smooth and vibrant trip to your province. Result: More will be encouraged to come here, which will again create opportunities, and continue the cycle of progress.

I would like to thank every individual and organization that united to reach this day. To the DOTC and DOT, under the leadership of Sec. Jun Abaya and Sec. Mon Jimenez; to the local government of Cebu, under the leadership of Governor Junjun Davide, who we know has good lineage; and of course, to the members of GMR Megawide Cebu Airport Corporation (GMCAC), led by Mr. Manuel Louie Ferrer. We also thank everyone who participated in the bidding for this project. We know that in bidding, of course, there are winners, and there are losers. To those who were not lucky enough to win, I hope that instead of lessening your interest in participating in our other projects, your desire to join future projects in our PPP program will be strengthened.

Today is truly a symbol of the success brought about by working together; it is also proof of the fruits we are reaping under our Public-Private Partnerships. Think about it: In the past three administrations, only six solicited PPP projects were awarded to the private sector; now, from December 2011 to June 2015, we have already awarded 10 solicited PPP projects, worth P189 billion. In addition to that, we have 12 projects that are in the bidding stage; and 30 are still in the pipeline. More than 50 PPP projects worth an estimated P1.11 trillion, under our administration.

Let me just reiterate: Before, the Philippines could not attract investors. For example, in the contract for MRT 3, in Luzon, just to encourage companies, the government itself was courting and offering various incentives. There was the provision of a 15 percent fixed and guaranteed rate of return, or giving them a guaranteed income—any shortfall in the company’s expected earnings, the government had to cover. There was also a foreign exchange guarantee, where they were protected from any increase or decrease in the peso; and even all taxes, the government was also obliged to pay, such as corporate income tax, withholding tax, business tax, and other local taxes. In this system, it was as if the companies encouraged by the government, just by saying “yes” to the project, their income was guaranteed; there was no way for them to lose.

Under our administration, the story is very different when it comes to the PPP sector: There are no losing transactions; the government is being courted to obtain the privilege of building the infrastructure needed by Filipinos. The big difference: Because of our more reasonable pricing, coupled with our transparency initiatives, companies now have full confidence in the government; they are confident that by partnering with us, their company will earn. What is the effect of this? Now, we are able to build the necessary infrastructure, and we are also given additional funds for various projects and programs. For example: For the Daang Hari-SLEX Link Road Project, the first PPP in our administration, the government received P518.48 million, called a premium. For the NAIA Expressway Project 2, we received: P11 billion. The premiums we receive are increasing. Here in the Mactan-Cebu International Airport New Passenger Terminal Building Project, the premium given to us: P14.4 billion. All of these funds go directly to the national treasury, and can be used for other projects for the people. A win-win situation for the public and private sectors, right?

You know, before I continue, I was just told earlier: There are already people saying that the P14 billion will be used by the Liberal Party for the elections next year. You know, that’s really insulting because, first of all, do we know any thief who would say what he stole before he stole it? And after that, specify that it’s stolen and hopefully we still win. They say our party is thieves, and also stupid. That’s a bit of an insult. But that’s life, I’ll just swallow it. And I hope you read how the process works to see that this will go directly to the National Treasury where only Congress has the right to say [where] the funds can be taken. By that time, the elections will have long been over. Or to the person who told me this, you have no one to talk to, I will ask Secretary Dinky Soliman to help you find someone to talk to.

Only one year remains in the mandate you have given me to serve as President. I sincerely thank our beloved Cebuanos; for your care for our family—from my father, to my mother, to me. I have approached you twice—when I ran for President in 2010, in 2013 for our colleagues in Team PNoy, and I also in 2007, when I ran for senator—and you really showed your warm support. Again, thank you very much for your continued trust.

You all know how difficult this job is. You have witnessed all the insults and abuses directed at me. Every move I make is criticized; no matter how big the good deed, they will still look for the smallest mistake, often just to make themselves look good and engage in politics. But when I see our aspirations being concretized; when I see the positive results of the changes we are implementing; when I see the joy on the faces of our countrymen due to the benefits we have delivered—I can truly say: Every bit of fatigue and hardship is worth it, even the insults and slander, this service to the Filipino people is worth it. When the time comes for the Lord to call us, I will proudly say: We have come a long way.

Let me emphasize: This is just the beginning of the Philippines and the Filipino people showing off their skills. The straight and narrow path does not end with me. We are laying the foundations for reform now, and I am confident that you, our Bosses, will continue to steer the Straight Path; you will steer it in the right direction; you will accelerate it towards the realization of our highest aspirations.

I will never tire of saying: It is truly a privilege to serve a race that stands up with every fall and truly does not give in to any challenge. It is an honor to be the leader of the Filipino people.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.