[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-c9HeC4iOiM[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the awarding of the Ten Accomplished Youth Organizations for 2015

What a beautiful start to this day. Can I thank the St. Paul’s High School Choir Pasig? Your voices were really very clear. [Applause] It was really a pleasant way to start the day.

Just a while ago, I was looking at you, especially the awardees and the finalists, you are all so young. The question is, are we already old? [Laughter] Don't laugh too much, Perci and Earl. You are now also among the seniors. [Laughter] It feels like yesterday you were the youth. Maria said you are heading towards “ga-youth.” [Laughter].

Anyway, colleagues:

Almost three decades have passed since the end of the dictatorship, but perhaps, our countrymen still remember the Martial Law. Like many, I witnessed the brutality of a powerful dictator, and the suffering he brought to our countrymen. When Martial Law was declared, our world really turned upside down. Because of his criticism of Mr. Marcos, my father was imprisoned; he was imprisoned for seven years and seven months, and we were forced to go abroad. When my father decided to return home to call for change in the government, he was ruthlessly assassinated. With what happened to my father and our family, the question that enveloped my mind at that time: What kind of future could we still expect? During those times, I could not help but think that everything would lead to a bloody revolution.

However, with the guidance of the Lord and compassion for others, the Filipino people were able to do the impossible. The whole world admired when millions of our countrymen gathered to lead the peaceful revolution at EDSA. They were able to overcome fear and anxiety to go to EDSA. They went there unarmed; their only weapon was prayer and the desire to restore democracy. They did not mind the danger to their lives; they set aside the fear that they might be shot or shelled. All they were thinking: If the oppressive dictatorship remains, what kind of tomorrow awaits our loved ones? After four days of collective calls for change, the dictator was successfully overthrown, and our democracy was restored.

The interest of the majority, freedom from corrupt practices, a good future for the next generation: these were the things considered by those who fought at EDSA in 1986. And as leader of our country, we embody this spirit of EDSA in facing the challenges of our time. During my term, we have gone through and are going through many trials. One example of this is the tension between North and South Korea in 2010 where 50,000 of our countrymen could be caught in the conflict. There was also the turmoil caused by the Arab Spring in 2011. Aside from the unrest in other countries, there was also our effort to prevent the spread of diseases such as Ebola and MERS-Coronavirus in the country. If you will also remember, we faced a series of trials in 2013: earthquake in Cebu and Bohol, crisis in Zamboanga, and the onslaught of Typhoon Yolanda. Just recently, the people faced another trial due to the incident in Mamasapano.

As President, I am doing everything to face and address the problems of the country. Often, we just ignore the fatigue and sleeplessness. I cannot give in to the impulse of my emotions because it might worsen the problem. On every occasion, I need to be calm, and always go back to why we are doing all our efforts. This is our only desire: To prevent the mistakes of the past from happening again, and to pass on to the next generation a far more developed and beautiful Philippines than the one we found.

From the start, I knew I could not do everything alone. In the past four and a half years of our administration, we have proven that when more of us work together, the faster we achieve our goals. Here I remembered the idea shared with me: When the wisdom of the elders and the strength of the youth combine, we can really go far.

In this context comes the value of our gathering today, in honoring the Ten Accomplished Youth Organizations of the country. Led by the National Youth Commission, TAYO Awards Foundation, EDSA People Power Commission, Coca-Cola Foundation, as well as in cooperation with my brother, Bam Aquino [laughter], we recognize the contribution of the youth in responding to social problems. Together with the people, I thank you for your dedication and effort to continue your meaningful advocacies.

We congratulate the winning organizations today: To the Phi Lambda Delta Sorority for your Milk Matters program to promote breastfeeding for the good health of infants [applause]; to Kanlungan Pilipinas Movement, which develops the knowledge of residents in remote areas using solar-powered technology [applause]; to Rescue Assistance Peacekeeping Intelligence Detail, RAPID, and Cauayan City National High School – Red Cross Youth and Junior Rescue Team, which train our youth on how to help in responding to disasters and in times of need; to Katipunan ng mga Kabataang Santiagueňo for using agricultural waste to make charcoal and become a livelihood partner for the community; to ACCESS-PYLP Alumni Association, which provides livelihood skills to our youth combatants in Basilan, Sulu, and Zamboanga; to Move This World-Pilipinas, for your efforts to address the issue of bullying in schools; to Youth for Environment in School Organization, for leading the Mangrove Reforestation Program in your community; to Indigenous Youth Servant Leaders Association of the Philippines for promoting the welfare of our indigenous people in the province of Isabela and also to the University of San Agustin Little Theater for a series of theater productions and your creativity to empower those affected by Typhoon Yolanda.

Of course, we also thank our other finalists. You led programs that deliver immediate benefits to many Filipinos. From providing livelihood and quality education to indigenous and underprivileged Filipinos, developing knowledge in modern equipment, promoting Philippine music, improving electricity supply, and caring for health, to protecting the environment; you participate in the solution instead of adding to the problem. You also serve as an example to your fellow youth, to encourage them to participate in promoting the welfare of others and the country. I also salute the many organizations that participated and continue to participate in the TAYO Awards.

You can count on it: With the improving state of our economy, we are expanding opportunities for the youth especially since you are our future professionals and public servants. One example of this is the Conditional Cash Transfer for High School Expansion program. Through this program, the state now supports the beneficiary of Pantawid Pamilya until he reaches the age of 18. Currently, 1.2 million students aged 15 to 18 are being helped to finish high school. What benefits will this bring? According to a study by the Philippine Institute for Development Studies, high school graduates earn 40 percent more than those who only completed grade school. This means that because of the expanded benefits of Pantawid Pamilya, more opportunities will also be available for the majority of young people.

The number of scholars we are able to provide with livelihood through TESDA is also continuously increasing. Let's look at their Training for Work Scholarship Program: From July 2010 to December 2014, there were 774,532 graduates of TWSP. Included in the good news we are receiving is the result of TESDA and Semiconductor and Electronics Industries in the Philippines training. The employment rate of graduates here from April to September 2014: almost 96 percent. Just a little push and we will reach 100 percent full employment. [Applause]

We are doing all of this to uplift the living standards of our countrymen, especially those struggling in life. We are maximizing opportunities to empower them to help themselves improve. We are all under one roof; the problem of one is the problem of all.

Remember this: You, the youth—I would like to say “we, the youth” [laughter]—will inherit the fruits of our efforts. You will live in this world much longer than we, who are a little older. If negativity and self-interest prevail now, you will suffer the consequences for a longer time. If we do what is right, you will enjoy the positive results for a longer time. On the straight and narrow path, we will not allow you to experience the same problems we faced and are currently facing. We will continue our efforts to increase the number of children holding pencils and paper, and decrease the number holding rags on the streets to wipe the windshields of vehicles. We will not stop providing the youth with proper skills, so that you do not end up selling sampaguita garlands and begging. We will open many more opportunities so that instead of being addicted to vices, you will truly become the hope of the nation.

Indeed, we have come a long way because we chose to do what is right, and to prioritize the interests of the majority. Despite this, we know that we still have many trials to face. But should we give up now, when what we once only dreamed of is now being realized? Should we retreat now, when more and more of us are participating in broad development?

The challenge of our time: Continue the change that we are now enjoying. Let us intensify our unity, and strengthen the foundation of the Philippines we are promoting; a country where everyone is capable of fulfilling their desired future.

Good day to all of you. Thank you very much.