Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During lunch with the Ateneo de Manila Blue Spikers and Lady Eagles and De La Salle University Lady Spikers

Good afternoon to all of you again.

At least, this luncheon pushed through, and I’d like to thank both Father Jett and Brother Armin for organizing this, and I really felt this was a very timely event. So, this is the formal portion of the speech… You know, I could see in your faces there are a lot of questions in your mind. I think first and foremost are two questions: One, when will we eat , and, is there enough for everybody?

Susan, I’m glad you’re here. I hope you took note that these are athletes who normally have healthy appetites.

You know, the rivalry between Ateneo and La Salle has spanned decades. I remember: During our time, which was about five years ago or so, [laughter] the competition was intense. If a glare could literally kill, many generations of Ateneans and Lasallians would have already been eliminated.

Until now, the competition between these two schools remains heated. Whether it’s basketball, volleyball, or other competitions, tickets are always in demand—perhaps for Fr. Jett, after those appealing for admission to Ateneo [laughter] getting tickets is his second heaviest problem—[Laughter] just to watch the game. It doesn't choose age; whatever year you graduated, everyone, all-out in cheering for their respective alma mater. How can it be otherwise, because every time they face each other, it feels like life is always at stake. Whether it’s a championship game or a game with no bearing, it’s the same; everyone will give their all, just to avoid losing to the opponent.

Now, if you notice our Cabinet, there are those who studied in Katipunan, those who studied in Taft and Greenhills, and there are those who are unsure where they want to go [laughter] like Kim Henares who came from La Salle and Ateneo, and also Jun Abaya—he went to Taft, then Ateneo Law School by way of Annapolis, the school, not the street ha. [Laughter] Nevertheless, we consider each other family. On all occasions, we have unity, except, and this is the only time—singular time that the Cabinet is not united, when Ateneo and La Salle are competing. [Laughter]

Just like once, I was in a room here in Malacañang with Brother Armin and Secretary Babes Singson, both from La Salle. It was the UAAP Season last year, and it was probably the finals of the Men’s Basketball Tournament or the round of four. Secretary Babes asked Brother Armin, “How did our team do?” Brother Armin replied, “Ateneo lost to NU.” [Laughter] I didn’t know if that was directed at me. I said, “Isn’t the question, ‘How did our team do?’ But you’re talking about Ateneo and NU?” I said, “Is that how you were taught at La Salle, to not answer a question directly? And you’re a Christian brother at that.” [Laughter] Then, we all laughed.

Once upon a time, there was a State Visit here at Malacañang. And every time we troop down the line, the PSG Band plays “Blue Eagle, The King!” Sec. Babes smilingly said, “Why is it that on these occasions, I always hear ‘Fly High’?” My response was, “Because if we play ‘When The Saints Go Marching In,’ I’m afraid instead of marching, all our guests might start dancing.” [Laughter]

It also happened that last year and this year, coinciding with the finals match of the Ateneo and La Salle women’s volleyball teams, I was in Baguio for the PMA graduation. I wanted to watch, but I couldn’t, because it also happened that we had an issue that we needed to focus on and study. But truthfully, I didn’t need to tune in to the TV; just from the cheers of our colleagues who were watching it, I could tell how intense the match was, and who was winning.

What pleased me was when I read the newspaper the day after this last match. The picture I saw: Some were wearing green and some were wearing blue, embracing each other. The match was over, and you, the players, were sincerely congratulating each other. Despite the fierce competition and intense pressure to win, you demonstrated the spirit of unity and sportsmanship. Isn't that wonderful?

Now, someone suggested that we accommodate a courtesy call from the Women’s Volleyball Team of Ateneo de Manila University, like last year. I thought: Maybe we could also invite the 1st runner-up of the tournament. If the Lady Eagles showed their skills, they were likely motivated to prepare thoroughly because the competition wasn’t easy. Isn't it true that when you have a skilled opponent, you are really encouraged to give your all? That is why we are accepting and recognizing today the Women’s Volleyball Team of De La Salle University, the DLSU Lady Spikers. Also, we received news of the championship win of the Men’s Volleyball Team of Ateneo de Manila University, the Ateneo Blue Spikers. I said, it would be good if we combined and unified your visits here.

Therefore, I congratulate the members of these three teams, from your members inside and outside the court, players, coach and manager, as well as the institutions you represent. Truly: You, student-athletes, reflect the vibrancy, enthusiasm, and determination of today’s generation. You are a model of the extraordinary talent and ability of Filipino youth to succeed, in whatever field they choose or love.

This gathering further proves: Behind the intense competition and banter, there are true teammates and friends. This is known, especially by you athletes who were once classmates, now rivals in different leagues. Some of your players also know this, according to my writers who are more or less your age, have a sweetheart or are falling in love with someone from the opposing school. [Laughter]

In this time when there are those who push for chaos and division in various parts of the world, and even here with us, much can be learned from the good example you show. Even though you are now at the center of this age-old rivalry between Ateneo and La Salle, you do not completely succumb to the animosity and teasing. At your age, you show, even to those older than you, the power of humility and camaraderie.

I also thought: I hope that politicians, as well as members of various sectors of society, would show this kind of relationship as well. When they look at a conflict or competition, I hope they ask themselves: Is this rivalry healthy? When there is criticism, I hope they ask: Is it constructive?

That is the spirit we want to instill in the minds and hearts of our countrymen. Even if we are divided into different islands, even if we have differences, in the end, we are all one team of Filipinos. No spike is too difficult to receive if we are focused on a unified goal. No attack is too strong to overcome if we have strategy, passing, and coordination among each other. Through unity and harmony, through contributing to genuine change, every Filipino wins.

That is the call to us now, especially to you young people who will inherit the reforms we are sowing: to fight One Big Fight against corruption and poverty. As Coach Tai of the Ateneo Lady Eagles said: Heartstrong. As long as we are united and have a heart for our fellow Filipinos, we are sure to achieve our collective aspirations as a nation.

Before I end, I would like to thank all of you who attended today. If someone requests a selfie with me again, I will agree, but with one condition this year. Last year, someone approached me and asked if they could have a selfie with me. I said, “Yes.” The person who asked me was just one, but there were about twenty-five of us in the photo. [Laughter] But the photographer was good, no one’s face was cropped out. Before I agree, if anyone still wants a selfie with me, please have a selfie with our two colleagues who made this gathering possible first: Fr. Jett Villarin and Bro. Armin Luistro, and if Bro. Benny is here too, I hope you treat them with the same respect you would treat me.

Good afternoon to all of you once again. And congratulations to all. We would not have achieved our achievements without the good interaction with others.

Thank you. Good day.