Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the inauguration of the school building at Tarlac National High School

You know, when we were invited here, I said, “Of course, an opportunity to return to Tarlac is a definite yes, we will return here.” After all, we are talking about education, and I received a text message. I will share it with you. There was a child who came home a little late. The father said, “Why are you just coming home now?” The child said, “Dad, just let this day pass.” It was the first day of classes, he said. “Why?” “On this very first day, we were already overwhelmed with a lot of assignments. They even organized our organization. I was even summoned by the dean. This day was really heavy, that’s why I was late coming home.” The father said, “Really? You’re just in kindergarten, and you already have this much work?” [Laughter]

It seems like you didn’t have breakfast earlier, so I was just waking you up a little. Anyway, it wasn’t Bro. Armin who sent me that. [Laughter]

When Chairman Bong Naguiat invited me to come here to be part of the turnover ceremonies, I didn’t hesitate to come. I said, why would I miss it, of course, it’s an opportunity to be with my fellow provincemates here in Tarlac? Including Captain Canapi, San Miguel is here [applause], and they didn’t bring a folder today and are smiling, so I assume there are no problems with San Miguel. Even if I can’t always visit and return here, I assure you: You are always in my heart and mind, I truly love my fellow Kapampangan. [Applause]

To be honest, when I was a congressman and then a senator, if I decided to go home to Tarlac, I could go home anytime. Now, if I say I'm going home to Tarlac, it takes about four months to actually happen. [Laughter] The roads are so beautiful now, and yet Tarlac seems further away.

Of course, I am also excited to see one of the fruits of all our efforts on the straight and narrow path: the progress of the education sector in our country. I remember what my father used to say. He said, “You might be rich today, you might be poor tomorrow. You might be famous today, you might be outdated tomorrow. But once you learn, that’s yours forever. Whatever happens, your education will never be taken away from you.” The opportunity my parents gave me to learn, of course, as Father of the Nation, is also my priority to give to our youth. We are maximizing every opportunity to provide our students with sufficient skills and knowledge. This will give them wider opportunities to fulfill their dreams. In this way, they will also have a greater contribution to achieving our collective goals.

If you will recall, the problem we inherited in the education sector was truly severe. We had a backlog of 61.7 million textbooks and 2.5 million school seats. The number of our teachers was also insufficient, to the point where they almost had to divide their bodies to focus on the number of students in a class. The truth is: we were relying on their unwavering dedication to guide and care for our students. In addition, we also lacked 66,800 classrooms. The DepEd and the DBM told us at the time that they could only build around 8,000 classrooms per year using our National Budget. This means that in the six years you gave me in the mandate you entrusted to me, we could only build 48,000 classrooms. When I stepped down from office, we still had a debt of 18,800 that the next administration will surely have to deal with.

The question is: Where will we get the huge amount of money to fill this backlog in classrooms? Under good governance, we truly pursued all reasonable means to raise funds. Aside from our budget, PAGCOR contributed – can we give Chairman and his Board, and the entire PAGCOR a round of applause? – [applause] and the private sector also helped through the Private-Public Partnership program. The result: By the third year of our term, or 2013, we had already built 66,813 classrooms; [applause] exceeding our target to erase the backlog in 2010. Because of the brilliance of Brother Armin, from La Salle, and Babes Singson, also from La Salle, I might even send my children to La Salle if I have any. [Laughter] Along with this, we also filled the shortage of textbooks and school seats as early as 2012. This February, we were able to hire an additional 128,105 teachers, in addition to the 43,204 LGU-hired teachers and Kinder-volunteer teachers.

Clearly: We were able to overcome the enormous challenges in the education sector without relying on any gimmicks, and certainly not on magic. We might have forgotten, back then, someone said, “We no longer have a backlog in classrooms.” What that meant was that one classroom was being used by three to four classes, and the eight hours of study were reduced to four hours. What was painful was that the last shift, even grade school students, were going home at night. That was the magic. Here, there is truly a classroom for every student.

We worked hard to implement reforms. With the growth of our economy, we were given the opportunity to add funds, and the ability to address the shortages in this sector.

We also changed the system where whims or self-promotion were the basis for building infrastructure. In our Straight and Narrow Path to the classroom, for example, identifying and responding to needs is systematic and efficient. The DepEd provides suggestions on where classrooms should be built, after careful study and consultation with various communities. PAGCOR funds this, and the DPWH manages the construction, including the budget. You saw the turnover of an additional P3 billion to the previous P7 billion in funds provided by PAGCOR for the construction of classrooms throughout the Philippines. And because the DPWH and Secretary Babes Singson will manage the construction, we can be sure that every centavo of the aforementioned amount will benefit students in various parts of our country.

Before I went straight here, I also attended a turnover ceremony of new classrooms in Malolos, Bulacan. This is part of the PPP or Public-Private Partnerships for School Infrastructure Project or PSIP. This is an additional strategy of DepEd and Bro. Armin Luistro to ensure that the equipment and methods used in building our classrooms are timely and of high quality. We saved a lot with this initiative: If done using the old technology, P1.057 million would be spent to build a classroom. In PSIP, this was lowered to P970,000. Of course, companies like Citicore-Megawide Consortium Inc. were eager to cooperate with us to complete the project. It’s a very worthwhile investment for them to buy equipment and build a plant. Therefore, we thank them for their willingness to contribute to the development we are promoting in the education sector.

The transformations you are witnessing reflect the primary commitment of our government: To leave the Philippines in a better state than we found it. And we are not only responding to current problems. We are also preparing for the challenges we foresee in the future.

We are now focused on the successful implementation of our K to 12 basic education program. Let me emphasize: The preparations we are making are not only for the students. Recently, we had a meeting regarding the possible effects of K to 12. For example: Because there are two additional years in basic education, there will also be two fewer years of students entering college. We are already studying measures to support teachers and employees who may be affected by this. Our goal: To open new opportunities for their teaching and studies. Now that we have K to 12, we know that many new teachers will be needed for the new Senior High School level. Our teachers in colleges can consider teaching here as an option. In addition, we are also laying the groundwork for the implementation of an initiative to support teachers in State Universities and Colleges who want to take masters and doctoral degrees while this transition to K to 12 is happening.

To the students here today: You are seeing the fruits of your government's efforts to provide you with quality education. Deficiencies have been filled, facilities have been improved, and the number of efficient teachers has been increased. Even in our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, one of the conditions is the regular attendance of children at school. We are also focusing on your proper nutrition so that you can focus more on your studies. In all of this, the purpose of your government is clear: To ensure that the vacant jobs in the market are filled by graduates with intelligence, skills, and sufficient training.

May you embrace the opportunities laid before you with your own effort. Perhaps you have heard this many times from your parents, but this comes from the President of the Philippines: Please study hard. All the support is there, but I can't learn for you. Prioritize opening books before opening Facebook. [Laughter] Finish your assignments before raiding Clash of Clans. Because as I always say, you will continue all of this. We are doing everything we can to give you a better start than where we came from. In this way, it is not an exaggeration to say that you can go much further. You can do this not only by choosing worthy leaders. In your mastery of the fields you choose one day, you will become better defenders of what is right, guardians of truth, and advocates of the interests of the majority. When you do that, you will bring honor not only to yourselves, but also to your families, to your profession, and to our beloved country.

Good day. Thank you very much to all of you.