VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q9wZMvMt6JE&feature=plcp[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the Oath-Taking of the Liberal Party of Bohol

[Delivered in the City of Tagbilaran, Bohol, on September 26, 2012]

Let us all be seated.

Governor Chatto taught me some Bisayan earlier. As you all know, I am not a native here. So if it is correct, it is because of him; if it is wrong, it is because of me. Here, they say it’s different when speaking to me—Bol-anon. I said, ‘Is that right? Isn’t Bohol—isn’t it Boholanon?’ But they said Bol-anon. I said, “I might get teased again; I’m Kapampangan, and the ‘H’ is gone.”

But good afternoon to all of you. Wait, I want to see you—can I… I will remove this teleprompter. I want to see you more clearly and I want you to know that what I will say to you comes from the heart.

Since the campaign—I think this is only now that I have returned to Bohol. Is that right? It’s not that I don’t want to. To be honest, I wanted to try Panglao; I wanted to see a tarsier again, I wanted—there are many things I want to do, but it’s just not possible.

Today, we came from Leyte, which is why we were a little late. There were two locations in Leyte; two venues here in Tagbilaran. After that, I will go directly to Clark in Pampanga because I will continue on to Tarlac. We have a wake that we need to attend there. And after that, because we have eight meetings tomorrow in Manila, I will go directly from Tarlac back to Manila.

Let me tell you about what we went through, more or less in two and a half years. One of the most difficult trials we went through was the Arab Spring, which I think we are all aware of. What is typical? Perhaps Libya.

[In] Libya [there] are an estimated between 20 thousand to 26 thousand Filipino OFWs. Libya was in turmoil; you all know that. How many members of our embassy are there? About 20 people. So 20 people will take care of 20 thousand or 26 thousand. If you look at the map, the unrest [started] in Benghazi. On the other end is the capital, Tripoli. So they are on opposite ends.

Their neighbors are Egypt and Tunisia. This means that, if there is unrest in Libya, in almost any location, the easiest thing to do is to bring our countrymen to a safe place to save them. Is that right? They were even offered a salary that was three times higher. So it took a long time to convince them to evacuate. And we can't blame them because it would really be a waste for their families.

But what was more painful was that, along with the Arab Spring, the unrest also started in Tunisia. Egypt followed. When it was starting to calm down, Libya followed. Where will we bring them? We can't go to Tunisia, we can't go to Egypt. Twenty people would be in command, and when it started, our embassy didn't even know how many Filipinos were there, where to find them, and how to evacuate them.

But we worked together, especially Secretary Albert del Rosario, who went there himself—three days after his oath-taking, he was already in Libya—and took care of things, and, as you can see, we were able to get our countrymen out safely. And it didn't just happen in Libya.

To be honest, Asec. Delantar, who is always with me, carries a world map with him, because we need—when there is news of unrest in a certain place, there is likely a Filipino there. When it comes to Somalia, the Somalian pirates hijacked a ship, one-third to one-fourth of all seafarers [are] Filipino. So when a ship is hijacked, there is likely a Filipino on board.

In terms of disaster risk reduction. We have 7,100 islands, and we are visited by 20 typhoons—minimum. Manila recently experienced flooding. What is the problem? To be honest, Manila, or Metro Manila, started during the Spanish era and there was no such thing as urban planning when Magellan arrived here. So it was expanded and expanded. We don't even have a sewerage and septage system. It's like a dumping ground for rivers. Whatever river is nearby, the water is dumped there.

So it just kept increasing; there were even some who settled in what is called the floodplain. What is a floodplain? That's where the overflowing river water will fall—it goes to the floodplain. Some allowed our countrymen to live there knowing it would flood. And when it flooded, they complained. But that's really what will happen.

Let's add to that, of course, the projects we inherited. There's one: they said we need to increase the amount of water that Laguna de Bai can hold. Sounds good to hear. What they will do is dredging. What is dredging? Well, you remove the soil to deepen it. Still sounds good.

What's painful is that they will take the soil from one part of the lake and bring it to the other part of the lake. To picture this, let's say: You have a basin, right? If you put soil inside it, of course, the amount of water it can hold decreases. If you move the soil to the other side of the basin, the amount of water it can hold remains the same, right? Because there is a volume—this soil occupies a volume. So in short, the project we stopped will cost us 18.7 billion pesos just to play with mud. The Panglao that we will build here, which will start construction next year and be completed before I step down, the cost of that is P7 billion. Laguna Lake, P18 billion.

Let's add more. There are bridges that were built—I think around P11 billion. What's painful about this is that the last contract there, among the contracts allocated during the previous administration, was signed on June 28, 2010. When did I assume office? June 30, 2010. They were still contracting just one day before leaving office.

So they will buy it; I will pay for it. Now, it's okay if the bridge is good. What's painful is that it's a prefabricated bridge. So once the bridge is built, they will just look for a place where the bridge will fit when the time comes. That's true; everything is documented. Isn't it that when you see a river, you want to cross it; you measure it so the bridge can be designed to fit, right? Here, it's the opposite. Here, you build the bridge first and then worry about where it will fit. That's why it's kind of funny, right? But it's true.

Let's look at rice. My predecessor inherited—I mentioned this during the SONA—more than P12 billion in debt. The RCA back then became the NFA. So he was dealing with P12 billion. When he left it to me, it increased. It was P12 billion before, but when it was given to me, it was P177 billion in debt.

So all these problems, you can see that we are solving them one by one. Things are happening. For example: what has happened since we took office? The salaries of our soldiers and police officers were around P16,000 gross. The rent they pay for where they live is from P3,000 to P5,000. So about one-third of their salary goes directly to house rent. And of course, they have to send their children to school. Of course, they also need food every day. In short, our police officers are struggling. They are very short on funds—police and military—when they go out on the streets, we say, “Don't extort. Make do with what you have.” And it's really very difficult, you know—there are many other expenses. What we did was housing. We have already built more than 20,000 houses in the first phase where they used to pay P3,000 to P5,000—and that was just rent—now it's only P200 a month and they own it after 25 years.

Another example: electrification. Sounds good, right? My predecessor said that 99.8 percent of the barangays in the Philippines have electricity. When I heard that, I said, “I hope that's true.” So I only have 0.2 left. But it turns out that when electricity reaches the barangay hall, they claim that the entire barangay has electricity. Where in your areas does the entire barangay fit in the barangay hall? Probably nowhere, right? So the truth is, almost 36 thousand sitios have no electricity. That's already thousands—goodness! Thousands! Then, how much does it cost to connect to the national grid? It's cheap: one million. So 36 thousand times one million is needed just to provide electricity to our barangays and sitios. How much is that? Some are probably nodding here—36 billion. But, here in Bohol, there are 136 sitios that lack electricity—we have completed 75 of them and we are not yet finished with that project.

Let's look at our economy. We went to a country in Europe. Their Prime Minister asked me: how is your economy? I said, in the first quarter, I said, our GDP—gross domestic product—grew by 6.3 percent. Honestly, he stopped talking and thought to himself “6.3 percent” because for them it’s 0.1, well, we’re at 6.3. You could really see it on his face: What did you do, you’re at 6.3, we’re at 0.1? So of course I’m Filipino, this is our economy, we’re proud. This second quarter, 5.9. Our target is between five and six (percent). It looks like we have a good chance of exceeding that target.

Tourism.

No, before tourism, rice. Didn’t we inherit P177 billion? Secretary Alcala is a very diligent person, and Secretary Alcala told me, his commitment to all of us: in 2013, we will no longer import rice. We will be self-sufficient in palay and rice, we might even export expensive rice—that will be next year.

Before we came into office, you remember, we needed to import 1.3 million tons every year. And 1.3 was the shortfall in 2010, they authorized 2.5 to be imported; two million were actually imported. That’s where the debts that added to the P177 billion came from. Again, you need 1.3 million, two million were imported. What was done with the 700 thousand? Well, it was in the warehouse. What warehouse? We rented a warehouse twice the size. So, that’s the disorganized system. What did Secretary Alcala do? He focused on irrigation; he focused on the certified seeds program. Acceptance of the certified seeds program increased, more land was irrigated, and other best practices were truly demonstrated.

And until this day, Secretary Alcala hasn’t said that his prediction is becoming uncertain and he continues to stand by it. He just said that we shouldn’t be hit by 20 typhoons during harvest, and we’ll be okay.

Stock market: their record has been surpassed 44 times, OK. Before, four thousand was unreachable. Now, I think I saw the other day, the index is at 5,200. But it has surpassed the previous record over and over. Before four [thousand] was unreachable, now it has surpassed four [thousand] and has even reached 5,200. I will stop there with what we have accomplished. There are many others, but I will let our other colleagues say those.

So perhaps our old slogan in the party: Liberal, Yesterday and Today, Honorable. It is clear in the Liberal [Party] that the one being served is the true boss, the people. The strength of the Liberal [Party] comes from the people. The importance of every individual is in our ideology. And what our party is pursuing now—and I think I’ll just put that in context. There were those who listened to our SONA and almost every week someone tells me this story: They said they were saddened by my SONA. I said, “Why were they saddened, it seems like we’ve done so much?” They said they were saddened because, wasn’t the beginning of my SONA, “This is now my third SONA.” There are only three left that I will deliver. This person said, only three left, PNoy is finished. They repeated that in different ways. And I, I also told you about what we go through every day, the problems we are grappling with. This, right here. It’s probably my seventh week now without a weekend. That means, 24/7, like a barangay captain perhaps, you answer the problems of Filipinos in the Philippines and Filipinos who are not in the Philippines. And if there is trouble in another place, there is likely a Filipino involved there, and you are always involved too. And with the many problems that were left for us to grapple with, you will really notice that I no longer brush my hair, I just use a comb.

So many are asking, “What will happen when you’re gone?” How… This is just luck. The sun shines for a moment, then we go back to the way things were. My answer to them is, “Maybe,” I said “Tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, Lord will take me.” If I am taken, will that be it? Will all our hard work be over?” That doesn’t seem right. That’s why our view and our view now in the Liberal Party is to uphold the ideology, uphold the party, and hone those who will replace us because we really need to have a succession of those who will uphold it so that this change that is happening now will be permanent. And that is what we expect from all of you. Can I count on all of you to uphold all of that?

So, that “Padayon Bol-anon” becomes “Padayon” for the entire Philippines. Senator TG Guingona, you might be mistaken, don’t vote for him next year, because his term ends with me in 2016. But he won’t run, but he will help, he’ll lose a lot of weight to support the same perspectives as those we are fighting for, so we can ensure that we are not alone, not two, but many pulling towards the progress of our country.

The Congress is very important; the Senate is very important. We presented Risa to you; we will introduce you to all 11 others we have placed on the ticket who we can truly be proud of, who we can guarantee will help speed up the change that is already happening in our country.

So, here in Bohol, I worked with…[coughs] Excuse me. I wish I could tell you that someone thought of it for me, but there wasn’t. Maybe someone is casting a spell on us, that’s where it ends.

Here in Bohol, well, our Governor Ed Chatto is very highly regarded. Truly, when he texts us, we answer immediately. When he calls us, it’s immediate. I’ve met with Ed so many times. I said, “I’m afraid you’ll think of me as your father-in-law. I haven’t even started courting her,” I said. [laughter and applause]

But earlier I came from Leyte, Governor Icot Petilla was there. It’s also nice to talk to him. He won’t flatter you, he’ll tell you the truth. He’s hardworking and truly looks after the welfare of his constituents, not just raising himself in office. So I’m lucky to have Icot Petilla helping me. Here in Bohol, I’m lucky to have Ed Chatto helping me. Accompanied by Bob Cajes and Rene Relampagos. Because it’s clear to us, whatever we plan in Manila, in Malacañang, if the one who implements it locally isn’t good, it will be wasted. We can prepare for all the disasters that come to us.

You know, in disaster risk, there’s geohazard mapping. That means we map the areas that are in danger and the areas that are safe. Now there are areas where people have been living for a long time. But the situation has changed. Is it really being said that a catastrophe will happen there? They’re asking when. So we need to approach those communities. Who will help nationally? Of course, the local ones. When a disaster happens, the national government will come. The local ones are already here. That’s why we need strong local governments from the barangay to the governor so that all that we aspire for our countrymen will truly happen.

Let me repeat to you, I congratulate you on joining our party. This, as our party president Mar says, isn’t about joining the party in exchange for a vest. Here we have expectations that we will stand firm, that we have one focus, that we can face any of our countrymen and say: Both then and now, the Liberal Party is truly honorable. That will happen and the change that is happening will speed up.

Let me repeat to you, in about two and a half years, I think we can compare the record of the one I replaced and what we have achieved so far. I’ll only run once—You know, my father and mother told me not to brag too much. But this is true: Earlier I was surprised when our administrator at NEA said that in 18 years, they only received P6 billion in budgetary support from the National Electrification Administration. In one year since we brought the problem to their attention—roughly one year, they approached us in September 2011—until the end of this year, December 2012, we will match the P6 billion of 18 years in roughly about one year.

That tourist, whom I almost forgot, during their nine and a half years in office, they seemed to have increased the number of tourists visiting the Philippines by 1.2 million. From 1.8, it became three million, what I inherited. This year, the three million I inherited from them will likely be 4.6 million tourists per year starting this year. Of course, you will be the next tourist destination.

Just to add. There are many coconuts here in your region. When I went to America on a trip there, we spoke with various companies and I was surprised that coconut water, or what they call “buko juice” in a sophisticated way, is imported from us. Now, when I returned, I was eager to tell our countrymen: look, buko juice, the copra, isn't it just thrown away? It turns out it has value. In 2009, we exported approximately 400,000 liters. In 2010, it became more than one million—about 1.6 million. Last year, 2011, we exported 11 million liters—almost 12 million. This year, in the first six months, we have already exported more than ten million. So after that, it will be around 20 million. That’s just the American market, Europe hasn't even been included yet.

Think about it, so many businessmen, traders, various experts are really eager to trade and do business here in the Philippines. So poverty is really not the destiny of the Filipino. Give the Filipino the right opportunity, and it will happen, if we elect the right people to various positions who are truly focused on others and not on themselves. We will truly look after everyone and we can proudly say that a lot has changed. And the next generation will remember us and say that we stood up for their future.

Good afternoon to all of you. Thank you very much.