[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nhFnQ_QiN1Y[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, During his visit to those affected by Typhoon Ruby in Western Samar

Thank you very much. Let us all be seated.

Secretary Dinky Soliman; Secretary Voltaire Gazmin; Secretary Jericho Petilla; Governor Conrado Nicart Jr.; Congressman Ben Evardone; Mayor Maria Abunda; other local government officials present; Mr. Bradley Me llicker of the IOM, our very strong partners through all these strategies, and hopefully we will not partner too much in the future [laughter]; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my beloved Estehanons:

Good afternoon to you. [Applause]

You know, before Ruby arrived, I was with Governor Nicart and Ben, and then there was a gathering of the LP, but what we discussed there was the arrival of Ruby and we were reminding ourselves that we needed to be more prepared than for Yolanda. And truly, after the results, with the help and mercy of God, we really reduced the number of casualties we have now compared to Yolanda. And that, the cooperation of your government and other citizens, we all sympathized with each other to lessen the impact of Ruby. So, I’ll start with that first: Thank you very much to all of you.

When we learned that another storm was coming to the country and it was reported to hit the Visayas, we were really worried about your situation here in Eastern Samar. Think about it: Just last year, you were hit by Typhoon Yolanda and it caused severe damage in the Visayas. And before the year ended, here comes the threat of Typhoon Ruby. Honestly, I admit, I am also a human being, I said, “What is this Christmas of ours? We always face something like this.” But Ruby came and passed, and with God's mercy and our mutual support, although many were worried because it was one of the strongest storms to enter the country this year, the damage it caused was not as widespread.

During my visit earlier in Dolores, and now, in Borongan, I am grateful for the opportunity to be with you. I salute the spirit and resilience you show after the calamity. This proves: No matter how strong the storm and no matter how severe the damage it leaves, what is important is that we are here, together and drawing strength from each other. I asked Governor Nicart and Ben to teach me a little Waray. If it’s correct, it’s because of them. If it’s wrong, it’s because of me: I offer my great praise to all of you Estehanons. [Applause] Thank you for being an inspiration to many people. It’s not “Merry Christmas.” [Laughter]

Through good governance and diligent preparation, many of our countrymen were spared from the danger caused by Typhoon Ruby. Likewise, we avoided the more severe damage that the typhoon could have caused if we had been complacent. What steps did we take? Before the typhoon made landfall, we actively disseminated information to report the weather conditions and warn citizens of dangers such as storm surges. 146,875 families in areas to be hit by the typhoon underwent pre-emptive evacuation. We also had family food packs ready for distribution. Even before Typhoon Ruby arrived, we had already reserved 318,532 family food packs worth 110 million pesos. These were prepared in our DSWD field offices in various regions and at the National Resource Operation Center. In addition, relief equipment was already positioned for use, and we deployed disaster response teams to various locations. Secretary Mar Roxas was there, even before the first landfall of Typhoon Ruby, to lead the response and assistance to our countrymen. Secretary Edwin Lacierda was also there, among those who oversaw communication and the distribution of information regarding the situation in the affected communities. Secretary Dinky Soliman was in Cebu as the head of relief operations. Meanwhile, Secretary Volts Gazmin managed the coordination of all our actions from the headquarters of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. In all of this, we thank the various international agencies and organizations, such as the International Organization on Migration and the UN Development Programme and UN Humanitarian Country Team. The government's diligent preparation for the arrival of Typhoon Ruby was recognized and praised.

To prevent profiteering and price increases of goods in the market, we deployed Discount Caravans to the affected areas shortly after Typhoon Ruby passed. We spoke with manufacturers and distributors in areas likely to be hit by Ruby. We told them they should have inventory to ensure a sufficient supply of products in the affected areas.

Our intensive preparation has yielded positive results. We quickly addressed the needs during and after the typhoon. And now that we are moving from the relief stage to recovery and rehabilitation, we continue to deliver aid. According to the latest data, only 332 families or 1,529 people are currently being assisted in 44 evacuation centers here in Eastern Samar. We are ensuring they have enough food and that the spread of disease is prevented.

This December 21st, the family food packs distributed by the DSWD in your province reached 113,320. Here in Borongan, we have distributed 18,609 family food packs, while 6,500 have been delivered to Dolores. These family food packs are provided by the DSWD as additional assistance to the aid they have already provided in their areas of responsibility. Earlier, you witnessed us bringing our cash-for-work program assistance so that the victims have a means of livelihood. We thank the leaders and members of our LGUs who truly joined the national government's initiative to immediately help our affected countrymen—let us also include Congress, which is not hesitant to support our needs.

Under the Cash for Work Program, the government allocated a total of P68 million for 17,457 family-beneficiaries here in Borongan. Almost P46 million is for Dolores, which will benefit more than 11,700 families. These are part of our Early Recovery Program for the areas most affected by Typhoon Ruby. The DSWD is implementing this diligently, in cooperation with the United Nations and international organizations, such as the International Organization for Migration and the World Food Programme, as we mentioned earlier. There is also—you can see it on our side—the DSWD's emergency shelter assistance for our countrymen whose homes were destroyed by the typhoon. This is part of the assistance, and if a house is completely damaged by the typhoon, a qualified family will receive 30,000 pesos as aid. Those whose houses were partially damaged will receive 10,000 pesos for repairs. In connection with this, we will not allow them to rebuild their homes in so-called dangerous areas. We are carefully studying and selecting the areas where they will relocate. Our goal is simple: to promote decent housing away from danger; we cannot bear to return you to the previous situation, with the fear of the same tragedy happening again.

As always, the principle in our efforts to restore normalcy after a disaster is: Build Back Better. And these concepts are applied not only to the construction of infrastructure, such as roads, bridges and houses, but also to governance mechanisms. From the early reporting of weather conditions, the development of equipment to determine the direction, wind speed, and amount of rainfall, mapping of dangerous areas, evacuation of our countrymen, to the government's rapid response, the ability to respond during a typhoon has greatly improved. We are ensuring that the mistakes of the past are not repeated because the lives of Filipinos are at stake.

Of course, we also thank our countrymen for their cooperation in this initiative. Now, many are no longer resisting evacuation. We also thank our frontliners, first responders and volunteers. To all of you who quietly do your job and contribute to the recovery of those affected by the typhoon, I may not be able to name you all, thank you very much. This is just proof: through the unity of the citizenry, of the national and local government, we can avoid the severe damage that a typhoon can cause. This will also greatly help to continue our Build Back Better in communities recovering from past disasters.

You can count on it: We will continue to monitor government operations to speed up the restoration of affected communities to better than normal. This Christmas season, we know that some of our countrymen will celebrate it with problems and anxieties from past tragedies. However, let us still be thankful for the life that He continues to give us; that the joy and meaning of Christmas are found not in how abundant the food is, or how many blessings we receive. It is found in the bonding of family and in being a source of love and compassion for others. We know that the Lord will not give us a test that we cannot overcome. As long as we continue to contribute, continue to take steps on the right and just path, continue to have faith in God. And I am sure: no matter how strong the typhoon or how heavy the trial, the Filipino will not be shaken. Let us continue to overcome challenges and move closer to the prosperous future we desire.

Before I conclude, I took the opportunity to talk to Governor Nicart, Congressman Ben Evardone. Of course, during our flight earlier, we noticed that there were so many coconut trees here and some had fallen. The good news here is that the Supreme Court has issued a declaration to allow the use of the Coconut Levy Fund. Now, what we will pursue here is not just earning from copra from coconut farming—there are many products that are now being used and we are still exporting to other countries such as coco coir, coco peat, coco water, and many more. There is a factory being prototyped that will be used, or operated and owned by farmers as well. We are waiting for their study to be finalized. All products except copra, that is what this factory will produce.

So, we already have funds, even before the Supreme Court’s decision. Especially now that the funds have increased, you can expect that we will really pursue this, led by Secretary Kiko Pangilinan, and with the help of the Department of Agriculture, to really improve the income so that our future will be better.

Secondly, we were informed by the DENR representative earlier, that there is a large budget—billions—for planting what are called mangroves. Mangroves help save us when there are strong storm surges; they reduce the impact, as well as tsunamis. Hopefully, we won't experience a tsunami again. Now, 80 percent of the funds are allocated here, I think in Region 8, if I'm not mistaken. But the point is, next year, the planting of these mangroves is planned to be completed so that they can grow and add protection against the coming storms. Let us remember that we are visited by at least 20 typhoons every year. There are experiments on how to reduce the impact of typhoons, but as long as we haven't controlled the climate, we need to make sure that we can face each of these challenges with a much better situation than before so that we can really reduce tragedies.

With our cooperation, that will happen sooner. So, I will greet you, somehow, I hope you have a happy Christmas, a more peaceful and prosperous new year for us.

Good day to all of you.