Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III at the inauguration of the Negros First Cyber Center (NFCC)

Just a while ago, we came from Barangay Tabunan, Bago City, to inspect your Negros First Rice Processing Center. We were truly delighted with what we heard during the briefing and the changes we saw. Before, your rice production was done manually—especially the drying and processing—including drying it on the roads—your roads are very wide, by the way, Manong Freddie. If things go as planned, on June 30, or maybe July 1, I might move here to Negros. [Applause] Your highway has six lanes. In Tarlac, we are still constructing four lanes, asphalt only. They might not accept me there; here, there are six lanes, and it’s cemented. It’s complete, I think even with drainage and lighting. [Laughter] If my countrymen see that, they might say I’m Ilonggo now, not Kapampangan anymore. [Laughter] Now, regarding the rice mill we visited—that is, drying it on the road, if it gets run over, the yield is reduced. Long grain becomes broken grain. Drying takes three days. But if it starts to dry, it rains. Back to three days again.

Now, we have a modern and more effective facility. With mechanical dryers and a biomass furnace, it has the capacity to process up to 10 tons of rice per hour. This means: Your rice production will improve. For example: Your post-harvest losses, from an average of 16 percent, will be reduced to 8 to 10 percent. When we compute—how much rice needs to be harvested for the rice we eat—the average used is 15 percent losses. That’s the difference between palay and rice.

Here, the difference is 50 percent; so we will be at 65, the recovery will increase by 15 percent. In effect, more than eighteen thousand farmers in your province will benefit from this facility: without adding to their farming practices, they can increase their saleable rice by at least thirteen to fifteen percent.

With this initiative, we shouldn’t be surprised if all the restaurants or eateries here have an unlimited rice promo according to Secretary Alcala. [Laughter]

Now, we are gathered to inaugurate your Negros First Cyber Centre. The total cost of this project is estimated at P674 million. As you can see: It was only started in January 2012, and the construction was completed in October 2014. In December, it was opened, and operations began. This infrastructure proves: With the right people and project, with the right quality and price, the plan is truly concretized and enjoyed by Filipinos.

What is inside this building? We call this Cyber Centre an Information Technology-Business Process Management or IT-BPM hub. On its two-hectare land, there are call center workstations and a Business Resource Center; there is space for start-up IT companies and those who want to study and train in the IT-BPM sector, such as a Technology Business Incubation Center, a research and development facility, and a creative process studio. In addition to this, there are new eateries, banks, conference and exhibition halls.

And the best part of all: It is fully owned and under the supervision of your local government. This means that the Cyber Centre is expected to earn P90 million in rent per year, directly to the government of your province. It will also provide: 6,000 direct jobs, and an estimated 20,000 indirect jobs within the next two years. More funds, more jobs, for more services for our Bosses, our beloved Negrenses.

As you can see: From basic needs like rice, to modern infrastructure that delivers services and jobs, we are now providing these to Filipinos.

Despite this, we are not complacent; we continue to work hard to develop various industries in the country. The best example of our initiatives is the Training for Work Scholarship Program (TWSP) of TESDA. In partnership with the private sector, such as the Information Technology and Business Process Association of the Philippines (IBPAP), we provide thorough training to beneficiaries, to improve their job qualifications. From July 2010 to December 2014, we have allocated P1.36 billion in funds to the TWSP for the IT-BPM sector; 184,414 graduates have benefited from this. The good news is: from 2011 to 2012, the employment rate of our graduates under the TESDA and IBPAP partnership reached 70.7 percent. I think I’ll ask Joel to hold a seminar here; because here it’s 85 percent. [Laughter] This is higher than the overall 68.5 percent employment rate of our TWSP graduates in 2012.

Indeed, in the IT-BPM sector, the Philippines is shining. According to the 2015 Tholons Top 100 Outsourcing Destinations Report, Metro Manila is the second top outsourcing destination in the world, second only to Bangalore (Baeng-lawr) in India. Eight of the 100 cities on this list are in the Philippines, including Bacolod City, which has risen to rank 86 this year, from rank 93 last year.

These data prove: Give Filipinos enough opportunity, and they will truly shine. That’s why we are striving to develop the IT-BPM industry, not only in Manila, but especially in cities or provinces that are also rich in intelligence, talent, and enthusiasm, like here in Bacolod. We call this the Next Wave Cities Program. As of March 2015, a total of 37 cities are part of the program; we also expect it to spread to more provinces in the coming years. Tomorrow, Labor Day, we’ll be back here with electronic devices. I’ll just wear our binoculars.

Of course, we cannot achieve these changes without the cooperation of your local leaders with the national government. That’s why we thank Governor Alfredo Marañon—even if he’s not from our party, he cooperates in promoting good governance, and in delivering services to our Bosses. [Applause]

As you can see, even Governor Marañon’s pants capture the youth. [Laughter] I’ll join a seminar with you too.

Perhaps some of you have seen the post on Twitter by one of your representatives, Congresswoman Chedeng Alvarez. In her tweet, there is a picture of her lying on the road, and the caption: “Thank you Pres. Noynoy Aquino & DPWH for the completion of the Dancalan-Candoni, Negros Occidental National Highway!” [Applause] Now, from Kabankalan to Candoni, the trip that used to take three hours now only takes one hour. And because of this new road, the price of products and transportation costs will surely decrease. If I were to reply to her, I would tweet: “Let’s thank our Bosses. They, the Filipino people, are continuously making change, and don’t lie on the road again. You have a lot more to do for your constituents.” [Laughter]

And truly: The Filipino remains the most important wealth of the Philippines. That is why, every step we take on the Straight Path is focused on the welfare of our countrymen. We give Juan and Juana dela Cruz sufficient opportunities to progress, to maximize his/her potential, and to contribute, not only to personal development, but also to the entire nation. This is the reason we are promoting the K to 12 Basic Education Program, and other social services; this is the justification for our support of the Negros Island Region, to accelerate the connection and development in your provinces. [Applause] We thank [Roel] Degamo and ten of his companions. Isn't there really logic to that? You are one island, but you belong to two regions. Divided by six and divided by four. That's how it used to be, right? So if you are together, divided by two. That seems easier, divided by two. [Applause]

This is also the spirit in promoting peace, order, and development in Mindanao and throughout the country.

That is why, Bosses and my beloved Negrenses, we are on the right track; let us not deviate from it. Let us make the most of every opportunity to move towards a Philippines that is more just, with greater stability, and with sufficient capacity to reap the fruits of widespread development.

I will just go back to Joel Villanueva’s debt. How about Negros Oriental, Joel, are you bringing that with you too? Negros Oriental already knows about theirs because Joel came from there. Now we are in Negros Occidental. This year, there are P70 million worth of scholarship vouchers just for the IT-BPM sector. [Applause] We expect at least 85 percent of the 7200 beneficiaries to find a job. And last month, the animation and health info office received P65 million also for scholarships. [Applause] Joel, that’s about P135 million, right? Tarlac only got 1.35, maybe I won’t be able to go home to our place. [Laughter]

However, I do have a girlfriend, from Silay back in the day. [Applause] She’s been married for a long time. [Laughter] Father, maybe I can ask you to officiate. You still have a long time before you retire, Father. [Laughter] But truthfully, if we didn’t find someone to take to the altar, here in Negros Oriental or Occidental, you truly loved me from the Senate until, of course, when I was number one President. As far as I remember, 54 or 56 percent of all votes went to me. We defeated the seven, eight opponents we had. We weren’t greedy so we shared with them. [Laughter]

But truthfully, I am really happy to be here. I might also mention, there is a student from La Salle, you know I came from the other school, but here I really admire. I admire La Salle. Earlier in the games, you were producing software for La Salle graduates. The other school is being left behind. [Laughter] But you know even in grade school, there was a student–I will have to ask if I can identify who she is. After the SONA of 2014, she actually wrote a letter that came out in the webpage of the Philippine Daily Inquirer and she titled it “The Blame Game.” It’s really worthwhile reading this particular article written by a child of no more than… She was 13 years old when she wrote it, and her wisdom really exceeds those who are supposed to be a lot smarter, and more titled, and older, and wiser. But I guess, it’s really from the mouth of Babes: [from] the young ones, the truth always comes out. And I would like to thank her publicly. Unfortunately, I have not asked for her permission to mention her name. I understand she doesn’t really want a lot of attention. But you know who you are, and I’d like to thank you for doing that.

I practiced my Ilonggo, I don't think I have any courtship here in what I practiced. [Laughter] I was thinking, after I leave here, I might be blamed. Why haven't you gotten married yet? So I will just be direct: On the right path, let us continue what is good, towards achieving our collective goal.

Thank you very much.