Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines at the inauguration of the Pointwest Digital Center

[Delivered in Pasig City on November 24, 2015]

One of the things I want to comment on is the idea that you’re successful, you’ve competed against foreign firms, that are perhaps more established, have been in the industry longer. I don’t think we should think about the lopsidedness of the challenge. In one of my earlier careers, I was working for Mondragon in the division that handled Nike. At that point in time, people actually didn’t even know how to pronounce the brand name. Like any salesmen, we were being given knowledge of the product seminars. One of the questions I asked was “How do we differentiate our brand from the competitor?” And the product specialist told us, “Well, we use basically the same materials. We have a different trademark, we have a little more vibrant colors,” etcetera. In short, there was hardly any difference between our product and theirs. But, the major difference was we were selling ours at an introductory price that was over the regular price. So how do we get people interested in a product that is more expensive — that is basically the same — was the challenge. To be honest with you, I wasn’t really that clear on exactly how we were supposed to do this. We were a total of six or seven handling the whole Nike account for Mondragon, which meant production, advertising, promotions, marketing, the whole gamut. Including training of the sales personnel, designing of the point of purchase displays, researcher during the sporting events that we wanted to get involved with. Then of course, we were competing with the giant of the industry whose name I won’t mention right now, they might think I’m insulting them. But the bottom line is our advertising and promotions budget was probably one percent of their promotions budget. We’d innovate, for instance, sponsorships in villages for basketball leagues. When they saw that it was catching the attention of the youth — which was our market — they decided to do 10, 20, 30 for each event that we’d sponsor. But at the end of the day, it got to the point that we even discovered new lines for Nike in the Philippines in garments. At one point in time it was responsible for a third of Mondragon’s profits, just the athletic wearables at that point in time.

When you look at a competitor that is bigger, one should say they actually have an inertia — how to change systems that seem to have worked all these years. Whereas the younger, upstart, has — as the Latin speakers would say — a tabula rasa ; we can invent anything. These innovations really cause disruptions in the market, and the ability of the older and established brands to navigate the changing winds indicate whether or not they will succeed.

They might be bigger, they have all the resources, but you are actually the change agent who knows where you’re going and they will have to wait to react to where it’s going. So there is a built-in advantage to being the smaller guy on the block. There is another thing I wanted to comment on, I think I will remember it in a little while.

The job of President, really, is trying to watch all of the cable channels in the world at the same time and being perfectly aware of what is happening with each and every one, every second of the day, and preferably knowing the conclusion before it is even thought of by the writers.

During my time as President, I have grown to treasure attending events such as this. It is in these places where Philippine ingenuity is harnessed and displayed to the world, and being able to witness this for myself reinforces my optimism about the future of our country. Before I proceed with that, I did remember the second important thing. [Laughter] Jack Ma was in the country and I had the chance to talk to him for about over an hour–really an interesting guy. First thing [where] we hit it off: Like me, he is the opposite of a techie person. He said “I’m not really that techie, I hire the people who know all the tech and they try to distill it enough for me to understand.” But the bottom line is, I think he was responding to the dirt or the quality of infrastructure in China at that point in time. He had this vision that we can do this service using the net. Now the point in the conversation that I want to stress is that we talked about Q — the knowledge quotient, the intelligence quotient, and the LQ. The bottom line is, you can hire the knowledge of anyone in the world; IQ is there anywhere in the world. But he did notice that in the Philippines — and that is the point I wanted to comment on in Mr. Hizon’s speech — LQ is love quotient, so I had to explain to him: “Jun, my generation, LQ is referred to as ‘love quarrel,’” but the love quotient enables the Filipino to go really to the needs of the client that he is talking to, which is not available elsewhere. The bottom line is that’s a tip, he’s really looking seriously at us to add that LQ to the operations of Alibaba. You might want to prepare the proposal already for Mr. Jack Ma. [Laughter] I don’t think I have to encourage you as to the sheer volume of transactions and the value of transactions going through Alibaba.

So back to the main topic: The success story of Pointwest Technologies is a testament to the skill and talent of the Filipino people, and to our nation’s continued leadership in the IT-BPM industry. The numbers tell an inspiring tale: In 2003, this company employed sixty people. Now, I am told that you have hired more than 1,250 individuals, with revenues reaching — wala naman si Kim Henares — $31.3 million last year. [Laughter] She’s very efficient. [Laughter] In the same year, I am told you were also chosen as the Best Filipino-Owned Company of the Year in the International ICT Awards Philippines. Not to mention that the services you provide include those that have a significant impact on the lives of our people: for example, the award-winning weather monitoring application for the Department of Science and Technology’s Project NOAH, which was aptly named Arko.  Si Mahar Lagmay is present, sabi ko “Bakit hindi ko nakikita yung in charge sa nag-create ng NOAH?” Which basically means NOAH is working well. If it didn’t work well, we would probably be in my office every other day explaining. [Laughter] This tells me that your talents are not limited to technology, but extends to biblical history and marketing as well. [Laughter]

Indeed: Your belief in the capacities of your fellow Filipinos seems to be at an all-time high, because you express it not in words, but also in pesos and centavos, to the tune of an additional P40 million in investments in the firm. I am told that this delivery center—your third in the Philippines—is envisioned to accommodate 222 additional seats, not to mention another 62 seats for your idea incubation unit. Of course, the multiplier effect that the investment has on your employees here, who will have more money to spend on cafes, convenience stores, transportation, entertainment, Uber taxi services, and so on are even infinitely more. For your trust and confidence in your own country and, more importantly, in your own people, obviously, you have my utmost gratitude.

I stand before you today to assure you that our government will continue to be your partner in maximizing the talents of the Filipino people. You are aware that we have just concluded the hosting of the APEC Economic Leaders Meeting last week. In our retreat session, we had an interesting discussion about technology and how it impacts our respective economies. Naturally, innovation opens many doors for us, but it is vital for any government to deal with the disruption that always accompanies innovation. President Barack Obama spoke of how, in the United States, certain manufacturing plants that once required 1,000 workers to produce a certain number of cars now only need 100 workers to produce the same amount, obviously that displaces 900 of them. The next question is: How do we re-capacitate these 900 workers, or at the very least those of them who have not retired already? Given these kinds of advancements in technology, it behooves us all to find ways to make certain our people cope with an ever-changing world, and even better, make the most out of it.

This is the thinking behind our massive investments and reforms in technical education: As innovation expands the realm of opportunities, we need to be certain that our people have the skills to capitalize on those opportunities. Through the Training for Work Scholarship Program, for instance, of TESDA, we have done just that. Over the course of our administration, we have spent more than P1.6 billion on this program just for the IT-BPM sector, training more than 200,000 Filipinos along the way. We worked shoulder-to-shoulder with IBPAP to ensure that this money was spent efficiently, and it has resulted in more than 70 percent of the beneficiaries of the TESDA-IBPAP training program in 2012 finding relevant employment within six months after graduation. This, compared to the 28.5 percent employment rate posted by all TESDA scholars from 2006 to 2008. And I am certain that, with our continued cooperation, we can improve this figure even more. Again: go through the training, within 6 months find a job. Success for over 70 percent of them.

Two years ago, we also launched the Service Management Program, which is a 21-unit specialization track for students in IT and business schools. This year, we welcomed the first batch of graduates of this program, and as of June, we estimate that around 8,000 students across eight State Universities and Colleges are enrolled in it. Of course, we have also taken advantage of the blistering progress in technology. The University of the Philippines Open University has been working with the IBPAP to convert the courseware of this program to create open distance e-learning courses. Essentially, this allows more Filipinos to overcome more boundaries and better equip themselves to succeed. I am told that, as of September of this year, 1,200 enrollees have already signed up in these courses, and half of whom are OFWs. Hopefully, upon graduation, they will stay in the country and not need to be outside of the country.

These programs are not dole-outs. They are investments in our people, who we consider our greatest resource. Let us look at the numbers. For the TESDA program, government invests around P7,155 per scholar. When that scholar graduates and finds a job in your sector, a conservative assumption would be that he makes at least P234,000 a year as an entry-level worker. This means that, with the maximum tax deduction, his annual income tax will be P7,900, therefore we have made money just graduating one person; that facilitates the next person in line to get the same opportunity. Is that not the definition of efficiency? In less than a year, the state recoups its investment. And this is not even considering that the graduates will be taxpayers until retirement, and that they will also become empowered consumers, whose spending will spur our local economies.

Of course, none of these would be possible without companies like you, who have bet on the Filipino people—you, who give them the opportunity and the creative space to make the most of their capacities. I have less than 8 months remaining in office–or I am hoping that I have less than 8 months–but I am hopeful that you will work closely with whoever succeeds me, with the goal of continuing your sector’s growth, and of showing the world that it is worth it to bet on the Filipino people.

Indeed, over the past years, our partnership has reaped unimaginable rewards. We have proven that, with the partnership of a government that serves no other boss apart from its people, your sector—and our entire country can go from success to success. I am confident that, if we continue our productive engagement, we will not just remain globally competitive; we can also give rise to a Philippines that is seen as a global example of what it takes to enjoy success that is both sustained and inclusive; a Philippines that we can be proud to bequeath to the next generation of Filipinos.

That appeal earlier of, hopefully the success of continuing what we have done is also my appeal and my desire but at the same time, we should not be fearful in the sense that, there is a saying that goes something like “Success has many fathers and mothers, but failure is a lonely orphan.” bottom line is this: If you succeed, I don’t think there will be a fool that will replace me who will say “I want to fight this industry that is successful.” Therefore, you yourselves will actually cultivate the necessary support that government can give and should be giving.

With that, thank you and good day.