Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the presentation of major infrastructure projects on the island of Mindoro.

Secretary Babes Singsong; Secretary Mar Roxas; of course the most popular, Governor Alfonso “Boy” Umali, also known as “Pa,” [laughter] and the kind wife, Mareng Susan, who really makes the day brighter when we see her, because with Boy, when it’s mealtime, it’s just chatting; the kind Governor Gene Mendiola of Occidental Mindoro; our kind colleague Congressman Doy Leachon; and Kuya Rey Umali; we tease Tita Josie Sato of Occidental Mindoro; and Egay Erice who is about to move to Mindoro [laughter] but is currently in Caloocan; Mayor Hubbert Dolor; Mayor Eric Constantino; Mayor Sandy Javier; Bishop Warlito Cajandig; other local government officials present; fellow workers in government; honored guests; my beloved countrymen:

Again, good morning to all of you. [Applause from the crowd]

Boy invited us today for a briefing on the circumferential roads among other infrastructure projects. Then, the helicopter landing site [landing], I think it passed about three resorts. The plan was for me to try to be a tourist tonight here in Mindoro Oriental. [Applause] That’s the plan. The truth is, I’m being called back to Manila after this because, as you know, we have a little problem in the Golan Heights with our peacekeepers. Those involved in the civil war happening in Syria. But so far, let’s not be alarmed. The news is that the situation is somewhat stable, but that’s it, there are rebels and it seems there was an incident involving Fijian members of UNDOF, or the UN forces, the peacekeeping forces there in the Golan Heights. After that in Fiji, our soldiers were targeted by the rebels. As of now, although the situation is tense, there doesn’t seem to be any real danger being reported to our Department of National Defense. Perhaps we should start with what Boy mentioned. You know, Boy and I have come a long way. I can’t say we both still have long hair when we met. [Laughter] We were both a little thin when we met, but we’ve really been tested. And he’s really with us through thick and thin; usually just through the thick. So, he’s right, when we went to Cagayan, because he was the head of ULAP, you know. We went there, he teased me every time a province was mentioned, saying this is what has been done for you and is being done. He said, “I should probably change my last name so I might get noticed.” And when we carried the list of guests, hundreds of millions were going to Mindoro Oriental, but billions are being talked about in Cagayan and Apayao. The road, you see, [that] will connect Cagayan and Apayao, was only planned recently, in 1968. [Laughter] So they planned it, they promised it, we will finish it. Like the Metro Manila Expressway, that’s the South Luzon and North Luzon connectors. That was promised to us in 1976. I was in grade school, I don’t know about Boy, he was probably in college at that time. [Laughter] We will finish that too.

Anyway, let’s focus on Mindoro Oriental first. So this morning, I called Butch. “Butch, I’m meeting with Boy. Where is the estimate you’re working on for me?” Secretary Butch Abad, Secretary of Budget, replied to me, “Ah, is that needed now?” So, with his quick calculation, it’s reached P6.1 billion from 2011 to 2014. It went to roads, bridges, flood control, and even an airport, ports, irrigation, then farm-to-market roads, either ongoing projects or completed. Then, when we were reminded that it was still lacking from the DOTC, it wasn’t complete and from the Department of Agriculture. So it will grow even more. Anyway, Secretary Singson mentioned, it seems that in the DPWH including 2015, it’s already at 6 billion. In Mindoro Oriental, I showed the kind Governor Gene and Tita Nene, they said: 6.1 [billion pesos] is your record in Oriental Mindoro, in Occidental Mindoro, 4.6 [billion pesos]; we seem to have been left behind. I said, we will equalize this. [Applause] To be honest, here in these two only, I’ll repeat, the record is not yet complete, it’s about 10.71 billion pesos that we’ve brought to Mindoro Island. My problem is that I can’t fill the needs of Mindoro, because when I arrived here earlier, I said, “This is good. Circumferential road, it looks like it’s all concrete roads here.” My problem when I get home to Tarlac, most of our roads are asphalted. [Laughter] Even the highway, the MacArthur Highway. Anyway, that’s my problem.

Now, Babes mentioned earlier, our circumferential road, here in the northern part, the problem is just to connect it and how long to connect, about 20 kilometers remains. The problem is, we will disturb either the beach, which has setbacks that are needed, or the forest, what we call protected by nature, they will protest. So the DPWH’s choice now, who will be angry with them: those who want to preserve the coastline for tourism purposes, or those who want to preserve the rainforest.

So, that’s our role in the executive. You have to do it, a road that isn’t connected is useless, right? At the top, suddenly there’s a 20 kilometer stretch that can’t be connected. If you connect it, someone will be angry with you. Your only choice, who will be angry with you? But I think, this will benefit the majority. Of course, once the road is completed, it will greatly help tourism, which is a major industry in Mindoro, isn’t it, and the livelihood of many Mindoreños. So let’s work together on this, minimize the impact on the environment, but the infrastructure that people need, I hope it will push through. So that we have a complete road, and not like a “horse shoe,” with two ends but not connecting. That would be useful, I think.

More than two years have passed since my last visit here in Mindoro Oriental. We participated then in catching King Crab, and celebrated the birthday of the most senior member of our party, who is none other than Governor Boy Umali. [Laughter] No, let me correct that, the most senior in active service, because we have retired members. In active service, Boy is the most senior. [Laughter] But of course, we didn’t come here just for the big and delicious crabs, we’ll be accompanied by lobster, they say. It’s embarrassing, Boy, let’s not. [Laughter]. I’m not teasing Governor Boy, but to personally check on Oriental Mindoro, especially our countrymen. In the short time that has passed, it is clear that the transformation in your province is continuing. Only one thing hasn’t changed: the warm welcome of the Mindoreños to us earlier. Thank you very much. [Applause] I feel like I’m not just a “visitor” to you, but a family member that you never fail to support, and again, thank you very much for your continued trust.

Earlier, we listened to the briefing of Secretary Babes Singson of the DPWH regarding infrastructure in Mindoro. I am pleased with the list of meaningful structures that we have already completed and are currently completing to benefit our countrymen.

Of course, when we return to Manila, I want to see a clearer picture of the flood control projects.

For example, the portions of the Mindoro East and West Coast Roads and the Abaton-Maidlang Bridge II. What is good about this is that there are many more projects in the pipeline that will surely deliver quality service to our citizens. The DPWH is also studying the proposed Abra de Ilog-Puerto Galera section of the Mindoro Island Circumferential Road, which will connect the northern parts of Occidental and Oriental Mindoro.

What benefits does the development of our roads bring? It's simple: building roads makes travel easier, speeds up the exchange of products and services, and grows businesses. In addition, tourist spots in your provinces are more accessible, encouraging more tourists to visit. With good roads, those of us from Manila or Tarlac like me are more inclined to visit your beautiful beaches here in Puerto Galera or go to other beautiful destinations [applause] like Apo Reef in Occidental Mindoro. The result of this: From a vibrant commerce and tourism, opportunities spring forth for the Mindoreños.

Along with the development of roads in Mindoro, the rehabilitation of your airports and ports is ongoing. There is the improvement of the Pinamalayan, San Jose, and Lubang airports, as well as the soon-to-begin repair of the Calapan airport. The expansion of the new San Jose port is also ongoing, as well as the development of the Calapan and Bulalacao ports, while the development of the ports in Roxas, Bansud, and Abra de Ilog is completed. In addition to these, we have also completed the strengthening of flood control facilities in Pinamalayan, Bongabong, and Calapan City to avoid major damage from flooding in your communities. But I also want to see a more complete plan for that.

Despite these successes, we are aware that our work is not yet finished. We will continue to focus on the development of our infrastructure, which greatly contributes to the revitalization of the economy. In the proposed budget for 2015, the funds we allocated for infrastructure nationwide is P562.35 billion. This is equivalent to more than 21 percent of our National Budget. As always, we ensure that funds go to meaningful projects. Secretary Babes ensures this—our resident good newsmaker in the Cabinet. Under his leadership, there is no room for corruption and collusion; kickbacks and commissions are not tolerated, and chop-chop projects do not succeed. Because of the reforms concretized by Secretary Babes in the DPWH, the agency has saved more than P27 billion pesos on its projects from July 2010 to May 2014.

Of course, Mindoro will not be left behind in the infrastructure drive, especially with its competent leadership. There are reliable public servants like Governor Gene Mendiola, Congresswoman Josie Ramirez-Sato, Congressman Rey Umali, Congressman Doy Leachon, and of course Governor Pa Umali. [Laughter and applause] When we were in congress, he was called “Papa,” I think. Just “Pa” for short. It’s important to be the father of your province, that’s what that means. [Laughter]

Aside from the development of infrastructure, we also have initiatives to strengthen the agricultural sector. Here in Oriental Mindoro, the construction of 152 farm-to-market roads has reportedly been completed; the beneficiaries of this are more than 31,300 farmers. We also have 63 completed and 5 ongoing irrigation systems, benefiting more than 4,700 farmers. In addition, we have funded the construction of postharvest facilities such as hand tractors and flatbed dryers, which are being utilized by 133 farmers’ associations. Our goal is clear: to increase the yield of our farmers, speed up the transport of products from farm to market, and ultimately, increase the income of our countrymen.

Let us now move on to our other social services. A total of 62,095 households have benefited from our Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program here in Oriental Mindoro. This is just a part of the more than four million beneficiaries of the program nationwide. That’s four million households of families. There is also Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services. What a long name, isn't it? That is what is called KALAHI-CIDSS; it’s easier to remember that way. Under the leadership of the DSWD, 128 subprojects of KALAHI-CIDSS have been implemented and are being implemented in the municipalities of Bulalacao, Mansalay, Bongabong, Gloria, Roxas, and Bansud. Through this, the construction of classrooms, health stations, day-care centers, and other structures in 128 barangays has been funded. From January 2011 to July 2014, more than 11,200 families have already benefited from our Sustainable Livelihood Program. We provided training and investment assistance here so they could establish their own businesses.

As we have pledged: Projects that can be implemented immediately to alleviate the suffering of Filipinos, we implement immediately. It is not in our plan for projects to just remain on paper, or if they do push through, to take decades to complete—to be honest, sometimes even decades.

Whatever height we have reached today is a result of the contribution of Filipinos. We continue to fight corruption and create opportunities for our countrymen. But there will probably always be a few who persist in casting doubt on our reforms. There are those who are even more eager to make negative comments, even though they were also leaders of the country; Instead of alleviating the suffering of those under their jurisdiction, they worsened it. And now, even as we address the problems inherited from us, those who consider themselves countrymen still do not tire of criticizing. Others deliberately weaken the foundation of our reforms to return us to the old system where personal interests come first.

The challenge to you in Mindoro, and to every Filipino who is our ally in the reform agenda: be vigilant about what is true, and be aware of the motives of those who sow negativity. As the father of the nation, I uphold what is right and just; we address the problems that come to us so that we do not pass them on to those who come after us. All my decisions are based on the mandate of my Bosses—the people. Together with the Mindoreños and the nation, may we continue to contribute so that the transformation in society becomes permanent, and progress becomes more accessible.

Good day to all. Thank you very much.