Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at his meeting with Filipinos in Tokyo, Japan

You know we just came from Canada. It was also a state visit there. Then, I remembered a story of our countrymen who went to the United States to immigrate. Earlier, I spoke with the owner of Uniqlo, and he told us that they send students to us, their workers, to study English. So that reminded me of the story of this countryman of ours who didn't know much English when he went to America.

So, he went to his friend who had been there for a long time. His friend who resided there actually went home to the Philippines. “Friend, help me,” he said. “What’s the problem?” “Well, I have a job in America. The problem is, I don’t speak English very well. I might not even be able to eat there. How will I eat, where will I eat, what will I order?” His countryman said, “That’s easy. You go to a place. It’s written outside, posted: Diner. D-I-N-E-R. The food is relatively cheap there and there’s a lot. Then, you sit at the counter. You get served fastest at the counter. Then you say, ‘Coffee and donuts please.’” [Laughter] “What’s that?” “Well, coffee and a donut.” “Ah, that sounds delicious!” “Okay, if you have a problem, come to me next time. Just look for me.”

His friend was in the Philippines for a month before returning to America. They met after one month. Our countryman said, “Friend, I’m glad I saw you.” “Oh, what’s the problem?” “I’ve been eating coffee and donuts for breakfast, lunch, and dinner for a month now. [Laughter] I’m already getting sick of coffee and donuts. Help me change it up.” So his friend said, “That’s not a problem. Tomorrow, order this: Ham and eggs please.” [Laughter] So he asked, “What’s that?” “Well, ham and eggs.” “That sounds delicious!”

So that night, while he was dreaming, he was chewing because tomorrow, [there would be] ham and eggs. He went to his favorite diner and the server asked him, “What can I get you?” He replied, “Ham and eggs, please.” Smiling. Of course, the coffee and donuts were finished. “Okay! How’d you like your eggs?” He replied, “Pardon?” [Laughter] “You know. Boiled, soft boiled, hard boiled, scrambled, fried, over easy, sunny side up, eggs benedict.” All kinds of eggs were mentioned to him. “Hmmm. Coffee and donuts, please.” [Laughter]

I mentioned to the owner of Uniqlo, who has already established twenty-three branches in the Philippines. Their target is two hundred. And it looks like they are steadily moving towards that goal. And they seem to want to accelerate it. They already have around 1,200 employees here in their twenty-three stores. What’s unique about the Japanese is that they won’t do something until it’s perfect. The Filipino, on the other hand, is often very bold. When they only know a little, they already feel like an expert. It’s okay, let’s go for it. [Laughter] So I said, “We are complementary. We should get together more and we will work on each other’s strengths and each other’s weaknesses.”

And now we move on to the formal part of our speech:

You know, there is only a little over a year left in our term as President, and this might be our last visit to Japan before we finally step down. You know, it was here in Japan that we really experienced, first of all, the praise for our countrymen: They really say that the contribution is significant to their society. And here, perhaps it was around 2010, we saw—give a Filipino a chance and the right opportunity, and they really show brilliance anywhere in the world. And I’ll add, a part of the world, sometimes you really see my thick hair, it used to be a little thicker than this. [Laughter]

There are Filipinos all over the world, I think. When there was a problem in Ukraine, we had compatriots in Kiev. When there was trouble in Yemen, there were a thousand Filipinos in Yemen. When I was in Canada, they said that in their northernmost communities, about 70 to 80 percent of those in the church were Filipinos, went to the church of members of Parliament. Even in the most remote areas of Canada, there are also Filipinos.

I do not forget: During the last Presidential elections, my win in the absentee votes was overwhelming. So to all of you who took steps, and continue to take steps on the Straight Path, especially here in Japan: Thank you very much for the opportunity. [Applause] You were the ones who planted the seed of change, you are the ones watering it, and I truly believe that you will continue the transformation that we are enjoying now.

I also have mixed emotions when facing our Filipino communities. On one hand, I am happy to see the success enjoyed by our compatriots in various fields. On the other hand, of course, I am also saddened, because they found progress not in our own homeland, but abroad. Fortunately, in recent years, the news we received – this was just recently told to us – the number of Overseas Filipinos is decreasing. In 2011, there were more than 10 million Overseas Filipinos. According to the figures of the DFA or Department of Foreign Affairs, as of 2014, there are only 8.359 million Overseas Filipinos. For me, this is a good indicator that our compatriots see that life is improving in the Philippines, and it is really worth returning home.

How did we do it? When we started, our vow was: Change. We know that we inherited a lot of problems, and not all of them can be solved in six years. But our focus was what we call inclusive growth. We said, it is not possible for only those at the top to rise while those at the bottom are left behind. Others cannot just wait for a drizzle: We will all rise together, we will all benefit from the expanding opportunities. That is why our focus is on the sectors of education, health, and programs that will uplift our compatriots from poverty.

I assure you, many of you are on social media, so I hope you have heard about the good things happening in the sectors we mentioned. In education, we have closed the backlog we inherited in classrooms, chairs, and textbooks. In classrooms, there was a shortage of 66,800 when we came into office; we have filled all of those by 2013. That 66,800 has been paid for. As for chairs, it was only a small amount, 2.5 million chairs, and those are gone as well; and in textbooks, there was a shortage of 61.7 million, and those shortages were closed as early as 2012.

Let me tell you an example: As you know, at least 20 typhoons hit us every year. And I think, like me, you would be surprised that when we took office, there wasn't a single undergraduate course in meteorology being taught in our country. That's the course of reading the weather: If it will rain, how strong it will be, and when and where it will come. We immediately pushed for change, and now, four State Universities and Colleges – or what are called SUCs – have already offered BS Meteorology at the college level. When these universities complained that they would lose funding, we immediately called the Department of Budget and Management; and I told Secretary Butch Abad, we cannot let this lose funding. How can we progress if we don't have our own talent in reading the weather, which is a problem we face every year? That's why now our State Universities and Colleges are continuously training new meteorologists. Isn't that right, that the government is really focused on the needs of the country?

That's just one example in the education sector. If we list all the changes one by one, we might not be able to go home and say I’m [bothering] my post. We will go through it quickly: In PhilHealth, which is the pillar of our Universal Healthcare Agenda, in 2010, only about half or 51 percent of our population was covered by it. By the first three months of 2015, that rose to 87 percent. Now, if you belong to the poorest 20 percent of the population, you can get free treatment in public hospitals. In the past, this PhilHealth was used for political purposes. You would be given a PhilHealth card – our countrymen – when elections were approaching. After the elections, it suddenly became uncertain whether the premium had been paid, or whether the premium payments would continue. We have also changed that practice.

This Pantawid Pamilya program, where poor families are given cash incentives to keep their children in school, we have greatly expanded it: From 786,523 households when we came into office, it now covers 4.4 million households, including those whose children are graduating. It's not just for grade school, but also for high school.

This April, the first batch of our beneficiaries who were assisted through the expanded high school program in Pantawid Pamilya have graduated from high school. That’s 333,673 Filipino youth. Two students spoke on their behalf during our celebration. Both of them have already passed the UP College of Engineering. This is no easy course; it’s a quota course that requires high grades on your entrance exam and in school to get in. Imagine this: These are students who really went through hardship, and if they hadn’t been helped by the state, and with the perseverance of their parents, they might not have continued their studies. But now, there are those who passed a quota course, and have a higher potential to get good jobs. In the College of Engineering, their plan is to take Civil Engineering.

Their families and the larger society will really benefit from their talents. And because of them and others like them, the situation of their next generation will be much better. That is the true fruit of our focus and empowerment of every Filipino.

When it comes to opportunities, TESDA, led by Secretary Joel Villanueva, really stands out. Just imagine: Since we took office, they have recorded more than 7.4 million graduates in various technical and vocational education and training courses. That’s a number that includes our countrymen taking multiple courses.

The good news is: If before, only 28 percent of graduates of its scholarship programs could find jobs, now the average is 70 percent who immediately find jobs within six months. Some may ask, do TESDA graduates have what it takes? Secretary Joel Villanueva told me a story: There was someone who trained at TESDA to become a certified mechanic. His classmates used to laugh at him, “Why do you have that kind of ambition?” Now, he’s working in Australia. And if you ask how much he earns, just imagine the salary of the President of the Philippines. Then, double it. That’s his salary. [Laughter] I said, maybe after my term, I’ll enroll in TESDA too and join the progress. [Laughter]

What is the effect of these programs? Those we are helping to rise, they will ensure that the opportunities opening up because of the growing economy are truly maximized. When they get employed, when they use their knowledge, the salaries they earn will go back into the markets and really further boost our economy. Businesses, their income will grow, they will expand their operations, and create jobs for other citizens. This is what we call a virtuous cycle.

We already have initial results of our efforts. This January, 1.04 million were added to the number of Filipinos employed. In October 2014, a 6.0 percent unemployment rate was recorded in the country: This is the lowest in 10 years. Let me just clarify: What we are referring to here are permanent jobs, not the type where you just have a source of income for a few weeks or a few days and you are already included in the number of employed. That means, if you saw the oyster–a t-shirt with an oyster–before, it means you swept the streets for a week. Because that was the survey period, our unemployment period improved. After the survey period, they no longer had a job. Now, that is no longer possible.

The good news is: According to the latest SWS survey, the self-rated hunger this first quarter of this year is at 13.5 percent. This is also the lowest in the past decade.

The truth is, the number of job vacancies is really increasing. When I was young, and it wasn't that long ago when I was young—now I'm still relatively young—the signs we always saw posted were, right, “No Vacancy.” Now, there are so many “For Immediate Hiring.” Other companies have their own gimmicks. Didn't you used to have to make a lot of requests just to get an interview? Now, some companies, if you go for an interview, they'll even give you breakfast at popular fastfood chains. And if you get hired, pass the interview, they'll also pay for a celebration with your family because you were hired. I'm surprised because before, when I treated my family, I had to save my salary for three months and ask them to order slowly.

You see: The problem we have now is no longer that our countrymen cannot find jobs, but how to train them to qualify for the many jobs that are opening up. Did you ever think we would reach this point?

That is just some of the results of a growing economy. Think about this: Because of sound spending and honest leadership, the former Sick Man of Asia is now considered the Darling of Asia, and we are now at investment grade status. We recorded an average GDP growth of 6.3 percent per year from 2010 to 2014; and of course in 2015, we expect to further increase that. This is the fastest growth of our economy in the last 40 years. In addition, we achieved an all-time high in foreign direct investments worth $6.2 billion in 2014. Bloomberg even said that the Philippines will be the world’s second fastest growing economy this year. [Applause]

This improvement we are experiencing can also be seen in the infrastructure we are building. We are truly focused on this, because when products and services can travel more easily, the economy grows faster. In 2010, the Philippines’ infrastructure budget was P165 billion. Now in 2015, it has reached P570 billion. This is more than triple, and it is not like before where infrastructure construction could be influenced by connections. With us, there are no favorites; projects are focused on what truly benefits our citizens.

Many of these infrastructure projects were planned or promised decades ago, but became a reality only during our term. For example, in Isabela, there is a bridge that the people there have been requesting since 1995 because it was destroyed by a passing typhoon, and also due to the flooding of the river, the passage of logs, illegally cut logs, and other debris that damaged it. Before the bridge was built, our countrymen had to travel for one and a half to two hours to cross to the other side of the river. Now, to cross, it only takes 5 minutes, compared to the previous one and a half to three hours. I would like to emphasize: We did not win in Isabela in the last election. But because of the infrastructure that was built, even politicians who are not our allies are truly grateful. They are enlightened: When there is a real need, our administration will not abandon them.

You know, when the bridge was inaugurated – it even had a cute name – the name of the bridge is Lullutan Bridge. [Laughter] What could be its full name, Lulutang and Lulubog? Because back then, it was a low bridge that could really overflow. So when we finally built it now, the bridge is high so that if the river rises again, they are protected.

So when it was inaugurated, the politicians there told us, “You know, we have a second bridge.” Secretary Singson replied, “You know, it’s in the budget, it wasn’t approved by the Senate but it’s included in the 2016 budget.” “If that’s the case, thank you. Because we already have the first one, we have the second one, we have a third bridge.” I said, “Just a moment, you’ve already made me number two, you need three more bridges. But we will go there if it’s really needed.”

For example, again: In Iloilo, there is a project for irrigation called the Jalaur River Multi-purpose Project Stage 2. It was first conceived the year I was born. We even started it – they were thinking about it when I was born, now that my thinking is really intense, I am the one who started this project.

You all know that building infrastructure is expensive, and our budget has limits. One way to supplement the infrastructure budget is what we call the Public-Private Partnership program. Here, private companies will be partners of the government; they will be given the right to build the projects and operate them, so that the freed-up funds can be focused on other areas that also need funds, which have low commercial aspects. In PPP, there is also a lot of good news. Before, all sorts of wooing and incentives were given to companies, including commercial development rights, subsidies, and even guarantees that they would not lose money just to invest in the country. Now, we are the ones being wooed; they are competing and really vying for it. And if before we almost had to pay a lot, now, we are being paid a premium for the privilege of building the infrastructure we need. For example, in the Mactan-Cebu International Airport Passenger Terminal Building, and NAIA Expressway Project Phase 2, the government obtained a total of P25 billion in premiums. That was paid to us for the right to build the infrastructure we need.

Isn't the situation now very good? From December 2011 to this May, your government has already awarded and signed 9 PPP projects and is expected to increase by one more this month. Aside from that—so that will be ten—there are still 15 projects in the pipeline that are already in the procurement and roll-out process. Let's compare: In our almost five years on the straight and narrow path, we have already surpassed the combined 6 approved solicited PPP projects from the previous three administrations. When we roll out the fifteen projects in the pipeline, including the nine that have been awarded or signed, in total, that's 24 projects. That's four times the projects completed compared to the combined three administrations before us.

Things are really different now: The competition is fairer and more intense, the private sector is more willing to invest, and we are reducing the opportunities for corrupt officials to pocket funds. The national treasury is now going directly to building good roads, bridges, and structures that are truly beneficial. Wasn't it the case before that the Department of Public Works and Highways topped the list of the most corrupt agencies? Now, it is one of the most admired offices. Under the leadership of Secretary Babes Singson, who is with us now, the culture that prevails here can be summarized by what we call the 5Rs under his leadership: right projects at the right cost, right quality, and right on time, implemented by the right people. The result: The agency's savings as of this March reached P39 billion; because of this, we are able to respond to the needs of the people earlier, and we are able to deliver benefits to our Bosses faster.

Let us remember: We have done all these initiatives without raising any taxes, except for the Sin Tax Reform passed to protect the health of Filipinos. Imagine: If those who came before us had done what was right and good governance a long time ago, how high would we have reached today?

In light of the successes we have achieved, can we say that we can now relax? Can we be complacent and say, “That’s okay, that’s enough”? Let me emphasize: This is just the beginning; the reform must continue. Those who are guilty of offenses against the nation must be held accountable. The culture of corruption and the cycle of poverty must be completely eradicated. Let us not forget: There are still those who are planning to bring us back to the crooked system.

This includes what are called 'trapos,' or traditional politicians. These are politicians who prefer to keep the problems in their areas, so people will always approach them for help. If a band is needed for a fiesta, go to Congressman. If there's a need for donations for a wake, bring it to Mayor. If you need to solicit for a basketball league, well, let's go to Councilor. The result: Juan is burdened with a debt of gratitude. And when will the reckoning come? Of course, it will be no other than the next election.

I will also tell you another example. In Bilibid, there are prisoners who were caught with a band equipment and sound system, even audio-video equipment, air conditioning, and even a jacuzzi. It's like they're living in a condominium instead of a prison. When confronted by the authorities, one of them even retorted, “What are you going to do to us, imprison us again?” [Laughter] In other agencies, some were also caught doing all sorts of irregularities. Their excuse was: We've been doing this for decades. You, just one term there. We'll just wait for you to step down so we can continue what we've been used to. They really don't want change.

You know, some have suggested before, and even until now, some still bring it up from time to time: Why don't we just extend the term and continue the change in our leadership? When it became clear to them that I did not agree to amend the Constitution to extend my term, the new version of the question became this: Perhaps I want to run for another position? Another one: Do I still plan to get married? [Applause] That question is repeated again and again. I've been planning that for a long time. I'm wondering what these questions really imply. The truth is, I think what they mean is, “Run for another position, because it's good to have you there to lead again if we need your help.” As for getting married, they're probably not waiting for an invitation. [Laughter] I think what they have in mind is that if we are lucky enough to have a child, it would be good to have a reserve they can call on if problems arise. Just imagining that, they seem to have already volunteered them. With this kind of thinking, maybe even my nephews, who are now of age, in their twenties, might change their surnames. Maybe they will be volunteered.

Therefore, the correct perspective and our suggestion is: Didn't you do all of this, didn't you bring about the change, and won't you continue it? We have really achieved a lot, but we still have a lot to do. The question is: Will we make a U-turn back to the crooked path? Or will we continue to accelerate on the Straight Path? The future of the Philippines is in the hands of the people. Especially as the 2016 elections draw closer, many are asking who will continue the good change we have started, especially as we step down from office. I repeat: You made the change, and you will continue it. It is up to you to choose a honest and righteous leader, who will truly use this improved state we are enjoying, to further elevate the Philippines towards the fulfillment of our collective dreams.

If someone comes to replace us only to oppress us, it's like we're just doing a U-turn back to the past. And I think, who among us would agree to have such a situation? I would just like to emphasize: The future we will face, we and only we will create it, we will maintain it, just like what you are doing in creating the change we are enjoying now.

My Bosses, let me emphasize: It is not the destiny of the Filipino to suffer hardship for life. Endless suffering is not attached to our name. It is in our blood to stand up for what is right; it is in our race to fight for justice. We now hold the opportunity to continue the positive transformation of the country. Let us not let go. Let us pass on to the next generations of Filipinos the developed Philippines that we have long dreamed of. Let us prove that “The Filipino is worth dying for,” “The Filipino is worth living for,” and truly, “The Filipino is worth fighting for.”

It is an honor to serve the Filipino race. Good evening. Thank you very much to all of you.