Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during the inspection of Manggahan Residences Phase I

On occasions like this, I cannot help but remember the late DILG Secretary Jesse Robredo. Even before, he had already begun addressing the situation of our informal settlers. He focused on implementing the reforms he pioneered in Naga throughout the Philippines. His leadership philosophy: Treat the poor as partners, instead of as burdens. Through his efforts, the concept of the People’s Plan became popular, where the beneficiaries themselves contribute to creating solutions to their problems.

That is why I feel a mix of sadness and joy as we visit here today. On one hand, I am saddened that we are not with Jesse as we concretize his aspirations. On the other hand, I know that wherever he is now, he would be happy to see that we have reached, and are reaching, our dream for the urban poor.

This Manggahan Residences Phase 1 is concrete proof of how a community is invigorated by a leadership that listens to its citizens. I would just like to emphasize: this is only Phase 1. These two buildings of yours will be followed by six more in Phase 2. [Applause] Chairman Chito Cruz’s commitment is that we will open Phase 2 in March. [Applause] As for Phase 3, that’s in July, so it’s likely you won’t invite me anymore. [Applause] I’ll just visit you if you invite me. [Laughter] As you can see, the construction of the buildings I mentioned is ongoing. In total, 900 families will benefit from this project.

To those who are getting impatient with the relocation to the housing units we are still building, I ask for your understanding. As you know, our goal has always been to implement the principle of Build Back Better. This means that simply relocating you is not enough for us. We also don't have a habit of implementing only temporary solutions, which after the photo-ops, there is no real change. We also ensure that your new homes are safe, sturdy, and close to services and opportunities. In this way, the comfort provided to our beneficiaries is genuine and long-lasting. Think about it: As your children grow up, they will no longer see water entering your homes; they will no longer have to carry belongings to keep them away from floodwaters; their sleep will no longer be disturbed when it rains heavily.

This is part of our comprehensive strategy to improve the living standards of our countrymen. Through the cooperation of the DPWH, DSWD, DILG, MMDA, NHA and other government agencies, and with the contribution of non-government organizations, civil society groups, and every decent Filipino, we ensure that the condition of our Bosses is better than what we found it to be. What's even better is that, aside from being spared from danger, our government is also becoming free to develop the Manggahan Floodway. That's why we are also addressing the problem of flooding with this initiative.

All of this is possible because you chose to take a chance and participate in the Straight Path. Instead of opposing or just waiting for help, you contribute to the creation of a People’s Plan, which helps our agencies to address your needs correctly and adequately. [Applause] You have proven wrong those who said you were just dependent. You are becoming partners in achieving change. [Applause] Because of that, I thank each and every one of you. As I always say: You made this happen.

Bosses, you can clearly see the result of our continued empowerment of each other. Your new homes are just part of the bigger story of change in our country. We are holding corrupt individuals accountable. Our economy is vibrant. We have regained our national dignity. Opportunities abound. The government has a stronger capacity to care for its citizens; and everyone has a greater ability to contribute to achieving our collective dreams.

My question to you now is this: We have come so far; is there anyone thinking of taking a step backwards? Shouldn't it be, only by continuing along the Straight Path can we reach a better tomorrow?

Bosses, we have proven to ourselves and to the whole world: When we side with what is right and just; when we fight for the interests of the majority; when we combine our strength to achieve a single goal, we can achieve things that we once only dreamed of. [Applause] I am confident that with the continued guidance of our beloved Lord; and with the inspiration left by Jesse and other great people who strived to give us a better start, we can pass on to the next generation a Philippines where everyone has the strength to reach higher dreams.

Before I finish, let me emphasize this: This is a partnership. Now our dwelling is quite nice. It will remain nice, of course, with the help of APOAMF. [Applause] But most importantly, you are first. What is important to me here is that the example you show will tell whether the program will continue or not. If the problem that started gets bigger, I think we can no longer continue the program for those who are waiting. But if you are successful, as they say in English: “Success has many fathers. Failure is an orphan.” [Applause]

There are many informal settlers now, aren't there? We need to address all the needs. It seems like a good strategy is being done here, which really combines the forces of those with problems and the government. Now, let me emphasize, you need to be successful, so that the next beneficiaries will also be given the opportunity. If it doesn't succeed one day, our allies who are suggesting to continue the program will have a hard time providing evidence that this solution is correct. A strong plea: You who came first, show why what we are doing is the right strategy now. You hold the key to being able to give the opportunity to our other countrymen who have the same needs.

I wish you all good luck. I will go to your tarpaulin to read it thoroughly. [Applause] I will just take a look, perhaps there are still provisions there that I will study to see if I can do them. But in the end, I hope this truly becomes the bridge for your lives to improve significantly.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much to all of you.