Read this in English.

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, during the celebration of the 29th anniversary of the EDSA Revolution

My beloved countrymen:

Good afternoon to all of you.

There is an image from the EDSA People Power Revolution that is etched in the national consciousness: Nuns kneeling, fearful though they were of the guns before them, yet still trusting and caring. In offering rosaries and flowers to the armed soldiers, in linking arms to stop the advance of the tanks, we proved: Compassion is the most powerful response to anger; no weapon is stronger than love.

This same strength was also shown by the people to our family in 1983, after my father was assassinated. There is a photograph that serves as a reminder of how deep the pain we went through was then. In this picture, I could barely recognize him. He looked like meat dropped onto the tarmac, and thrown into the AVSECOM van.

If you were to put yourself in my situation, perhaps you would understand where I am coming from. He was my father, covered in blood, after being shot. I am the only son. I admit: Revenge entered my mind; I said, a debt of blood should be repaid with blood. As it says in the Bible, “An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.” I reached a point where I was willing to die, just to drag those who murdered my father into the grave with me.

But my perspective changed when I saw thousands of people standing in solidarity and offering their condolences outside our home on Times Street. It was as if their fear of Martial Law had disappeared, and they bravely expressed their compassion for my father. Like what happened at EDSA, they showed us: We are not alone. And the Filipino people taught me: The peaceful change my father dreamed of is still possible.

Looking back on this story, I do not seek sympathy for myself, but to emphasize the lesson it carries. As your President, I would be remiss in my duty if I do not remind the people of the power of compassion. I would be remiss if I do not remind everyone that, in times of sorrow, we are not alone, and there is another way. In the face of videos showing violence, in the face of anger that may build in our hearts, we must remember: Trust, compassion, love, and peace are still more powerful.

Let us remember: The turmoil in Mindanao causes turmoil for all of us. That is why it is the obligation of everyone to promote peace in Mindanao. But we know that the path to peace is not easy. When there was a deadlock in the negotiations between our government and the MILF, we decided to personally talk to Chairman Murad Ebrahim in Japan, including Chairman Mohagher Iqbal, and their companions, to continue the peace talks. What was clear to us was the quality that needed to prevail at that time: That is trust. From trust in each other, a good and honest relationship between the two sides emerged to achieve an agreement acceptable to all.

Now, we have the opportunity to change the story of the ARMM for many reasons. Many countries are pouring support into our peace process. For example, Malaysia: Not only in words, but in deeds, they have shown us that they are partners in achieving peace. And because the people have full trust in us, not once have I been tempted to use the ARMM to conduct command votes. The leaders of the MILF also showed us their trust and confidence that they will also be partners, along with the entire Bangsamoro, in seeking peace. This opportunity can truly be considered golden, when peace in Mindanao is within reach. To those who say to stop the peace process, and the passage of the Bangsamoro Basic Law, we ask: How can they ensure that such an opportunity will arise again?

What happened in Mamasapano was truly painful. Let us not forget that our police went there, not to sow violence, but to enforce the law. They sacrificed themselves to achieve peace, it is not reasonable that their offering for peace would become the spark for violence. As Martin Luther King said in America: “Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that.” Now, we are called upon to remember the lessons contained in these words.

I hope I can assure you that no one will take advantage of this incident. We are striving to maintain order. But we also know that as we get closer to achieving our goals, those who oppose it become more desperate. It would be good if, in addition to criticism, they would present alternative solutions. We can't help but think: they don't want peace, because they themselves benefit from the chaos and violence. What they want is for Filipinos to go their separate ways again, and for us to lose trust in each other in order to advance their personal agendas.

If we allow ourselves to be defeated by those against peace, it will be as if we are allowing the turmoil in Mindanao to worsen. If we give up on promoting the Bangsamoro, it will be as if we are allowing them to pass on arms again to the next generation of our fellow Filipinos.

We will never allow this to happen. Only by achieving lasting peace will the sacrifices of those who fought at EDSA be worthwhile, including those who gave their lives to end the sowing of fear and violence in society.

For all of us who experienced EDSA, we know the positive results of remaining calm; that instead of giving in to anger and emotion, we should give way to reasonableness, trust, and love for one another. If the Lord guided our nation towards peaceful change before, I believe that despite new challenges, trust in one another can be restored.

When Cardinal Sin called, and our Uncle Butz responded by calling for people to gather at EDSA, millions flocked here, including religious individuals. The truth is: it was sudden. All the elements were present for everything to escalate into a bloody revolution: fear, tension, and weapons. But with the guidance of the Lord, the overthrow of the dictatorship was successful and peaceful, which the whole world admired. This desire for peace throughout the country, especially in ARMM, if you think about it, is more planned, and more collaborative among almost everyone. Perhaps, if the Lord helped us then, He will help us now. What is perhaps asked of us, we who have learned from the lessons of EDSA, is to be zealous in building the framework for achieving this peace.

In the name of the Filipinos who fought at EDSA, and to all our countrymen who sacrificed and continue to sacrifice for others and for the country, let us continue the fight for the peace and development that we have long aspired for.

Good afternoon. Thank you very much.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Magandang hapon po. Maraming salamat sa inyo.