Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of the 117th anniversary of the Department of Public Works and Highways

I recently went to Tarlac, and I was surprised to find that the tiles in our bathroom had come loose. I will explain why and what connection this has to your anniversary. I spoke to our caretaker there, and I said, “You know, we’ve only been using these tiles for 50 years. Is that already worth it?” The tiles were whole but had come loose.

You know, I remember when I first visited the DPWH, before I was a congressman. It was quite a few years ago. You had stairs here that were chipped and broken. Thank God. [Laughter] You’re a new congressman, you approach the Department of Public Works, and their own office is a bit disorganized, you get nervous too. [Laughter] What can this department do if their own stairs are a tripping hazard.

But now let’s look. Your building, we can no longer say it’s brand new, but it looks well-maintained. It seems like there’s a big difference now. [Applause] In Gawad Kalinga, that’s what they say, right? Give them decent housing, a decent community, and even their mindset improves and becomes better. Of course, the office of Public Works should also be beautiful. I don’t know if we’ll live to see it changed, but I don’t think it’s a priority for Sec. Singson right now. [Laughter]

Anyway, this occasion is truly meaningful for the DPWH. As we celebrate the anniversary of your agency, you received the ISO 9001:2008 Certificate for Quality Management System. You are one of the departments of the Executive Branch that has been given this recognition. This reflects the invaluable contribution of the DPWH in delivering effective, honest, and upright service. That is why I would like to use this opportunity to convey to you the gratitude of our Bosses for the concrete benefits resulting from your cooperation in treading the Straight Path.

Since we are talking about it, I remembered when I interviewed Secretary Singson. Honestly, when I said, “I’m considering you for the position of Secretary of Public Works and Highways.” He asked me a lot of questions. I thought I was the one interviewing, but he was interviewing me. [Laughter] And honestly, he seemed very hesitant to accept it, and we understand that. Accepting the position, you might not be able to handle the problems you will face there, as well as the system you want to correct. And when it all comes down to all your hardships, you might receive a lot of insults and criticism. Few people would really accept such a challenge. So, we understood that’s why I answered all his questions, and we got along well. You can say it yourself, has there been a change happening?

Therefore, our admiration for the DPWH deepens when we look at the extent of the transformation that has happened in your agency within five years. What was once the poster boy of corruption is now a model of efficient administration. And some are asking: How did this happen? How did you reverse it? It’s simple: Your chief, Secretary Babes Singson, no longer hesitated when we appointed him foreman in promoting reform in your agency. As we say, “He who does not look back at his origins will not reach his destination.” And Sec. Babes studied the situation he found; he identified the right problem; and proposed and implemented the right solutions that yielded the right results. Of course, with all of your cooperation.

Under his leadership, we held corrupt officials and employees accountable; anomalous projects were reviewed and the awarding of contracts was prevented. Contractors proven to be taking advantage were blacklisted and investigated; and soon, they will also be prosecuted. In bidding, the letter of intent, which was used by those who wanted to collude, was removed; and the bidding process was made simpler and more transparent. In addition, there was clustering of small projects to save money, and to ensure that our contractors have sufficient and proper capabilities and equipment. Because more people are joining the competition for the project, and there is a specific standard that must be followed, infrastructure is built with quality and at a more affordable price; so the Filipino people truly win. The time when infrastructure was immediately damaged when disaster struck is also over. There is also no more patronage and showing off in the implementation of projects. If before it was “just-tiis” (just endure) that was the practice, now, on the Straight Path, justice truly prevails.

I would like to emphasize: The entire strategy for reforming the DPWH is encompassed by a single concept that you implement in every aspect of your work: These are the so-called 5Rs, “Right projects, at the right cost and right quality, and accomplished at the right time with the right people.” I believe that if there is one agency in the government that should be emulated, one department that we can say “works” and truly seeks “ways” to improve the lives of citizens, it is the DPWH. [Applause]

For example: One thing I often mention when we visit provinces and even other countries is the C3/Quezon Avenue Interchange Project, which you completed three months ahead of schedule and at a lower cost. There is also the Plaridel Bypass Road, which you completed at a lower price of P593.61 million, instead of P706.54 million. I would also like to add the Tagumbao Bridge in Tarlac, which we proposed during my first term as Congressman.

You know, I was asking back then, I said, “Can my entire PDAF during that time be allocated to this project so that even just the installments can begin?” Because every year, when the river swells, our riverbank is eroded. Of course, every year, the width of the river lengthens, the expense for the bridge increases. An installment plan is no longer feasible. And when I asked who was in charge of our flood control, when I went to the Pampanga River Delta Project, I was told that Lower Agno had jurisdiction. When I went to Lower Agno, I was sent back to Pampanga, they said they had jurisdiction. In other words, no one took ownership of our area. Luckily, I became President, and we finally had a bridge. [Applause]

Our fellow citizens in Gerona have greatly benefited. But better news for everyone: The Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) for this was P334 million, but the project was completed for only P248 million. [Applause] My point is: Because your bidding process has been streamlined, and projects are implemented properly, you are not only able to meet needs, but you are also able to collect savings. I heard that your accumulated savings have reached almost P49 billion, [Applause] which has been allocated for other meaningful projects of the agency.

Perhaps what we should look at is that, of course, if your funds are insufficient, we cannot build the infrastructure that is needed, and we have countrymen who are suffering. You saved, and you hastened their attainment of the projects they need. The suffering is lessened. Truly, our collective efforts have been meaningful.

This is now the new normal at the DPWH: Economical yet efficient work on roads, bridges, and other infrastructure; completed on time or even earlier. If we talk about road quality, according to the Global Competitiveness Report of the World Economic Forum, we are continuously improving, from 114th in 2010-2011, now we are 87th in 2014-2015. [Applause] This proves that as we increase the budget of your agency and strengthen our support, you reciprocate to our country with a higher quality of work. Because of your contributions, isn't it easier to deliver products and services, and visit different parts of the country?

It is clear: Your efforts have improved the lives of our countrymen whose dreams for orderly infrastructure have been left “under construction” for so long. For example, the new Lullutan Bridge in Isabela, which was damaged by a storm and debris in 1995, but was only completed, restored, and even better under our administration. For two decades, our countrymen there were allowed to suffer; but now, a journey that used to take one and a half to two hours now takes only five minutes. There is also the Aluling Bridge in Ilocos Sur, which was conceived in 1978, but was only completed in 2013. The Candelaria Bypass Road Project in Quezon, planned in 1998, but we finished it in 2012. There is also the Ternate-Nasugbu Road Project that passes through Cavite, which, although only six kilometers long, took more than 20 years to complete. In Mindanao, you are completing the Basilan Circumferential Road, which has not progressed for 15 years due to unrest. That road was truly a collaborative effort of the DPWH and the Engineering Brigades of our Armed Forces.

It is clear: The changes we are seeing in the DPWH are not the result of luck, rocket science, or magic. Sec. Babes and your officials and personnel pushed for change, and you joined the desire to truly alleviate the state of life of our Bosses. Instead of just patching up the problem, you joined in leveling the bumps in the system. Instead of being mired in the image of a slow-moving bureaucracy, you established an agency that can deliver a higher level of efficient service. To those who are retiring today, in your years of service, you have seen how your agency has truly been reformed under our administration; and it is not an exaggeration to say that now, when you say you are from the DPWH, the person you are talking to will truly be impressed with what you have accomplished.

Let me be frank with you: Given the long list of accomplishments of your agency, someone could already say, “We’re good; we’ve done what we needed to do.” But I know Secretary Babes, and I know the quality of your department: As long as there is a dream of the ordinary Filipino that you can concretize, you will continue to lay the foundation for positive change.

Comrades, there are only 374 days left in our administration, and we must maximize the remaining time to further strengthen the transformation that is now being enjoyed. From what we have started, benefits will emerge that those who come after us will enjoy: The dikes and dams that will support communities; the farm-to-market roads and roads that will boost agriculture, commerce, and tourism and deliver opportunities to remote communities; and other types of infrastructure that will bridge us to a [brighter], more developed future. I am confident that the DPWH is with me in ensuring that we never have to U-turn back to the practices we found, and instead, you will continue to contribute to accelerating our arrival in a society full of opportunities that every Filipino can truly be proud of.

In the coming year, it is estimated that the DPWH budget will be equivalent to five percent of our larger gross domestic product. Earlier, when you saw me fiddling with my iPhone, I was just checking how many zeros there were. It’s quite large. Somewhere in the vicinity of P600 billion is earmarked for your 2016 projects. And of course, it’s not easy to allocate such a large fund if we are sure it’s going to the right place. Even a thousand pesos, if you really doubt it will reach there, don’t bother. But here, I repeat, five percent of next year’s GDP, or the projected GDP, is our target. We are currently at four percent. So, keep up the good work. I really hope that even these cadet engineers of yours, your idealism now will remain intact even when you reach 40 years of service here. I will not be able to take back what you have contributed in those 40 years. We will strive to bring the rewards to our government employees as much as possible. [Applause]

Of course, to suggest this, we aside from that, you know I’ll just tell a story: Secretary Abad, I was the one who sent him to school. And sometimes, he told me, “Sir, you’re giving me more and more work to do. Next year, I’m retiring on July 1. Actually, June 30 at noon.” By that time, he said his pension would not be enough because he only served 19 1/2 years in government service. I said, “It’s okay, friend. After all, we’re friends, I’m 18 1/2, we’re both short on our pension so let’s not pass this shortness on to others. Let’s strive to find a way to maximize what we can give as gratitude of the people to our colleagues in the government.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much to all of you.