Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, on the 40th anniversary of the National Housing Authority and the awarding ceremony for the Gawad Parangal sa Kabalikat sa Pabahay.

We once likened our country to a house. In 2010, we found it in a deplorable condition, because funds were corrupted, materials were cheated, and it was allowed to fall into disrepair. Corruption was the problem; poverty was the result. Due to the dire state of the country then, some were already saying: “It is impossible to fix and rebuild this. Let’s not hope anymore. Let’s just accept our bitter fate.”

This very fate is what we defied when we embarked on the Straight and Narrow Path. We cleansed the bureaucracy; we leveled the playing field; we restored a government focused solely on the welfare of the people. We repaired the very foundations of our country’s home. And in just over five years, we not only rebuilt it, we also improved and strengthened it.

Today is concrete proof of the change we are experiencing on the Straight and Narrow Path. We are gathered to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the National Housing Authority, and we commemorate the invaluable contribution of your agency in caring for our countrymen, especially those on the margins of society. We also recognize the communities and partners who have been our allies in the successes achieved and still being pursued in the housing sector.

Since the NHA was established in 1975, your agency has completed a total of 1,351,768 permanent housing and housing assistance. As Chairperson Chito Cruz mentioned: 483,063 of these were built by the NHA and housing assistance was provided under our administration, from July 2010 to August 2015. Let me emphasize: In just five years, we were able to build almost 36 percent of this number; [applause] apart from our 36 percent, the other 36 percent took 35 years to complete. This does not include the 142,374 permanent housing units currently under construction, which are expected to be completed by 2016. This means that we will complete 433,362 permanent housing units; and in total, we will complete and repair 625,437 homes before the end of the year.

I just noticed earlier, when our good chairman was showing us the statistics, that more of what we will accomplish is still under construction than what has already been done. You haven’t disappointed me, Chito, so if you happen to expedite what you promised, I guarantee I won’t be offended. [Laughter]

I always say: I didn’t do this; you did, the dedicated personnel of the NHA, [applause] with the cooperation of our Bosses—you made the change. Thank you all very much.

Just this August, we visited Manggahan Residences Phase 1 in Pasig, of course with our good Mayor. There, we mentioned the philosophy of the late DILG Secretary Jesse Robredo: Treat the poor as partners, instead of as burdens. This is precisely the mindset we followed: Instead of looking at them as a problem, we considered our informal settlers as partners. Following Jesse’s concept, we implemented what is called the People’s Plan, where the beneficiaries themselves contribute to creating solutions to their problems. We listened to the voices of both sides; we reached an agreement; and because of cooperation, the result was positive. And in my opinion, everyone was happy with their respective solutions to the problem we are facing. We have already built Phase 1 of Manggahan Residences. We are targeting to open Phase 2 in July; and Phase 3 in May. Phase 3 came before Phase 2? Right? That’s right. There must be a technical reason for that. In this project, a total of 900 families will be moved away from danger, and provided with decent housing.

Let us now turn to our uniformed ranks. They seemed to be forgotten when it came to housing. We calculated that a PO1 in Manila has a base pay of P13,000. Between P3,000 and P5,000 goes to rent. This may already exceed one-third of his monthly salary. Another third is for food. And the last third, is squeezed to cover electricity, water, transportation, children’s schooling, medicine, and others. I said: How can we expect good service from our uniformed ranks if the state itself does not care for them? That is why in 2011, under the leadership of the NHA and in cooperation with our uniformed ranks, we launched the AFP-PNP Housing Program. And since August, of our target of 81,702 housing units, we have completed 57,760 in various project sites across the country. So the 30,000 will be next year, around January. [Laughter] Let’s get it right. This is a celebration, so I’m a little lighter. [Applause]

When it comes to those who have been victims of past calamities and disasters, the NHA has also been a source of aid. As of now, in this category, we have provided 249,129 beneficiaries with permanent housing or home materials assistance. Of course, we are working doubly hard in the coming times to deliver more aid, and to promote the principle of “Build Back Better” in every affected community. Our future programs, which we do not wish to add more disasters and tragedies to our country, are to move communities away from danger, especially those in coastal areas, so that if a storm and storm surges come, they will be safe.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank all our partners in the housing sector over the past years—from those who make up the NHA, led by your new head, GM Pagunsan, and partner agencies, [applause] to the private sector, local governments, those we are honoring today, and above all, to every Boss who chooses to be part of the solutions we are laying out.

Let me also raise what we consider the pillar of the housing sector: None other than Chito Cruz. [Applause] You all know, I have been friends with Chito for a long time and he is a partner in many things. When he commits to a target, he is not only on time, but often ahead of schedule. [Applause] He is able to do this, of course, because of your cooperation. [Applause] That’s why, every time I meet with the NHA, my stomach doesn’t churn. [Laughter] I feel that you are pushing yourselves to the limit in service; and when you exceed your capacity, you do not hesitate to ask for help. You are also easy to help, because you are always reasonable. So again, on behalf of our countrymen whose lives you improve, thank you very much. [Applause] Your chairman and your general manager are really diligent. Earlier, I spoke with your chairman, and he reminded me: Isn’t this a milestone anniversary? [Applause] I, too, have some good news for you. [Applause] As I recall, you have the authority to give a bonus of three thousand. [Applause] So with the diligence of Executive Secretary, we have already put together the three, let’s add seven, let’s make it ten. [Applause] I assure you, continue what you are doing, it is very easy to sign that document. [Applause] I remember before, someone asked for a milestone bonus in the year after the milestone year. I said, can I give you the milestone bonus even though it’s past because last year was the milestone, you’re asking for it the following year. When my fountain pen was focused, it didn’t want to touch. [Laughter] But here it’s easy to touch. [Applause]

Bosses, we have achieved all of this because of the Straight and Narrow Path, we did not stop, we did not deviate, and we did not pull each other down. Instead, we chose to work together. The former “me” became “us.” The former “each one for himself,” became “together.” We have proven the innate helpfulness of the Filipino race; we have offered our shoulders and strengthened each other, which has brought us to where we are today.

We have truly come a long way, but soon, the nation will once again face a crossroads. The question is: Will we continue what we have started, or will we return to the old path of corruption and poverty? Our fate is once again in our hands. I am confident: We will continue to uplift our fellow citizens; we will continue to advance our country. Bosses, we are all under one roof, we Filipinos. We will beautify our home. We will develop our country. We will continue on the straight path.

Good afternoon. Thank you all very much.