VIDEO:

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YeUJ6mSeBrQ[/youtube]

TRANSCRIPT:

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the turnover ceremony of the Bangsamoro Basic Law to Congress

[Declared at the Malacañan Palace on September 10, 2014]

When our term began, we told our countrymen: You can dream again. And today, we are proving it: We are not just dreaming, we are fulfilling our aspirations. We have taken another big step towards a more peaceful and more progressive Mindanao. Through this proposed Bangsamoro Basic Law, we are giving shape to the realization of the principles contained in our Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro.

During the past SONA, I asked for understanding from our Congress regarding this law. We needed sufficient time to dissect each provision of our proposed law. This process was long and meticulous because we laid out every detail of the implementation of our aspirations for the Bangsamoro. I assure you: The Bangsamoro Basic Law was forged to be reasonable, just, and acceptable to all, Moro, Lumad, or Christian.

I thank the cooperation of the leaders and members of the MILF, led by Chairman Al Haj Murad Ebrahim and Mohagher Iqbal, our diligent and courageous peace panel led by Secretary Ging Deles and Chairman Miriam Coronel-Ferrer, as well as our Bangsamoro Transition Commission, stakeholders, members of the Cabinet, and our partners in other countries, to finally imprint a new chapter of peace and unity in the country's history.

Trust brought us here. Throughout the negotiations, I saw that each party was truly determined to reach an agreement. We have proven that: when we do not think about how to gain an advantage, we reach a situation where everyone wins.

Now that we have a bill, I firmly believe that it is consistent with our Constitution; that it is faithful to the principles of our Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro; that it reflects our collective effort towards development that leaves no one behind.

To our Congress: we understand that you need to carefully review this bill. Our only request is that it be passed as soon as possible. In this way, we can give our brothers and sisters enough time to prepare, and fully nurture the change we have sown in governance in the Bangsamoro.

To my Bosses: now that we have given a copy of the bill to Congress, let us not think that the progress of this initiative depends only on the legislators. The truth is, each of us has an important role to play in achieving true social transformation.

Isn't “brother/sister” what we call our fellow Filipinos in Muslim Mindanao? In a typical Filipino family, have we ever heard our parents advise us and say, “Go ahead, take advantage of your sibling”? As father of the nation, it is my duty to lead in protecting the welfare of the country and to promote a just and equitable society. Now, this is my plea: Let us help our Filipino brothers and sisters. It is clear that ARMM has been left behind in terms of development. That is why we want to give everyone equal opportunities, especially those on the margins, so that they can be empowered to contribute to the progress of the country. As I said: There should be a boost up, so that those who need it most can catch up.

To our countrymen in Luzon and Visayas, please be clear: Change will not be complete if it does not begin in our minds and hearts. Let us fully accept our Muslim countrymen. Let us respect the beliefs and way of life of our indigenous people. Instead of believing those spreading negative news and beliefs about the South, let us use our intelligence and time to fully understand the history, culture and experiences of our fellow Filipinos. Through this, we will discover that they are just like us: dreaming of getting their children through school, wanting to live without fear and anxiety, and wanting to succeed in their chosen fields. It is clear: Now, more than ever, trust prevails among us. We need to strengthen this trust, by supporting the immediate enactment of the Bangsamoro Basic Law. Let us not allow this opportunity to give a new dawn to the Promised Land; I urge you to contribute to its realization.

Once the Bangsamoro Basic Law is passed by Congress, the next step for us is a plebiscite for the people of Bangsamoro. My appeal to our brothers and sisters who will vote: Please study the provisions carefully. Your understanding and participation will be your protection against those spreading doubts about our agenda for lasting peace. This will also give you greater ability to participate in the transition to a stable Bangsamoro government by 2016.

To those who are worried if this initiative will succeed, my response is: Now that far more Filipinos—Moro, Lumad, or Christian—are joining hands, should we now doubt each other? Should we now be afraid of change? We may not hold the future, but I am confident, and I am sure, as are our colleagues here now—that genuine trust and clinging to hope will lead us to the fulfillment of our dreams.

On Saturday evening, I will be traveling to Europe. I will share with the leaders and our fellow citizens in Spain, Belgium, France, and Germany the proposed Bangsamoro Basic Law and the progress we have achieved in the peace talks. I will tell them how, through trust and cooperation, we have reached where we are today. I will share with them that although our success is not yet complete, we are fully committed to continuing our efforts towards a more progressive and peaceful Philippines.

It is clear: We have been given a unique opportunity to prove, not only to ourselves, but to the world, that we can achieve what was once considered impossible. When we reached a crossroads, we chose to do what is right, and now we are within sight of lasting peace and broad development. Let us continue to work together so that we can bequeath to future generations a Philippines free from conflict, with continuous progress, and admired in various parts of the world.

Good day to you all. Thank you very much to all of you.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Magandang araw po. Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat.