[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DtNJCjxeSOU&[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, for the Filipino Community in Belgium

My fellow countrymen, this is the second stop on my trip here in Europe. We just came from Spain this morning, and on Wednesday we will be heading to France, before flying to Germany. After this, we will fly to Boston, New York, San Francisco, in the United States. The total number of engagements in the places we will go on this trip is “a little”: only 86 engagements in the next 13 days. But like all our trips, the purpose of these visits is one: to promote the interests of the Filipino people. To do this, we are meeting, and will meet with the leaders of countries, with businessmen and institutions to strengthen our relationships, and to announce the successes we have achieved. Of course, in all these activities, our favorite part of these trips is meeting our countrymen who are venturing into different countries. Truly, it’s like a phone—you know—the trip, 15 hours from Manila to Madrid, and then I really can’t sleep on the plane. I was allowed to sleep at the hotel for 30 minutes before all the meetings started. But when I see our countrymen who are really energetic, we are fully charged like a cellphone. Thank you all very much. [Applause] If there are those who haven’t returned home for a long time, let us share with you the changes our country is enjoying. In 2009, the ICAO, or the International Civil Aviation Organization, saw that there were many “significant safety concerns” in our aviation industry. That’s why in 2010, the European Union banned our planes from flying to Europe. We designated a new head of our Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines; and Director General William Hotchkiss III showed his skills, because in 2013, the ICAO lifted the significant safety concern it had imposed on the country. This was followed by the EU allowing Philippine Airlines to fly to Europe again in July of 2013; April 2014 was when Cebu Pacific was allowed. PAL’s flight from Manila to London is now direct. There is now an opportunity for Philippine carriers to increase flights to Europe. What this means is, now, it will be easier and there will be more flights for our OFWs, as well as investors and tourists.

Another thing: We used to be called the “Sick Man of Asia.” Before, in the eyes of the world, the Philippines seemed to be sick and needed to be cured before other countries would have confidence in investing or engaging with us. Now we are called “Asia’s Rising Tiger”; far from the old image of being sickly. Before we traveled, the World Economic Forum once again raised our competitiveness ranking: we are now 52nd out of 144 economies surveyed. Since we took office, we have risen 33 places, the highest rise in the economies in the World Economic Forum report since 2010. The data speaks for itself: In just under four years in the administration, we have received 20 positive credit ratings actions. Last year, for the first time, we were given investment grade status by the most prestigious credit rating agencies such as Moody’s, Fitch, and Standard and Poor’s—these are the three most prestigious credit rating agencies in the world. In May of this year, 2014, Standard and Poor’s was impressed again and gave us another upgrade. Our consistently failing grade has been replaced by investment grade status. What are the implications of this? Because we are investment grade, the risk to investors is lower. We need to offer a smaller interest rate to those we borrow funds from—that’s why the interest we no longer need to pay can now be directed to our social programs. In short, there is also more confidence in investing in our country, and the anxiety of businessmen is reduced. With the entry of capital, businesses will increase, and more jobs and opportunities will open up for Juan and Juana dela Cruz.

Let's revisit this: Wasn't it the case that our countrymen had become accustomed to the numerous scams and scandals in our government? Perhaps we haven't forgotten yet: there was “Hello Garci,” followed by the Fertilizer Fund Scam, millions of pesos given as send-off money to retiring generals, and so on. That was the Philippines we inherited. But because of the trust given by the Filipino people, and our commitment to good governance, change became possible.

This stems from the restoration of integrity as the primary pillar of governance. You have likely heard our basic principle: If there is no corruption, there will be no poverty. This is the very foundation of the reforms we are implementing. We are closing the loopholes for trickery, and ensuring that institutions are focused solely on the welfare of the people, rather than the interests of a few. Of course, this includes holding the corrupt accountable, those who have long feasted on the holes in our system. Last September and November, the Ombudsman filed the first cases against some of those implicated in the Pork Barrel Scam, and now some of the personalities involved are already detained. This includes three senators pointed to by the evidence gathered. They will go through the process, and the Ombudsman has an obligation to prove the evidence they have gathered. If it is proven that they have wronged the people, they will be held accountable. It is clear: the net of the justice we are promoting is wide, and we will not let anyone escape, especially the big fish.

Significant changes have also been made in agencies that used to frustrate us whenever they were mentioned in the news. Let's look at the DPWH: this agency has saved 27 billion pesos due to more efficient and more honest processes. As for GOCCs, or government-owned or controlled corporations: if you recall, I reported to you during my first SONA, some institutions were drowning in debt, yet they still had the audacity to shower their officials with bonuses. Before we took office, the average annual remittance of these GOCCs was P9 billion; now they pay an annual dividend of 27.4 billion pesos. The GOCC, as you can see: they delivered on their work, especially with the GCG. And the result: three times the amount has been added to the fund we can use for what are called social services.

In terms of tax collection, the BIR collects an additional P40 billion per year. Let me clarify this: We achieved this not by adding new taxes, except for the sin tax, which was intended to reduce the consumption of cigarettes and alcohol. Commissioner Henares did her job, and ensured that those who should pay taxes pay the correct amount. Now: 536 cases have been filed against those evading the payment of the correct taxes. The total amount we are billing them is P78.11 billion.

We are also giving the appropriate attention and support to our countrymen in Mindanao who have long been neglected. We have restored trust in negotiations, and now the door has opened for us to a Mindanao that is more progressive and free from conflict. Just last Wednesday, we conducted the ceremonial handover of the proposed Bangsamoro Basic Law. We expect this law to be passed as soon as possible.

Since our first visit to other countries until now, everyone we talk to is always full of praise for our countrymen who have ventured abroad. Of course, thank you very much to all of you—those who are here and in other parts of Europe and other countries around the world—for what you have achieved, and what you will achieve, as well as for honorably carrying the name of our country wherever you go. I repeat: Thank you very much to all of you in the name of our Motherland. [Applause]

I will also take a look at our counterparts here sometimes. You might say you are not involved in this matter. [Laughter]

I asked myself during those first trips: Why does a Filipino show off when you take him out of the Philippines? This includes Team Gilas. We came to the realization: Give a Filipino the right conditions, put him in the right situation, and surely, he will truly show his skill and ability.

Therefore: The government remains fully focused on those at the margins of society; from education, where we have filled the gaps in classrooms, not just the 66,800 we inherited, but also those to be added due to the K to 12 program. We have also filled the shortage of textbooks and chairs; we even bought books at a lower price. In health, where the number of PhilHealth beneficiaries is increasing, and also the diseases covered or that can now be treated for free by our poor countrymen; up to programs like the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program—you know this, this program provides what is called a cash stipend to our countrymen at the margins of society, in exchange for ensuring that infants are vaccinated, their children stay in school, and pregnant mothers have regular check-ups. This investment of ours is proof that the government is on the side of those most in need and is already bearing fruit: According to the latest report we received, it was found that 2,500,000 Filipinos have risen above what is called the poverty line. Now, there are also successive initiatives, so that those called near-poor, those who have just exceeded it, will completely move away from what is called the poverty line, so that they will not return to living below the poverty line, due to the sudden onset of illness or disaster.

Let us also not forget: We will enter the next year in what is called the demographic sweet spot, where the bulk of our population will enter the working age. When they start earning, the money they earn will circulate in our economy, and will continue our progress. That means, the programs we are funding, especially the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, helped you finish—formerly grade school, now we have expanded it to high school—when you finish high school, the additional income is estimated to be more than 40 percent higher than if you only finished grade school. So opportunities are added, you increase the ability of our countrymen to participate in this rise and increase of these opportunities. In the end, the whole country wins. Honestly—so I might confuse our writers, I’ll just read what they wrote:

This extraordinary opportunity should not be wasted. What we want is: to always have a plan on how to maximize all these opportunities. We do not leave this to chance. We look for which sectors contribute greatly to the economy, and we continue to invest in our people, so that every Filipino is empowered.

It is clear: We Filipinos—wherever we are in the world—are the ones making the change, and continue to make this change. We will also continue it. We will not stop pushing for widespread transformation in our society. The reasons why our countrymen used to feel forced to leave—such as corruption, lack of opportunity, and a cycle of poverty that seemed unbreakable—are being erased since we first took office. Naturally, those who benefited from the old system are intensely opposing us. But we will not be defeated by them. [Coughs] I was envious of the singer earlier. [Laughter] It seems his voice has no limits. [Applause]

You know, back home, the noise about the election in the coming 2016 is starting to build. It seems to be part of our culture to be excited about elections, and it’s true that some are already very excited.

What I can tell you—we who have been given a mandate will not give in to political talk. There are problems that cannot be solved by campaigning. Before we leave, we made sure that our allies who should be focused on their respective duties, and we issued a directive—for example, this issue of traffic from port congestion; or the issue of energy, which we fear we may lack due to El Niño and the continued increase in demand due to our developing economy. I'm not a fortune teller, but I estimate that two types of candidates will emerge in the election. Those who are our allies and we know will continue everything we have planted—from the field of reform, to economic development, and to caring for our people. They will say, “I will continue, and I will further improve this transformation that has begun.”

The other side, the second type of candidate: Those who do nothing but oppose and object to all the reforms we have fought for. Because they oppose, there is only one meaning: They are against the right things we have done; they are against the successes we have achieved on the straight and narrow path. If they say in the coming days that they agree and will continue our successes here on the straight and narrow path, of course a question will enter our minds: If you agree, why do you still oppose? Why didn't you just contribute? Why don't you just contribute to speed up and deepen the change?

A question to the people—To those who were previously against and will continue, I ask you: Are we ready to gamble on these opponents? Isn't it more certain to continue if we side with those who, even now, we can clearly see are contributing?

The challenge before us now is to care for and support one another, wherever we may meet. And as we continue to walk the straight and narrow path, we will arrive at a future where opportunity is open to Filipinos, within the Philippines; we will reach a society where those who want to return home can truly do so and say, “This is the Philippines I have dreamed of.”

Comrades, perhaps it would be good to revisit where I started. Of course, there were many guides and lessons I learned from my parents. I remember my father saying, during the Martial Law era, I asked, “Dad, if we are right, why do we seem to have so few allies?” He answered me, “You know, with the amount of freedom within a democracy, the primary freedom that needs to be achieved is freedom from hunger. If we don’t know where we’ll get our next meal, nothing else matters but how to fill the stomachs of our families, especially our children.” And that statement really stuck with me during the darkest part of Martial Law. And while we are seated here, I will revisit what I said to you earlier. Why do Filipinos, when they leave the Philippines, truly succeed? Why can’t Filipinos succeed in their own country—and that is really what drives us. So what is happening to us now, let me repeat to you, is planned. The businessman will come, invest, and build a factory. That factory won’t be able to find employees, because they are not prepared. You, I think, have friends, relatives, who once enrolled in a course, like Nursing, because they were told, “There are many jobs in Nursing.” When they graduated, there were no jobs in Nursing. What’s worse, before that, they first became a physical therapist, because there were many physical therapy jobs available. They graduated from there, passed the board exam, switched to Nursing, because the jobs in Physical Therapy were gone—after graduating in Nursing, there were no jobs in Nursing either. Is that right? So we did something about it. We need to connect with the industry; let’s talk to them, “What do you need?” So that those who have worked hard to gain knowledge are suitable for the opportunities that are coming—and we are already achieving success in that area. TESDA, when we started, 28.5 percent of their graduates found jobs. Now, 65.8 percent have secure jobs in general. There are sectors where we’ve reached 91 to 93 percent—almost certainly, if you go through TESDA, you’ll have a good job waiting for you. There was even one, when interviewed, he went to the Middle East, and he said in his interview, “I didn’t finish college, but here, look at those in our office, there’s an engineer, a business management graduate, and so on. “All of them,” he said, “people with titles, call me ‘Sir’. But I didn’t finish college.”

So, let me repeat: our investment in TESDA, in the first year alone, when they pay their taxes, in witholding tax, even in the minimum tax base: the state’s investment is already paid for. That means: the state’s capital is returned, the opportunity to give the next person a chance to improve their situation is returned. It doesn’t disappear into corruption, it doesn’t go into kickbacks. So, the result of this—and I’ll go back to my father—it was hard to believe during the dark times of martial law that a time would come when we would have democracy again. Our mother came and continued her fight, and democracy was restored. Perhaps, I think, the job is to show you why democracy is truly the best system, and we, when we worked together—what does it mean when we work together? I didn’t change when I was in the opposition. I fought for the same things. But you gave me a mandate, and I showed you, through our cooperation, what was once impossible is now truly becoming possible. What is needed is that we don’t change. Let’s not be like Juan Tamad. Juan Tamad, the picture when I was young, was under a tree, waiting for guavas to fall. And honestly, I thought: If those guavas fall, are they overly ripe or rotten, that’s why they fell from the tree? Why would I wait for them to be overly ripe or rotten, when you can pick them at the right time? It is the government’s obligation to give you that opportunity. You, in turn, shape the government that will do that. Through our cooperation—let me repeat—what was once impossible is now possible. We can dream again.

Good evening to all of you. Thank you very much.

Learn more details about President Aquino’s visit this September 2014