Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During a meeting with the Japan National Press Club

[Delivered in Tokyo, Japan, on June 5, 2015]

Last November I had the opportunity to welcome and meet many of you in Manila in a productive exchange. Today, I wish to thank all of you in the JNPC for your kind invitation to again engage the members of Japanese media, this time in your home turf.

A free and responsible media is necessary to any healthy democracy. My father, himself a journalist, as well as my mother, had valued media’s role in the growth of our nation. Japanese media also has a special place in our recent history. It covered my father’s return and subsequent assassination in Manila in 1983, and soon after was instrumental in providing intelligent analysis that helped shed light on the circumstances of his assassination.

The Philippines that you cover now is far different from that covered by your predecessors during those troubled times. Media is free to report the facts and to speak its mind. The Philippine government merely joins the chorus of voices in asking that media provide a true and fair accounting of events, and balance its roles in promoting vigilance and encouraging enlightened discourse for our citizens.

Allow me now to brief you on the events of this memorable and fruitful State Visit, in which I retraced a lot of the steps my mother took when she came to Japan in November of 1986. In fact, back then, she spoke to this same institution, in this very building.

My Summit Meeting with Prime Minister Abe has given additional impetus to our already very dynamic Strategic Partnership. The highlights of that meeting have found their way through the news desks and have been duly reported, and I believe I need not cite them in great detail.

I would merely add today that I always value frank discussions with the Prime Minister, ever since our first meeting in 2013. It is a source of great encouragement to me and my countrymen that, on many issues and strategic interests, the views, stances and sentiments of the Philippines and Japan greatly complement, if not mirror, each other.

The coming years will be interesting ones for the Philippines-Japan Strategic Partnership, which, as I told Prime Minister Abe, is from our perspective entering a new, more invigorated chapter. We have our common appreciation of the synergies between our economies, on which we have agreed to build our future economic engagement. At the same time, both our governments are undertaking sweeping and critical reforms across various fronts, to facilitate and strengthen our own national responses to emerging challenges, and allow us to improve our bilateral cooperation.

In the sector of security, the Philippines and Japan’s respective evaluation of ongoing developments in our region very closely adhere to each other. The Philippines follows with interest Japan’s ongoing review of its security policy and legislation, with a view to allowing Japan to play a more proactive role in securing peace and security in our region and the world. I wish to again manifest what we have stated before: the Philippines does not view with any concern Japan’s consideration of the question of reinterpreting its Constitution. Japan is an ally and partner to many nations, and Japan should be able to cooperate in the fullest and most effective way to promote and protect peace. Countries of goodwill can only benefit if the Japanese government is empowered to assist others, and is allowed to come to the aid of those in need, especially in the area of collective self-defense.

Being both island nations, our respective histories and the development of our economies and international relations have been contextualized, defined and facilitated by our regional maritime environment, which for the past decades had enjoyed relative peace and stability.

Today, however, as you all know, our maritime environment and its resources, as well as the airspace above it are now under threat. We are particularly gravely concerned by the land reclamation activities being undertaken in the West Philippine Sea. These activities prejudice and undermine the arbitration that the Philippines has initiated to settle the dispute in a manner compatible with international law, particularly the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). It raises the specter of increasing militarization and threatens peace and stability in the region.

One of the important areas where this new era of positive engagement between the Philippines and Japan will be brought to bear will thus be in the area of maritime security. But by no means does this constitute and define the length and breadth of our dynamic partnership. Our engagement in trade, investments, ODA, tourism, people-to-people exchanges have also intensified. In tourism, in particular, the Philippines is one of the fastest growing markets for Japan in Asia; in turn, Japan has been the Philippines’ third largest tourist market since 2005. I look forward to seeing the Japanese media accord due interest as well to these aspects of our partnership.

I would like to take this occasion to again convey our deepest thanks, through you the members of media, to Their Majesties, The Emperor and Empress, to Prime Minister Abe, and to the government, and people of Japan, for the hospitality and their commitment to the furtherance of Philippine-Japan relations.

Thank you. I am ready to take your questions.

Question and Answer

Q : On the hot topic, the South China Sea, I would like to ask a question. First, Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter, he has appealed to all countries about the reclamation and he has asked for immediate halt of the reclamation to all the relevant countries. In the Spratlys, one of the report, there is a plan to repair; according to the plan, the repair of the airport will be conducted. I would like to ask a relevant question. Quite often, a spokesperson of the Foreign Ministry of China calls themselves a major power in the world. And to the Philippines and to others, they often say that smaller countries like your country, which is very rude for you, should not meddle. What do you think about the comments of the spokesperson of the Chinese Foreign Ministry?

Aquino : Perhaps we should utilize their own words. In 2002, in an attempt to manage tensions within this area of the world, ASEAN, and its dialogue partner, China were trying to come up with a Code of Conduct. Unfortunately, they were unsuccessful so they came up with a Declaration of Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea. This was signed by all parties concerned and we assume that this is still binding on all parties concerned.

In fact, in all of the fora, all parties say they still adhere to the DOC and look forward to the formulation of the COC. May I quote the declaration. Paragraphs 2, 4, and 5 in particular.

May I quote Paragraph 2: “The Parties are committed to exploring ways for building trust and confidence in accordance with the above-mentioned principles and on the basis of equality and mutual respect.”

I assume that even if we are a much smaller economy, a non-existent military entity and a smaller country be it in land area or population, equality also refers to the Philippines.

Paragraph 4: “The Parties concerned undertake to resolve their territorial and jurisdictional disputes by peaceful means, without resorting to the threat or use of force, through friendly consultations and negotiations by sovereign states directly concerned, in accordance with universally recognized principles of international law, including the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.”

And fifth: “The Parties undertake to exercise self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate or escalate disputes and affect peace and stability including, among others, refraining from action of inhabiting on the presently uninhabited islands, reefs, shoals, cays, and other features and to handle their differences in a constructive manner.”

So perhaps we should request the spokesperson to revisit the Declaration of Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea to refresh his memory to that which they pledged to.

And the other aspect is something that we have often stated perhaps in more private discussions. We were taught when we were younger that the ability to come to an agreement sometimes necessitates, or a lot of times necessitates, putting yourself in the other’s shoes. Look at it from the other perspective. If the situation were reversed, if China is in the Philippines’ position, will they accept the advice that they are now telling countries as small as ours?

I think we have delayed our repair of the landing strip that services our community within the Kalayaan Island Groups. The delay of the repair makes all the repairs even not much more extensive down the line. This facility existed before 2002. And that is important because there was an agreement to preserve the status quo starting from 2002.

Now, when certain countries say that everybody is reclaiming at this point in time, the Philippines vehemently denies that we are reclaiming anything at this point in time. We are even repairing that which already existed before these agreements were entered into.

Q: The agreement that you had yesterday with the Japanese Prime Minister, you talked about the transfer of defense technology. One of the things that wasn’t in there that some people had expected was perhaps you would start talks on a Visiting Forces Agreement. As Japan extends its defense footprint, there has been talks about them doing maritime patrols in the South China Sea, possibly air patrols, possibly more naval activity there. If they do that, one of the things that perhaps Japan would want would be to enable to refuel their craft in the Philippines or perhaps use naval bases to physicalize our refueling of naval vessels. Is that something that the Philippines would welcome and facilitate for Japan if Japan requested that? Would you need to have a Visiting Forces Agreement for that to happen?

Aquino : It was discussed yesterday during our summit meeting with the Prime Minister, the relevant entities will start discussions leading up to a Visiting Forces Agreement. And the Visiting Forces Agreement will have to be passed and approved by our senate. But we will be starting discussions on all of the details embodying this.

Currently, the Philippines has only two Visiting Forces Agreement, one with the United States of America, and most recently in the past has been the one with Australia. We welcome this development. We have only two strategic partners, the US and Japan. And again, as I have stated previously, it has not behooved a good partnership or relationship if you are not able to work at inter-operability with the other. An agreement even for humanitarian concerns that exist only in paper would not be effective when there comes a time that you would need to be in coordination and in cooperation, or in joint operation, with your strategic partners.

So yes, the Philippines does welcome this development and we will be initiating all of the diplomatic requirements to come up with a Visiting Forces Agreement.

Q: In the case of the Philippines, in the past there was the US forces Clark, Subic were there. But in the 1990s they were removed. And because partly of that impact in the South China Sea, China is becoming extremely active. There are such analysis by some experts. Your Excellency, you mentioned about strategic partner with regard to your relationship with the United States. Your relationship with the US, like in the past, [is] a mutual defense alliance type of relationship, just like the US-Japan relationship as of now. Is there any possibility to upgrade your bilateral relationship with the US? Do you have any wish to upgrade it to a stronger alliance like relationship? As you know, your Excellency, in the case of Japan, we have the US-Japan alliance, the security alliance. The Senkaku islands is applicable. The United States is obliged to defend. The US president did make a public comment and because of that, the defense policies has been made clear. But in the case of the Philippines, would you seek a stronger defense obligation of the United States and therefore might you wish to upgrade and strengthen your bilateral relationship with the US?

Aquino : Precisely we have this new agreement; the acronym is EDCA for Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement. Our Constitution prohibits foreign bases in our country. But having said that, it does allow rotational presence. So EDCA envisions an increase of rotational presence to foster, again, inter-operability and transfer of knowledge, perhaps technology, between the America and the Philippines.

The Mutual Defense Theory that exists between the Philippines and America started in 1951. There have been many clarifications as to exactly, for instance, the treaty talks about Pacific.

So recently I questioned whether Pacific refers to that portion of the body of water which is on the Eastern coast of the Philippines and where the South China Sea or the West Philippine Sea is not part of. And I was told that at the point of 1951, what they referred to as the Pacific, that is now what we refer to as Asia-Pacific. And I understand, exchanges of diplomatic notes throughout the decades have clarified all of these questions.

So, I guess EDCA is just a further refinement of a very strong and very long lasting relationship between the Philippines and America. And we see this as an improvement in making those agreed upon terms and the various treaties and agreements that much more real. It doesn’t exist just in paper but it has an actual ability, again, to render support to each other. And it is, we have to emphasize EDCA is not directed at any entity, it is just a refinement of a longstanding defense treaty between the America and the Philippines.

Q: I have a question on your domestic issue. Next year, you will have presidential election and when president that changes in the Philippines, it seems that in many cases, the policies will dramatically change. For the government of Japan, the Aquino government is a very friendly government for us so we have very good relationship. But when the government changes, there could be changes in policy vis-a-vis economy as well as vis-a-vis China.

Now, for the ruling party, the candidate Sec. Mar Roxas, according to the private sector survey, popularity is not that high. The presidential election will occur in one year. At what timing would you designate your successor? Would you be designating your successor other than Sec. Roxas? I understand that in the economic clauses, would you also be changing political clauses for your revision of your Constitution? In that, is there a possibility that you will be able to once again run for presidency with the possible changes in the political clause for your Constitution?

Aquino : Thank you for your very, very interesting questions. First things first, regardless of who replaces me as president next year, Japan is our biggest trading partner. It is always within the top two or top three sources for official development assistance.

Yesterday, we agreed with Prime Minister Abe, through JICA, very, very large projects; amongst them the revitalization of a train system that will cover the first province north of Metro Manila all the way to the southernmost portion of Luzon. This undoubtedly will spur quite a lot of economic activity and ease transportation for these communities. So the point I’m trying to raise is that, I don’t think our people will elect a foolhardy replacement that will suddenly throw away all of these very good economic partnerships that we have with Japan.

Second, when will I endorse? I promised our people that I was hoping end of June but now it seems I have to, by law, deliver a State of the Nation Address which is the last Monday of July and it will be shortly after that that I will endorse to our electorate, to our people the person I believe who can carry out the continuity.

Now, changes in the Constitution to allow for a further term. In our history, we had a period of Martial Law, we had Mr. Marcos who first got elected in 1965. He was authorized to have two terms that would have ended in 1973 and at that point in time when it was about to end, he imposed Martial Law wherein he proceeded to rule our country up to 1986 when he was ejected by the EDSA revolution.

Certain countries like the South American countries also went through a similar period. In their Constitutions, a sitting President has to step down but can re-run after the intervention of a different administration. Perhaps, that is something that the Philippines can consider.

So, my answer to those who are espousing an extension of terms was, we will undoubtedly have benefits for having a government that will not have to re-learn how to govern. But at the same time, we open the doors to somebody who might emulate Mr. Marcos and decide not to leave the office forever. And I think that is a very serious risk that my country has to avoid. So, I ask that we not consider re-opening the Constitution for term limits. The present joint resolution being worked through by the Congress and the Senate deals with economic provisions and I have yet to see the contents of the same to see if I can join them in their proposal. I have to study that particular proposal.

Q: I have two questions. The first one, as you mentioned in the Diet that Japan has gone beyond fulfilling its obligation to heal the wounds of the past, but we know that in your country that there are still plenty of comfort women awaiting for justice and compensation from Japan. As one of them who has been in Tokyo told us that you are very aware of their issue when you were a congressman. How do you view this problem currently?

The second one is regarding your speech in Nikkei. How do you think your words about Nazi for China? Do you think it hurts Chinese people’s feelings?

Aquino: May I answer the first question? When I was a congressman and I think it was here that I first heard the issue of comfort women. Our then Foreign Secretary or Minister for Foreign Affairs, I asked him about this particular issue. His response to me was that in our agreement with Japan covering reparations, this issue was supposed to have been tackled as far as the obligations of Japan relative to the Philippines.

Now, last night I was asked by our own media and I promised our media to find out all of the efforts that have been done to address the issue of the comfort women. As far as I am concerned, they are our countrymen and it is our responsibility to care for all of these comfort women. So I would want a review and as soon as I get home, I want a report on all of the efforts that have been done for these compatriots of ours who suffered so unnecessarily during the war.

With regards to hurting the Chinese feelings, we have no intentions of hurting anybody’s feelings. In 2011 when I had a state visit to China, we did point out that the relationships between our country, if you look at it from an economic perspective, were very, very much in favor of China. For instance, in 2011, if I remember the figures correctly, China would send us 200,000 tourists a year. We send China 800,000. The Philippines population has just reached a hundred million. China’s population is 1.3 billion at least. In terms of indirect investments, China provided about 600 million indirect investment in our economy. The Philippine corporations put in about two and a half billion dollars into the Chinese economy. And we proposed that stability is a very necessary component for prosperity, and prosperity seems to be the primary need or the primary mission of every government that exists in the world. And the response by then President Hu Jintao was the dispute in the South China Sea should not be the be-all and end-all of our relationships.

So, throughout the years, we have not answered, for instance, all of the attacks on the Philippines by the media. We have tried to do our best to de-escalate the situation. We have promised to abide by the international law and that’s why we went to arbitration which is found as a means of resolving these disputes in UNCLOS.

Scarborough Shoal which is where one of the major incidents happened between the Philippines and China is within 120 miles of our coastline and therefore within our exclusive economic zone. Our fishermen today complain that they are no longer being allowed to fish in this particular area. They are not allowed to even shelter in the cay during times of inclement weather and have had to modify their feelings. I have had to ask them to exert more patience because we do not want to escalate the situation. We keep saying in various fora, hopefully we can concentrate our energies and efforts in growing our economies and making our people more prosperous.

So, one only has to look at the map. And if I guess, one of the questions we would like to ask the Chinese people were: If you were the Philippines, and suddenly you would have one coastline, in effect, your whole west coast is gone, you will be retained with your east coast, would you say, ‘Yes please, take half of our waterways’? I don’t think any country would willingly do that. So we are just standing up for our rights. We respect everybody else’s rights. We ask that our rights also be respected. Thank you.

Q: Could you categorically state whether you would welcome Japanese patrols in the South China Sea? Second question, given Washington’s seemingly tougher stance on China in the South China Sea, do you think this is enough? And does this also bring with it a danger of a greater conflict in the region?

Aquino: I would hope that all of us are students of history and I don’t think anybody has been espousing going into violent actions with anybody. All of these comments by various entities, the G-7 amongst them, ASEAN, and the European Union, and so on and so forth, gives us, in a sense, a tremendous comfort in that this issue is not being ignored and that this is being consciously being striven to resolve. That, again, is I think a very helpful development.

Do we welcome Japanese patrols or joint patrols? These are international waters and beyond the 200-mile, well even the 200-mile economic zone, guarantees the right of transit.

Recently we concluded a delimitation of maritime boundaries with Indonesia, and amongst the things that are now possible with Indonesia, is that in the issue of protecting the environment or even anti-piracy operations, the Indonesian Navy and the Philippine Navy can patrol this very extensive area more thoroughly, in the sense that now that we know precisely where the boundaries are, we can take alternate patrols that we cover these areas closer to 24/7 than what is now possible.

So again, perhaps at some point in time, the issues in the South China Sea, West Philippine Sea will be resolved and that will enable everybody to be even more cooperative in addressing humanitarian disaster assistance needs, anti-piracy efforts, and so on and so forth.

So we are hoping that perhaps the model that the Indonesia and the Philippines that are now doing in this part of the world can serve as an example of what is possible. Thank you.

Q: About US…

Aquino : The US’ statements.

Q: …US’ tougher stance on China.

Aquino : Tougher stance? I think they have been stating the same position from the get-go. They do not take sides. But at the same time, they are calling on all parties to be responsible. And they are doing their efforts, I think, to try and de-escalate any potential sources of conflict. They are also, perhaps, reminding everybody that there are norms of international behavior agreed upon by all parties or all nations of goodwill. Thank you.

Q: Peace and stability of the Philippines is what I would like to ask about. The Mindanao peace process, initially, there were plans but it seems that there were some problems going forward about the peace process going forward with the MILF. What is your observation?

Related to Mindanao in the Philippines, the extremist Islamic state, what is the threat level, if any, for foreigners including Japanese nationals in terms of the security of foreign nationals? Any threat level of the Islamic state in your country? If there is a threat, what could be the counter-measures to this? Thank you.

Aquino : If I can answer the last portion of the question first. If you go to the Internet, you will find pictures of Filipinos who claim to be members of IS. Our intelligence tells us that a lot of these people who are real terrorists were at one point in time claiming to be affiliates of Jemaah Islamiyah, and therefore, affiliates of Al Qaeda. If there is a next group in next year or two years from now, we think are claiming to be members of that.

Now, having said that, there are certain areas that we discourage people from being tourists. But in general, the Philippines is safe. We cannot rule out the possibility of lone wolf terrorists. Lone wolf terrorists by definition do not exist in anybody’s database. They may be radicalized by the Internet and it’s only the person radicalizing them and themselves who know they have been radicalized. Their knowledge on how to construct bombs also exists in the Internet. So the Philippines has no greater threat than any other country when it comes to lone wolf terrorists.

But having said that, our intelligence services, our law enforcement entities are constantly upgrading their skills, are constantly exchanging information with relevant countries to be able to minimize further the threat that exists.

So I have to restate, claiming to be IS and being IS are two different things. We think that this is more an attempt to gain resources, rather than to being followers of that ideology.

In the peace process, our House of Representatives where the current basic law on the Bangsamoro is being tackled, promised us even before the incident in Mamasapano that they expected to pass the measure by June. And they are on schedule. They are now actually engaged in plenary debates. The Senate will follow soon. And so we are, as far as I’m concerned, and as far as our people are concerned, we still are experiencing what was promised by our legislature as far as their ability to pass this particular measure.

The incident was a bump. It was tragic. But it hasn’t stopped the process because at the end of the day, all of us Filipinos want peace in Mindanao. Once peace is achieved, and even now that we are just talking about the attainment of this basic law, there is already a growth in economic activity which brings about a lot of more opportunities for those who were so disenchanted that they then decided to secede. Now, they see the fruits of peace. Once the law is signed, once the governance is in place, that will accelerate. More and more will rejoin society and will shun away those who are espousing secession or rebellion or brigandry.

So I’m pushing both the lower and the upper houses of our legislature to pass the law as soon as possible because this has to be ratified in a plebiscite by our people and to maximize the effects of the new governance prior to elections next year. Thank you.

Q: I have a question to President Aquino. On the Philippines, will you join the AIIB?

Aquino: On the AIIB, I understand from June to December this year, we are invited, we are considering, we are studying whether or not to join the AIIB. But at this point in time, we haven’t joined the AIIB.

End of broadcast