[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RHxKMtgxx4k[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, at the 2014 Youth Summit

Thank you very much. Good morning to all of you.

After Joel spoke, I no longer know what to say now. [Laughter] But let me clarify, he said he knew me even before. We were together in Congress—let me just clarify, Congress—[to Director General Joel Villanueva] we were together in the 12th and 13th, you know—we are now in the 15th, perhaps some of you think we went to the Malolos Congress. Perhaps only Joel was there; I was not yet a member then. [Laughter]

Of course, let us first greet the Honorable Director General of TESDA, and a truly hardworking partner in resolving the country's problems, Joel Villanueva; [applause] our colleagues in Congress, the Honorable Chona Cruz Gonzalez and Sherwin Tugna; [applause] I’d like to also pay special mention to the management team of Kristyanong Kabataan para sa Bayan Youth Leaders; [applause] also to all of you delegates of the Youth Summit of 2014; [applause] honored guests; fellow workers in government; my beloved countrymen:

Good morning to all of you.

It is true what Joel said that sometimes we receive texts at two or three in the morning. It would be nice if the texts were about love life, [laughter and applause] but most of the time, at two or three o'clock, I'm talking to PAGASA; monitoring a storm or receiving a report from Secretary Albert del Rosario. He is now in Rome preparing for the Pope's visit. Sometimes, we forget there is a time difference between Rome and Manila. But that's okay. As long as we get the job done. We can make up for the lost sleep in 2016, maybe we can recover then.

When I saw Secretary Joel's invitation to attend the Youth Summit this year, of course, I didn't hesitate to come. I said, why would I miss the opportunity to be with [applause and cheers]—this is important—to be with my fellow youth? [Applause and cheers]

However, the last time I was here at Araneta, I watched a concert, and there were probably only about one-fourth as many people here because, well, how do I put it, the performer had been famous for quite a while. I think they’ve been famous for about five decades. Many of their fans are finding it a bit difficult to come here now. [Laughter]

On a more serious note: For me, the true measure of whether we have succeeded in our aspirations is if we have left our country in a far better state than we found it. What I mean is, after our time in this world, if your problems are still the same as the problems we faced before, then we, the elders, likely fell short for you.

This belief was formed as I grew up in a time very different from our time now. You know, although my heart and appearance are young, [laughter and applause] we have already gone through a lot. You know, I was in grade school when Martial Law was lifted, and our generation really couldn't see a bright future. It was hard to believe that we had a good future ahead of us. Those in power abused their authority, and it was dangerous to speak out against the government. Back then, just surviving to the next Christmas, or reaching the next Christmas, felt like a huge accomplishment.

That's why when the people entrusted us with their confidence, I promised God, our countrymen, and myself that I would pour out all my efforts so that Filipinos would no longer experience the same suffering and hopelessness. [Applause] With the guidance of God, and with the help of individuals and institutions that firmly believe in our administration, I can say that after four years and six months, we have a lot to be proud of.

Just a few examples: there's what's called the connector of the Manila North and Manila South Expressways. This was promised as early as 1976. Perhaps, during those times, your parents were just starting to date. Now, finally, after several decades, you are seeing the construction of the Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3, [applause] which is part of the system that will connect SLEX and NLEX so that if you really want to travel to NLEX and SLEX, you no longer need to go through EDSA for an additional two hours of your trip. There's also the rehabilitation of NAIA Terminal 1, which was neglected for several years, and is now nearing completion. Extensive development and peace in Mindanao are also within our reach. For the first time, the three most prominent credit ratings agencies in the world have given us an investment grade status. And just recently, we were upgraded again—apparently this is the 21st time we've been upgraded by these credit ratings agencies. [Applause] Before, we were considered the Sick Man of Asia, now, we are showing off as Asia’s Rising Tiger. [Applause]

As we continue to promote positive and long-term societal transformation, it is becoming clear that the youth play a big role in achieving our goals. As the heirs of the changes we are sowing, you will undoubtedly enjoy the fruits of our efforts for a longer time. [Applause] But on the other hand, if you choose to ignore it, our seedlings will be infested and destroyed, and we will return to the old ways.

Nowadays, with cellphones, the internet, and so on, it has become very easy to talk about politics and get involved in various aspects of the government. Before, if you wanted to express something, you had to meet secretly, or make a message on a typewriter and have it copied using a mimeograph. You might say, “What is a mimeograph and what is a typewriter?”

After that, a faster photocopying machine came along. You know, during Martial Law, even the photocopying supplies were registered because they were really suppressing our access to information as citizens. Now, a lot of information can be passed around on different computers using a flash drive, or by uploading it to the internet.

Of course, it is up to you how you will use these technologies. Please don't forget to be critical: Just because something is on the internet doesn't mean it's immediately true; just because something is viral or trending doesn't mean it should be given attention. If all you do is take selfies and boost your town in Clash of Clans [laughter and applause], of course our dreams will really be game over.

I sincerely thank the Jesus is Lord Movement and the Christian Youth for the Nation for giving me the opportunity to face you. [Applause] It is truly admirable that you are all here together to further strengthen your faith in our Lord, [applause] and to talk about contributing to the change agenda that we are promoting.

Let's take as an example your chairman, Secretary Joel Villanueva [applause]. Let us accept that he is also one of the youth. [laughter and applause] Sometimes he is mistaken for being younger than me. [Laughter] In his Training for Work Scholarship Program at TESDA, look at the numbers, 672,258 have already graduated and now have more opportunities for a better future. [Applause] In 2012, 68.5 percent of the graduates found employment within just about six months, and we continue to look for opportunities for the rest. [Applause] Joel inherited it because the placement rate was only 28 percent. So he has almost tripled that placement rate. In other sectors, his accomplishment reaches 96 percent. [Applause] Here we can see that when you choose to do what is right, you empower others to become better servants of God, and useful members of the country. [Applause]

Secretary Joel's excellent work at TESDA is part of our broad strategy of caring for and investing in the youth. For example, we also have the Abot-Alam Program, which, through the cooperation of DepEd, DILG, and the National Youth Commission, is mapping out-of-school youth in our country. In this way, our efforts to provide them with adequate education, training, and opportunities become more systematic. Just this November, more than 300,000 out-of-school youth have already been given skills training or enrolled in the Alternative Learning System. [Applause]

We are also implementing the K to 12 curriculum in our basic education system, to further enhance the knowledge and skills of our students. My only request: Please don't think that the additional years of study are additional time to ask for allowance for playing DotA or for buying cellphone load. [Laughter and applause] Our goal: To provide Filipino youth with a world-class education, so they can keep up with the changes happening in the world now. [Applause]

Those are just some of the initiatives and programs we are implementing based on the belief that the youth are one of our strongest allies in promoting broad and long-term change. [Applause] It is true that we have come a long way, but of course, we are still not content with what we have achieved.

As we walk the straight and narrow path, and as, again, my fellow youth [laughter], I have a reminder for you: Our fight is not yet over, and there will be times when our journey will not be easy. I say this to you to emphasize the meaning of the theme you chose for this year: To be fearless. [Applause]

Let us end the time when the youth are afraid to contribute to building a progressive nation. When someone sows doubt, let us boldly defend our principles. When someone spreads falsehoods, let us without hesitation proclaim the truth. When someone blocks our righteous path, let us bravely step forward towards the realization of our collective dreams. [Applause]

Clearly: As long as we stand united, as long as we uphold what is right and for the good of the majority, and as long as our faith in God remains strong, we have nothing to fear. [Applause] We can proudly say: We are truly fearless servants of the Lord Jesus Christ and defenders of Motherland. [Applause]

I will leave it at that for now. Thank you all very much, Merry Christmas, and a more peaceful and progressive New Year to all.