[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kKq1Jxp9Od8[/youtube]

Speech of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the 2015 General Assembly of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines

My concentration was good when I came here. I thought I could answer all your questions. I already saw George. My concentration was broken. [Laughter] I’ve been friends with him for a long time because we met in college. He was there for eight years before he graduated, I think. [Laughter] No, because he was rebellious back then. Still is, I think.

I get nervous when I see him; we always end up laughing. Sometimes it’s “laugh at” instead of “laugh with,” but it doesn’t matter – that’s not my intention today.

Comrades, as President, you know that we really have many issues that need to be addressed; every region, every province, and every municipality like yours, has challenges and problems that need our attention. If I could, I would visit all your municipalities personally to listen to you. But you know, we only have one body, and there are also many national and foreign issues that take up our time. Fortunately, there are organizations like the LMP, so we have the opportunity to meet in one hall, and collectively lay out our agenda to improve the living standards of our Bosses. To the mayors who really traveled far to be with us today, thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

I know, our local government units play a big role. If running the entire country is the responsibility of the national government, you in the LGUs are the ones who directly interact with our citizens. You are the bridge between the national agenda and every corner of our country. You are the source, and the destination of the projects we implement. Through you, our citizens feel whether the government is true to its promise to serve the country. That’s why: The success or failure of an administration depends on the cooperation of local government units with the national government.

No one would deny it: Your job as local leaders is really very difficult. I know the problems you face, which you are really immersed in, 24/7, in the local context. Although I wasn’t a mayor, we also mixed with local politics. Maybe at first, we were just smiling. But as the days passed, we really felt the weight of our responsibility. I already told you this before: When I was newly elected Congressman in Tarlac, a councilor approached me. He said he needed help renting an orchestra for our fiesta. My question was, “How much do you need?” His answer to me was, “P40,000 each.” How many do we need? He said, “We need two, and that’s the cheapest.” He even added, so there would be a relief, he said they needed two orchestras. In total: P80,000. In my mind, even if I doubled my salary back then at 35,000 gross, it still wouldn’t be enough for his request. Just for the music, our funds would be insufficient.

That’s just one example of the very long list of requests made to us as leaders, from the smallest to the biggest requests. As others say, what’s worse is that when someone asks for ten and you give nine or find a way to fulfill nine, the only thing they remember is the one you couldn’t give. Is that right? [Applause]

It is unavoidable that some of us, in wanting to fund these requests, are tempted to create gimmicks or magic, to ensure that whenever they encounter someone offering a favor, it can be granted.

The result: A system where our constituents are perpetually dependent on favors, while the leaders are also tied to granting those favors. It has been so long that this practice has reigned, it’s almost difficult to think of other ways of politics. Others ask: Is there even an alternative path?

Our response: There is, and that is precisely the path we are taking with the straight and narrow road. Don't we have a saying: Instead of giving a man a fish, teach him how to fish?

We are strengthening our national institutions and empowering our local governments. We are promoting a system that truly responds to the needs of the people; where aid is not a grace or a favor, not obtained by offering a palm to a sponsor or connection, not dependent on the whims of those in power, but a right obtained by following the correct policies.

We also believe: Those who excel in service deserve to be incentivized. We are able to do this through our Seal of Good Housekeeping, which has been implemented since 2011, and the Seal of Good Local Governance in 2014. Those who receive this award get a Performance Challenge Fund, and their ability to address the problems in their area of responsibility is increased. Because of this, we should not be surprised if in the coming years, more and more will excel and further develop their communities. Just a reminder, as English speakers say, “Success has many fathers and failure is an orphan.”

And if we are talking about good governance, we don't need to look far. There is the good example shown by your head in the League of Municipalities of the Philippines, Mayor Sandy Javier. [Applause] Under his leadership, his town quickly recovered from the devastation of Typhoon Yolanda. But instead of just relaxing and being content with what he has done, he led the clearing of debris from the roads, even in his neighboring towns. I also heard that: For 36 hours, even though tired and hungry, he and his colleagues continued to work non-stop to help others who were more severely affected by Yolanda. [Applause]

Truly: With our care and trust in each other, we have already achieved great changes in our country. With good governance, the economy continues to grow, which in turn raises our ability to fund our social services.

In the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program: If it was only 800,000 before, now, 4.4 million households are beneficiaries. In PhilHealth, we have also expanded the services we deliver. In education, we have also filled the inherited backlog in classrooms, textbooks and chairs to further improve the quality of education of our youth. We are truly improving the lives of so many of our countrymen; expanding opportunities to climb to progress, and raising their ability to contribute to the development of society.

The continuous transformation we are achieving in the infrastructure sector continues. Recently, we inaugurated the Lullutan Bridge in Isabela. “Lullutan” is an Ibanag word. When it was first mentioned to me, it sounded like “lulutang” (will float). I said, why would a bridge be named “will float”? Perhaps that bridge will float and sink. And truthfully, the bridge that was there in 1995 was called a spillover bridge. That means, when the water is high, the bridge will be covered.

In 1995, this bridge was damaged, causing great hardship to our countrymen in Isabela. Instead of rebuilding the bridge, those before us only remedied it. The result: longer travel times and higher transportation costs because it was necessary to use a barge to cross the communities. If you don't use a barge, your trip will take an extra one and a half to two hours because you have to go around different towns. We can't help but think: why did our countrymen suffer for so long, and why were they denied the services they deserve? That was twenty years, almost a generation has passed, but it could have been completed in three years.

Another example: the Jalaur River Multipurpose Project II in Iloilo, it was reportedly thought of as early as the 1960s. We both emerged in people’s minds in the 1960s. But it is only now, in our administration, that it is being concretized. In addition, there is also the Aluling Bridge in Ilocos Sur, the plan for which was laid out as early as 1978, but we are the ones who finished it. If you think about it, if these had been built a long time ago, how much progress would our many countrymen have achieved?

Just a few examples of the transformation happening now in our good governance. Wasn't it always said by the government that there was no money in the national treasury? Manong Hussin Amin knows that; we were together in Congress during that time. Now, we are proving: if the funds are not stolen, it will not be lacking.

That is clear: we are focusing on the welfare of the majority of our countrymen, and promoting initiatives that deliver long-term benefits. Projects that used to go through politics are now aligned with the proper process; benefits that used to be limited to a select few, we are striving to expand to include everyone. There are even politicians who are not from our party who are posting on social media, passing resolutions, or releasing ads to thank our administration for new roads, bridges, other infrastructure, and other assistance in their respective areas. [Applause] It is clear: politics is not the basis of our projects. In any province or municipality, regardless of the mayor’s surname or party, we are now striving to deliver immediate benefits. With all that we have achieved, can anyone say they have been neglected?

For us, the measure of good leadership is simple. If the problems we inherited have been reduced, or completely solved, we can say that we have succeeded. If the exact same problem or even more problems are passed on to the next generation, it is clear that we have failed.

That is why I expect the help of our colleagues in the local government units, to ensure that what we are planting now will be watered in the future, and will not be cut short by those who want to return to the crooked path. You can count on me: when legitimate problems arise that you cannot address, the national government is here, especially me, as the father of the nation, to take steps to help you all. [Applause]

Indeed, if we continue on the straight path, our destination will become even better. Imagine: if there are already so many new roads, bridges, airports and ports bringing opportunities to your municipalities now, what if we accelerate even more? If our economy is already growing now, how many more businesses will be established, how many more jobs will be created, if we ensure that integrity and honesty as the source of confidence continue to be the pillars of governance? If, just now, almost five years after restoring the hope of our Bosses, we have come so far, how much higher can we reach the dreams we can achieve if we continue and more reforms are implemented by the next leader?

The challenge before us now: Ensure that the fruits of our efforts become permanent. If we believe that the path we are taking now delivers benefits, it is only reasonable that we continue it. As leaders, we are called upon at every moment of governance: Let us be true to our word, choose what is right, and prioritize others. Let us bequeath to future generations a future far better than the one we inherited.

And in response to the request of Honorable Sandy Javier—although I only just heard his suggestion now—we probably already have an answer that we should share with you. He reminded us that you can raise local taxes, but let's not talk about that, especially since the elections are near, or many people might get angry with you. [Laughter] But because our economy has improved, our tax collection has also improved. Actually, regarding the pie that we are talking about, or a greater slice of the pie, here’s what happened: In 2010, the share from the IRA was P265.8 billion. This 2015, it is estimated to be P389.86 billion, excluding the Performance Challenge Fund and the Bottom Up Budgeting that we discussed. Before you even brought up increasing the slice, it seems the slice has already grown even without us slicing the pie again. [Applause]

You know, let me give you an example of my problem. You might notice that my hair is growing longer. In our uniformed ranks, we spend a lot on them, especially on retirement and pensions. About two years ago, it was already over P50 billion. Next year, it is estimated to be P80 billion for payment. The problem with that is twofold: First, there is really no pension system for our uniformed ranks, it all comes from the budget. Second, there was what is called “indexing.” When the salary of those in active service increases, the benefits of retirees also increase. You all understand, you have an obligation, but you have no source of funds. And we need to fix the system.

We are studying how to correct the system. The funds needed to establish their pension system—is almost two trillion pesos. Let me repeat, one estimate is 4.3 trillion; another estimate is 1.7 trillion. Our budget is 2.6 trillion. If we put in the entire budget, it’s still not enough. The bottom line is, I want to say yes. Sure, let's increase the slice of the pie. Perhaps I can commit to you, to those who are showing off, it’s not difficult to increase your funds. For those that cause us many problems, we are a bit cautious about increasing funds. It’s up to you. Let's work together here. Success will breed success. Excuse me, failure will breed an orphan. Let me repeat, we feel and see the problems you are facing, our role is to reduce the problems you are facing. That’s it, you can count on that.

Good day. Thank you all very much.