Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the courtesy call of the PRA Board of Directors and the heads of delegation from the FAPRA

[Delivered at Malacañan Palace on September 9, 2014]

First of all, let me apologize for being late. Somehow, a lot of people think that they have to meet me before I leave for the trip this coming Saturday. They could have met me last week or the week before that, but they decided that this has to be on the same week. So, the meetings dragged on and on and on.

Actually, I skipped out of one meeting just to be here because I knew I was late already. And by way of recompense, I think I can assure you that the countries enumerated earlier, composing the membership, I think I have been a customer in all of the countries—save for Turkey, which I intend to rectify as soon as possible—I was one of your customers in various retail outlets. And in the country in particular, I see Mr. Claudio of Toby Sports, and I was just there recently. And of course, long time friends and neighbors, Mrs. Escona, who I intend to patronize practically all their products, although I prefer patronizing the Tropical Hut outlets, especially the hamburger, rather than the Mercury Drug aspect of it. [Laughter]. In fact we have it every Saturday, during our athletic sessions—that’s the snack that’s served.

Anyway, let me go to the formal address.

There was a time when the Philippines was considered a backwater in terms of trade and retail: Filipinos often had to travel elsewhere to gain access to a greater variety of goods.

Today, however, the situation is very different—thanks in large part to the men and women who make up the Philippine Retailers Association and their predecessors. As our visitors might have seen during their visit, new brands and new stores are opening their doors to the public every single day. Indeed, the Philippines is not only back on the map; it is also gaining prominence as a retail destination in Asia.

The Filipino people have always been a significant, if not the most significant, contributor to the growth of the Philippine retail industry. As you might know, the Philippine economy has traditionally been consumption-driven. The retail industry, I’m told, accounts for 12.3 percent of Gross Domestic Product especially in the first half of 2014. This is not surprising to me. After all, many Filipinos consider “malling,” or visiting shopping malls, as one of our national pastimes.

Of course, “consumption” is not the only thing my countrymen are good at. In fact, I challenge you to find a better salesman or saleswoman than a Filipino. They are always ready to offer a smile, crack a joke, or even go the extra mile to effectively market their products—for example, the many salespeople who demonstrate the powers of the portable karaoke machine, by belting out songs in shopping malls. To our visitors today: Just ask any one of your counterparts in the PRA, or even Secretaries Jimenez and Domingo, and they will be the first to tell you that our people are talented, creative, and hardworking. There is no doubt: You can trust Filipinos to ensure that retail is more fun in the Philippines.

And since we discussed about that, can I just show you one of their inventions? It’s a case for an iPhone—and of course, there’s a very subtle message at the back of the case, which says, “It’s more fun in the Philippines” which is demonstrated every time we take a picture. Pardon us for the very subtle message: This is available from Secretary Mon Jimenez in limited quantities today. [Laughter]

Imagine, then, the wealth of possibilities that lie ahead for all of us, given the extraordinary growth that the Philippine economy has posted in the past four years: with a resurgence that has, as the saying goes, created markets where there were previously none, and that has helped in growing already existing markets. More and more investors are coming to the Philippines. Manufacturing has rebounded. The Business Process Management (BPM) industry alone remains very, very strong—and today employs 900,000 individuals, which we expect to reach 1,200,000 by 2016. Although, our Secretary of Trade normally cautions his projections, that must mean 2015 rather than 2016, perhaps in the second quarter. Not to mention the record high number of foreign tourists visiting the Philippines, which expands the consumer base even more.

You might also be interested to know that, according to the population estimates of the United Nations, the Philippines will hit its demographic sweet spot by 2015. That means that the vast majority of our population will be at working age, and this will persist for at least 30 years. Even more good news: Ernst and Young says that the Philippines will hit a growth sweet spot—characterized by increased private consumption—as early as 2019. With ASEAN Integration likewise on the horizon, the potential of the Philippine retail market seems limitless. We need only to explore the potential synergies between our countries in order to take full advantage of them.

As such, I am pleased to hear that the Philippines will play host to the 17th Asia Pacific Retail Convention and Exhibition. Not only will it be another venue for the country to show what we have to offer—it will also be a chance to explore those very synergies, and forge relationships with international retailers and suppliers.

It is our hope, however, that we will not have to wait another year before we see you, the members of the Federation of Asia Pacific Retailers Association, once again. After all, the potential for partnerships with your Filipino counterparts is already vast, and the earlier we begin, the earlier we can reap a shared success—not only for the companies involved, but also for the Filipino people and the entire country, if not to all our partners in the world.

We thank you, and we hope you enjoy your visit to the Philippines. Good afternoon.