Speech of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines at the 23rd Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) general meeting

[Delivered at the Sofitel Philippine Plaza, Pasay City, on September 11, 2015]

The Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) is an excellent example of a belief I always have held: The challenges of a country, or even of the world, are not for a mere few to solve. Each one of us must do his part. Standing here today, in front of an audience composed of representatives from business, the academe, governance, and other sectors, I see that belief realized. Since 1980, the PECC has contributed so much, not only in crafting policy, but also in shaping a more stable and more prosperous Asia Pacific. Indeed: By working together, we will find it much easier to solve our collective challenges. Foremost among these is how to achieve balanced, sustained, and inclusive growth.

Allow me to share with you today the Philippine experience in the pursuit of inclusive growth, which has been the driving force of our administration’s reform strategy. Many people tend to think of the economy as the only “growth engine”—the idea being to focus on economic growth, and hopefully that its benefits trickle down to the people. My administration views it differently. The Filipino people are front and center in our governance agenda. Over the years, they have proven to be our country’s greatest resource—from the time they rose up against a dictator to reclaim democracy, to the time they voted for meaningful change in 2010, and even to the present day, as they fuel our resurgent economy. They are our Bosses, and we see them as our most vital partners in growing the economy. This, we believe, is the quickest path to inclusive growth.

At the same time, this is also the most logical way to ensure continued progress. After all, any growth in the economy that is not inclusive will likely not be sustainable. Should government fail to realize this, and consequently fail to build the capacities of their people, then they would only help to widen the social and economic divide between their citizens. Many would be relegated to the most unskilled portions of the economy and invaded by a sense of hopelessness. Barely able to make ends meet, how can they become engines of growth that power an economy?

The good news is: The reverse is also true. Inclusive growth fosters stability, which is a necessary factor for continued growth. As we capacitate our people, so too do we empower them to take advantage of opportunities that arise. These citizens in turn gain the ability to make greater contributions to both government and society-at-large, helping foster an even more inclusive economy. This, ladies and gentlemen, sparks a virtuous cycle of opportunity and empowerment, and this has been the goal of our administration from the very beginning.

That is why we have made, and continue to make, massive investments into our countrymen. One of the foremost mechanisms to do so is the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Program. Under the CCT, the primary focus of families must be the education and health of their children, in order to receive the cash assistance. The CCT has also been expanded to cover families with children up to eighteen years of age. The difference is stark: In 2010, only around 786,000 households were part of the CCT program; this year, CCT households number around 4.4 million. Given an average of about five members per household, this roughly translates to 22 million Filipinos who our government is assisting. This particular investment has begun to bear fruit. Earlier this year, we celebrated the high school graduation of children belonging to the first batch of beneficiaries of the expanded CCT Program: 333,673 Filipino boys and girls who are now more equipped to realize a brighter future for themselves and for their families.

By itself, the CCT already displays the importance our administration gives to education. We also realize, however, the inclusivity can only be achieved by providing our people quality education—through which they can gain the capacity to enter careers that truly utilize their innate skills and creativity, as opposed to unskilled labor. This enables them to take on jobs that have a distinct growth path, as opposed to ones that condemn them to day-to-day subsistence such as those considered menial labor.

The extension of our 10-year basic education cycle through K to 12 reform gives Filipino youths a solid foundation, after which they can choose to pursue technical-vocational courses, or higher education, or direct employment. Whatever they choose, government has likewise implemented measures that ensure students reap the maximum benefit from their chosen course. Programs offered by state universities and colleges are monitored carefully, with substandard programs closed or phased out. We likewise exert efforts to guide students towards fields in high demand in the labor market. The same principle can be seen in the programs of our Technical Education and Skills Development Authority or TESDA. TESDA has had much success in partnering with the private sector to implement training programs. As an example of the results, let us take a look at a partnership forged with the semiconductors and electronics industry: a 91.26% employment rate has been attained for graduates of TESDA.

As we have invested in the Filipino people these past few years, so too have we been hard at work to ensure that these investments pay off—that the Philippines becomes a true regime of opportunities. From holding the corrupt accountable, to plugging leaks and holes in the system, to exercising fiscal prudence—systematic reform has been implemented to level the playing field and create an attractive climate for business. Transparency and accountability are no longer just ideals; they are realities in the Philippines.

The sea change that has swept our country has gained the administration the confidence of the world. We have climbed competitiveness indices at a tremendous pace; we have achieved investment grade—and continued to receive upgrades—from the three major credit ratings agencies. The Information Technology-Business Process Management (IT-BPM) sector now employs over a million individuals and earns nearly $19 billion in revenues. Philippine manufacturing has rebounded completely: growing by 8% from 2010 to 2014, which is significantly higher than its 3% growth from 2001 to 2009. In 2014, foreign direct investments were at an all-time high at $6.20 billion. Nowhere is this optimism more evident than in our own countrymen. Under the previous administration, from the first quarter of 2003 to the second quarter of 2010, domestic investments totaled only P1.24 trillion. On the other hand, under our watch: From the third quarter of 2010 to just the last quarter of 2014, investments by Filipino nationals stand at P2.09 trillion.

It goes without saying: Everyone, across the entire spectrum of society, is fully and completely engaged in growth—and we want to accelerate this momentum. Government is exerting the maximum effort to further engender an atmosphere conducive to business, down to our communities. In the same way that government has invested into the capacities of Filipinos through social services and education, among others, so too are we making investments to ensure that micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) reach their full potential. Our SME Roving Academy has helped more than 85,000 potential and established Filipino entrepreneurs by training them in business planning, financial management, and product pricing and costing, amongst other endeavors. In a few months’ time, by the end of 2015, 100 Go Negosyo, or business centers will be put up around the country. These will offer MSMEs services such as business registration processing, training sessions and seminars, and the establishment of market linkages. With greater regional integration on the horizon and the vast potential of e-commerce, these interventions will help our MSME sector to thrive.

In the past five years, government has likewise worked to enhance the state of Philippine infrastructure. In 2010, the infrastructure budget was equivalent to 1.8% of our Gross Domestic Product. Today, it stands at 4% of the [GDP]—and we are determined to increase it to 5% of GDP by 2016. Might I emphasize that, through the years, our national infrastructure component has been receiving a higher percentage, of a much higher GDP. A task force of different agencies is hard at work to alleviate traffic along Metro Manila’s thoroughfares. Critical transport infrastructure like seaports, airports, bus terminals, and light rail transport, continue to be upgraded, while big-ticket projects for transportation systems are in the pipeline. This will not only ensure that the Philippines becomes more competitive, but that the benefits of trade, investment, and growth are able to reach even the most far-flung communities of the Philippines.

In anticipation of greater regional integration, and in order to ensure that our long-term growth prospects remain good, we have opened up key sectors. In 2014, I signed into law the Act Allowing the Full Entry of Foreign Banks in the Philippines. Just a few months ago, I likewise signed into law the amendments to our Cabotage Law, which will improve the transport of cargo for import and export, and the Philippine Competition Act, which will penalize all forms of unfair trade and prevent monopolies.

What our government has done over the last few years has been to stimulate a virtuous cycle of empowerment, where the growth of business, industry, and the wider economy is spurred by the participation of the dynamic, innovative, and hardworking Filipino people. At every step of the way, our government is there to provide support. At every step of the way—whether we are studying the plans for a new bridge, or evaluating fiscal policy—we have always asked ourselves, “How does this redound to the benefit of our countrymen?”

This strategy and the success it has wrought in my country is proof positive of the simple fact that economic progress is inseparable from the progress of the people. Good governance works. Reform works. Even more encouraging is the fact that transformation has not just taken place in our institutions and our economy; it has taken place in the mindset of Filipinos. We see today a people who have felt the effects of good governance—and who will refuse to accept anything less. My countrymen will continue to demand integrity, accountability, and sustainable, inclusive growth even after I have stepped down from office. They will demand the continuity of the successes we have reaped.

Indeed: The task of building a stronger, more inclusive nation—or even, a stronger, more inclusive world—no longer falls only on the shoulders of those in power, or of men and women like yourselves. For our part, we Filipinos have taken on the responsibility. We will share in the work and its rewards. Today’s gathering, which dovetails perfectly with our administration’s agenda, is an excellent step in this direction, fostering even closer cooperation among all of us. I am confident that, by the end of the General Meeting, you will have helped to generate not only new ideas and policies, but also true and meaningful change.

I thank you. Good day.