Sponsorship Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III Senator of the Philippines

[Delivered on June 10, 2008]

Senator Aquino . Thank you, Mr. President. The Committee on Local Government is honored to present Committee Report No. 60, recommending the approval without amendment of House Bill No. 3224, introduced by Representative Rodolfo Plaza, entitled “An Act Providing for the Reapportionment of the Lone Legislative District of the Province of Agusan del Sur.”

Article II, Section 1 of the Constitution states that: “The Philippines is a democratic and republican State. Sovereignty resides in the people and all government authority emanates from them.”

This proposed measure seeks to ensure that the people of Agusan del Sur are duly represented in Congress and that their needs are adequately met.

Article VI, Section 5(3) of the Constitution states that: “Each legislative district shall comprise, as far as practicable, contiguous, compact and adjacent territory. Each city with a population of at least two hundred fifty thousand, or each province, shall have at least one representative.”

At present, Agusan del Sur, which is composed of one city (Bayugan City), 13 municipalities and 314 barangays, has only one congressional district. It covers a land area of 896,550 hectares.

Based on the 2007 Population Census conducted by the National Statistics Office (NSO) and as proclaimed and declared official by the President of the Philippines under Proclamation No. 1489, dated April 16,2008, Agusan del Sur has a total population of 609,447 persons.

This large population confined in a singular district has created a burden not only on their representative but, most of all, on the people of Agusan del Sur who must compete with each other for the attention of their representative and for the resources to which all of them are entitled.

The people of Agusan del Sur deserve an additional seat in the House of Representatives. They have complied with all the constitutional requirements that entail the proposed division of the existing lone district in their province.

To deprive them of this right is to forestall progress that can ensue in their respective locales with a representative that will be more focused on a smaller area of responsibility.

Thank you, Mr. President.

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Aquino, B. S. III (2008). Sponsorship speech of Senator Aquino. Record of the  Senate , 4(87) , 593.