Sponsorship Speech of Honorable Benigno Simeon Aquino III Senator of the Philippines On Local Holiday Bills

At the instance of Senator Aquino, there being no objection, the Body approved the insertion of his sponsorship speech into the Journal and Record of the Senate.

Following is the text of Senator Aquino’s speech:

LOCAL HOLIDAY BILLS

The Committee on Local Government is honored to present Committee Report Nos. 250, 251, and 252 recommending the approval of the following local holiday bills:

We recognize the need to observe local holidays that remind citizens of the legacy of their ancestors and what they have achieved together as a people. It is hoped that by celebrating these collective achievements, the people of Romblon, Cagayan de Oro and Victorias will be inspired to continue working together for an even brighter future.

Each locality is separated from others by their own distinct and colorful history. This uniqueness entitles localities to celebrate key historic milestones that are a source of pride for their constituents.

The authority to declare local holidays is vested in the President, through a presidential proclamation, or in Congress, through the enactment of a law.

Chapter 7, Book 1, Section 27 of Executive Order No. 292 (Administrative Code of 1987) states that “the President may proclaim any local special day for a particular date, group or place.”

Under the authority of the President, it is necessary to declare local holidays every year. This has led to repetitive declarations of the same holidays every year.

In contrast, Congress sets in stone the need to observe such local holidays through its power to legislate. This will help to eliminate the recurring and seemingly wasteful practice of annual holiday declarations. More importantly, it puts into practice the democratic principle of laws being of the people, for the people, and by the people.

In view of this, we therefore seek the approval of the abovementioned bills to place these holidays permanently in the consciousness of the people and to immortalize pivotal local events that helped to transform, strengthen and unify Filipino society.

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Aquino, B. S. III (2009). Sponsorship speech of Senator Aquino. Journal of the Senate , 2, 1709-1710.