Sponsorship Speech of Honorable Benigno Simeon Aquino III Senator of the Philippines On Senate Bill No. 1370

[Released on September 30, 2008]

The 1987 Constitution expressly states that “the State shall regulate the relations between workers and employers, recognizing the right of labor to its just share in the fruits of production and the right of enterprise to reasonable return on investments, and to its expansion of its growth.”

Such an ideal can be realized if companies share a reasonable portion of their profits with the people who help achieve them: their employees.

Profit-sharing, a system in which the people who work for a company receive a direct share of the profits, can help improve performance and productivity in a business organization the way basic salary systems cannot.

Small local firms, such as One Network Bank, a network of over 70 rural banks in Mindanao, benefit from profit-sharing. In a 2007 statement, the bank’s president, Mr. Alex Buenaventura, mentioned that One Network Bank’s employees received an additional 15% of their salary in 2005 and 26% more in 2006. This improvement was largely due to their company’s productivity incentives program which he said, encouraged his employees to be more conscious of the bank’s performance, and therefore more actively involved in achieving their company’s targets.

This evidence of growth suggests that through profit-shaking, workers are endowed with a greater stake in the outcome of their organization. Their entitlement to a reasonable share of the company’s profits tends to heighten their level of participation in increasing the firm’s overall productivity.

Senate Bill No. 1370 or “An Act Granting An Annual Productivity Incentive To All Workers in the Private Sector, Establishing Mechanisms For Its Implementation, And For Other Purposes” is a recognition of the indispensable contribution of the labor force to the success of the business enterprise. It seeks to provide additional measurers for the mutual benefit and industrial harmony between labor and management, which are not subsumed in the extend law, Republic Act No. 6971 or the “Productivity Incentives Act of 1990.”

Through this legislative initiative, workers can be expected to work harder as they assured of a just compensation for their labor. They will be encouraged to help their company sustain long-term growth, as this in turn, will benefit them. They will be empowered to live up to the core values of fairness and equity, which the company promotes by providing productivity incentives to its workforce.

This bill upholds the worker’s rights to improve their quality of life as well as the management’s rights to a reasonable return on their investments. It is a vital tool in changing the role of business enterprises from mere profit machines to socially responsible agents that place a high premium on the contributions of their people.

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Aquino, B. S. III (2008). Sponsorship speech of Senator Aquino. Journal of the Senate , 1 , 590-591.