Sponsorship Speech of Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III Senator of the Philippines

[Delivered on August 27, 2008]

Senator Aquino . Thank you, Mr. President.

Mr. President, distinguished colleagues, the Committee on Local Government is honored to present Committee Report No. 91, recommending the approval, with amendments, of House Bill No. 91, recommending the approval, with amendments, of House Bill No. 3389, introduced by Representative Aurelio Gonzales, Jr., entitled, “An Act Creating the Bacolor Rehabilitation Council and Appropriating Funds Therefor.”

The U.S. Geological Survey considers the 1991 eruption of Mt. Pinatubo as the second largest volcanic eruption of the 21st century. Successful warnings and early evacuation precluded a potentially massive loss of life. However, the aftermath of the eruption, especially lahars triggered by strong rains, have caused persistent threats to life, livelihood and property in the communities surrounding the volcano.

Damage to crops, infrastructure and personal property in Central Luzon totaled at least P10.1 billion in 1991 and an additional P1.9 billion in 1992. The business sector lost an estimated amount of P454 million in 1991 and an additional P37 million in 1992. The actual destruction, coupled with the continuing threat of lahars, had severely disrupted the otherwise flourishing economy in the region.

The peripheral town most affected by the eruption is Bacolor, 39 kilometers southeast of Mount Pinatubo’s summit in the province of Pampanga.

Before the disaster, Bacolor was an agricultural town conveniently nestled in between the urban hubs of San Fernando, Guagua and Angeles City.

When Mount Pinatubo erupted, Bacolor instantly became a ghost town. Between 1991 and 1997, a series of lahars along the Pasig-Potrero River progressively buried Bacolor under almost 10 meters of sandy deposits. Houses, schools and utility services were destroyed, forcing 95% of the population to relocate in four resettlement sites.

Today, 17 years after the eruption, Bacolor is still standing. The threat of another lahar devastation there barely exists, as the town proper had been elevated at least six meters by the lahars. Any future lahars would likely skirt this high ground, making Bacolor less vulnerable to lahars than any of the towns around it.

The people of Bacolor survived the wrath of Pinatubo. They are now ready to move back and rebuild their lives.

House Bill No. 3389 seeks to set up a rehabilitation council that will spearhead and coordinate the rehabilitation efforts in Bacolor, Pampanga. This team, composed of multi-sectoral representatives at the local level, will be implemented through a special fund subsumed in this proposed measure.

The forestalled progress in Bacolor has deprived its people for so long of their fundamental needs. Having withstood the challenges wrought by Pinatubo, they more than deserve their fair share of the benefits a once thriving community had afforded them. Let us support the, as they venture into the concluding phase of their epic struggle against one of the worst disasters of the last century.

Thank you, Mr. President.

The President Pro Tempore . The Majority Leader is recognized.

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Aquino, B. S. III (2008). Sponsorship speech of Senator Aquino. Record of the Senate , 1(12) , 397-398.