Sponsorship Speech of Honorable Benigno Simeon Aquino III Senator of the Philippines On House Bill No. 3206

[Released on May 18, 2009]

In presenting House Bill No. 3206 for the Body’s consideration, Senator Aquino delivered the following speech:

The Committee on Local Government is honored to present Committee Report No. 231, recommending the approval with amendments of House Bill No. 3206, introduced by Representative Glenda Ecleo, entitled “An Act Amending Section 1 of Republic Act No. 6769, Entitled An Act Creating the Municipality of San Jose in the Province of Dinagat Islands.”

Section 442 (b) of the Local Government Code states that the territorial jurisdiction of a newly created municipality shall be properly identified by metes and bounds.

The Municipality of San Jose in the Province of Surigao del Norte was created by virtue of Republic Act No. 6769 on November 15, 1989.

In the course of finalizing the town planning and zoning of the municipality with the technical assistance of the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLRUB), the actual survey conducted reveals an inconsistency in the narrative and technical descriptions defining the boundary of two municipalities, namely San Jose and Basilica.

Such an irregularity affects the Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA) share of the said municipality.

In order to correct this, a joint session was conducted by the head officials of both municipalities who agreed to correct and clearly define the boundary. This correction, which rectifies the technical description of the municipal boundary of the Municipality of San Jose in the Province of Dinagat Islands, was discussed in the hearing of the Senate Committee on Local Government last April 29, 2008.

The people of San Jose are responsible for the resources that exist within their jurisdiction. They are also entitled to a share of the internal revenue allotment that is commensurate to the size of the land they occupy. A well-defined physical boundary is therefore sought to prevent boundary disputes from arising and to award the right amount of government funding that is due them.

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Aquino, B. S. III (2009). Sponsorship speech of Senator Aquino. Journal of the Senate , 3 , 2208.