Statement of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the joint press conference during the state visit of President Francois Hollande of the Republic of France

[Delivered at the Palace Grounds, Malacañan Palace, on February 26, 2015]

Your Excellency:

A great physical distance has always separated the French and Filipino peoples. Yet, whether in the time of our forebears or today, that distance never posed a barrier to a sense of kinship. This is rooted in the inspiration that Filipinos have drawn from France, as your people confronted problems as they arose from the time of your revolution. A century after the stirring events of 1789, our founding fathers read about them, and dreamed of establishing a nation on the basis of liberté, égalité, et fraternité.

As history would have it, this bond between our peoples has had the advantage of not being complicated by negative feelings arising from a colonial relationship. We have thus been able to build excellent relations on a higher plane: that of ideals and seeing the best of what your nation and its people represent. For this reason, we welcome this historic occasion: the first visit of a French Head of State to the Philippines, since relations were formally established in 1947.

France and its people have expressed their fraternal solidarity with our nation on many different occasions: from the assistance you extended during Typhoon Haiyan, for which we reiterate our appreciation, to the agreements we signed in September last year in Paris. These agreements signify our decision to elevate our bilateral relationship to one of enhanced partnership, thus promising to open more doors of opportunity for our respective peoples.

This is likewise what we have achieved on this occasion. Towards deepening the engagement between our countries, President Hollande and I engaged in fruitful and meaningful discussions on enhancing bilateral cooperation.

A significant point of discussion revolved around heightened people-to-people exchanges, which consequently foster and create unique opportunities for our countrymen. Towards this end, we have signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Tourism Cooperation. This will allow for the formal sharing of knowledge and best practices in ecotourism and sustainable tourism development, management of tourism destinations, product development, and skills improvement of employees, among others. It is also my hope that this will encourage more of our friends from France to follow the footsteps of President Hollande, visit the Philippines, and see for themselves how it is more fun in our country.

We also welcomed the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Higher Education and Research, which will foster closer collaboration between students, faculty, experts, researchers, and administrators from both our countries, as well as promote joint research in various fields.

In line with our mutual resolve to strengthen our economic engagement, I also conveyed to President Hollande an invitation for French companies to explore investing in the Philippines, particularly in the aerospace, IT-BPM, renewable energy, and infrastructure sectors. Filipino workers have proven themselves to possess the skills, loyalty, and drive necessary to spur any industry to success, and given the economic resurgence that our country has experienced these last few years, there is no more opportune time than today to invest in the Philippines. French companies such as Teleperformance and Schneider Electric, both of which already have established operations, can attest to this; they chose to bet on the Filipino people, and that bet has paid off.

I also took the opportunity to express to President Hollande my pleasure with the participation of some French companies in our government’s thrust to boost the state of local infrastructure and public transport. Our collective efforts have resulted in the signing of three agreements, which we witnessed earlier: the Letter of Confirmation for the Financing Agreement for the Cebu Bus Rapid Transit Project, the Ceremonial Signing of the Business Agreement for the management, operation, and maintenance of the Subic Clark Tarlac Expressway between the Manila North Tollways Corporation and the Bases Conversion and Development Authority, and the Letter of Award for the Manila Light Rail Transit Line 1 Extension Project between the Light Rail Manila Corporation, Bouygues Travaux Publics, and Alstom Transport.

Indeed: the enhanced partnership between France and the Philippines has already redounded to great benefits for our people. At the same time, our discussions also covered regional and global issues of mutual concern.

We reiterated the importance of maintaining peace and stability in Southeast Asia and promoting maritime security, freedom of navigation and the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with international law, including UNCLOS. We likewise agreed to intensify the call on the international community to work together in order to fight terrorism in all its forms, as a common scourge to mankind.

President Hollande and I also discussed other issues, which though they may not appear to be grave threats, also have serious implications for humanity. For instance, the Philippines considers the protection and sustainable management of our natural resources as one of our foremost priorities. I informed the President of the reforms our country has undertaken to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing. Towards this end, we signed the Declaration of Intention Related to the Protection of the Environment and the Sustainable Development of Marine Resources of the Philippines.

The importance of protecting our environment points to a larger, graver concern: climate change and its adverse effects on the world. In the United Nations Climate Summit last year, the Philippines spoke strongly about the need for each country to do everything they can to address climate change. This is what we have done: from developing alternative sustainable energy sources, to undertaking a massive re-greening program, while intensifying an anti-illegal logging campaign.

Both our countries committed to work closely together during the 21 st Session of the Conference of the Parties, or COP21, to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change for the adoption of a new agreement that is universal, equitable and ambitious. In a short while, we will launch the Manila Call to Action on Climate Change and President Hollande and I will have the chance to speak further on this excellent example of the partnership between our countries.

These expressions of solidarity leave me optimistic about a future of closer ties, heightened cooperation, and enhanced partnership between our two countries: not only in helping each other in times of need, but also in pursuing opportunities that will further our relations; not only in fulfilling our responsibilities to the French and Filipino people, but also in combating the great challenges that our world faces today. Indeed: the Philippines and France will stand together, for mutual benefit, peace, and prosperity for all.

Thank you, and good evening.

__________________________________________

Related:

Toast of President Aquino for the state dinner in honor of President Hollande of France

Statement of President Aquino at the launch of the Manila Call to Action on Climate Change