[youtube]https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o8zNNBp_hB4[/youtube]

Statement of the Honorable Benigno S. Aquino III, President of the Philippines, upon his return from a visit to South Korea for the 25th Association of Southeast Asian Nations – Republic of Korea (ASEAN-ROK) Commemorative Summit

It was truly no joke what we went through as Typhoon Ruby entered and exited our country. We were even feeling a bit unwell while monitoring Ruby. If the typhoon had truly hit the Philippines badly, we likely would not have been able to personally participate in the 25th ASEAN-Republic of Korea Commemorative Summit. Thank God the typhoon’s damage to us wasn’t that great. But as we boarded the plane yesterday, Secretaries Cesar Purisima and Greg Domingo already shared a series of good news with us. Upon our arrival in Korea, the series of good news we carried with us increased even further. All the fatigue was truly worth it for our countrymen.

First good news, I think you’ve all heard: a new credit-rating upgrade from Moody’s landed, proving that it was truly right to bet on the Filipino. Second, the Millennium Challenge Corporation once again chose the Philippines to undergo another compact; this is truly a vote of confidence in our reforms on the straight and narrow path, and it will also serve as a launching pad for many more initiatives against poverty. Third, the favorable ruling regarding our case against Fraport for NAIA Terminal 3 also came out. This case, this was already round two, and we won that case again. Of course, we cannot fail to mention the positive decision of the Supreme Court regarding the Coco Levy Fund. This is good news this Christmas season for our partners in the coconut sector.

Now, our challenge is to match these good news with more vigorous implementation of programs and projects aimed at making the transformation in society permanent. In all our activities, our focus is clear: no Filipino should be left behind. As we went to Korea, we really maximized the opportunities it offered to advance the welfare of our Bosses.

In our meeting with the Honorable President Park Geun-hye, she presented the interests and steps of her country to further strengthen our good relations. President Park informed us that there are Korean companies interested in participating in large-scale projects in our country, in addition to those that have already invested in our economy. She also shared South Korea's expertise in port development, in the construction of coastal breakwaters, and other capabilities related to infrastructure construction. We will not refuse to share this skill and knowledge, especially since it comes from a country that is close to us and is truly admired in these fields. Let's add more good news: According to President Park, a $500 million framework agreement loan is coming from them for development projects in our country. These are concessional loans; the interest rate offered to us is very good, and frankly, they are just helping us with our development projects.

South Korea also offered support for the development of Mindanao and other parts of our country. They are also planning to implement the infrastructure development program of the Korea International Cooperation Agency for Mindanao, along with the continuation of their programs for capacity-building for the Bangsamoro.

Regarding Yolanda, President Park said again, in addition to sending their Araw troops, they also allocated five million dollars in aid which they shared after Typhoon Yolanda struck, and there is another 20 million dollars in aid for the rehabilitation of the victims of Typhoon Yolanda. All of this will greatly contribute to our 'build back better' efforts in communities that are recovering from past disasters.

This is the fruit of a close and deep relationship: mutual support anchored in the desire to empower each other for the good of the majority or all.

While we were there, we also took the opportunity to meet with the leaders of our brother countries in ASEAN, who conveyed their messages of support for our preparations to face Typhoon Ruby. We shared with them our experiences during disasters, as well as our continuously improving capabilities in responding to calamities.

You know, it is truly heartening that all members of ASEAN simultaneously expressed their so-called solidarity and support for what we went through at the hands of Ruby.

We discussed effective ways to address and adapt to the effects of climate change. We reiterate: It is the obligation of every country, large or small, modern or still developing, to contribute to avoid the severe damage of climate change.

We also saw the Exhibition on Public Governance organized by the government of South Korea. Their theme truly captured the essence of governance: “Better Governance, Happier Citizens.” We were truly impressed by the innovations they are promoting for their citizens. There was, for example, their so-called e-passport system or instant passport system, which is part of their e-governance agenda to make government work more efficient. This is a good model, I think. Also featured was the initiative of their National Disaster Management Institute. The studies conducted here, they share with various projects, such as their Northern Mindanao Project. This aims to help our country with flash-flood forecasting and establish a warning system.

The last item on our schedule was a meeting with the head of Korea Aerospace Industries; we were shown one of the FA-50s, similar to the twelve FA-50s we purchased. Next year, the first two units of these modern aircraft will arrive in our country for our Armed Forces. In the face of these modern facilities and equipment of other countries, we are even more encouraged to pursue our goal: to promote a reliable military, towards more effective service to the Filipino people.

It is true: With each visit we make to other countries, it becomes increasingly clear: the whole world truly has high confidence in the Philippines; that we are now capable of keeping pace and cooperating to achieve common progress in our region. Let us continue to strengthen our contribution to further improve the state of the country, and of our citizens. In the remaining time of our term, with the guidance of the Lord, and with the continued support of our people, we will do everything we can to deliver more meaningful service to our beloved Bosses.

Good evening to all of you. Thank you very much.