Statement of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the press statement for the official visit of Prayut Chan-o-cha, Prime Minister of Thailand

[Delivered at the Palace Grounds, Malacañan Palace, on August 28, 2015]

Your Excellency Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha, Profssor Naraporn Chan-o-cha, members of the press, ladies and gentlemen:

On behalf of the Filipino people, I wish to extend a warm welcome to Your Excellency and to the entire Thai delegation on your first official visit to our country. It is my hope that, while your stay here may be brief, you have enjoyed nothing less than the profound hospitality and openness of our countrymen, which are among the reasons our visitors say that it is more fun in the Philippines.

Thailand is a fellow founding member of ASEAN and one of the Philippines’ oldest friends and partners in the region. For more than six decades now, the Philippines and Thailand have demonstrated the high value we place upon our relationship. We have concluded numerous agreements and enhanced our cooperation in areas ranging from air services, to defense; from agriculture and energy, to tourism and culture, amongst many others—all of which redound to the benefit of our peoples.

In 2014, for example, Thailand was the Philippines’ eighth largest trading partner. Bilateral trade between our countries has reached more than $5 billion, and more of our people are discovering the beauty of each other’s country through expanded tourism exchanges. Indeed: These reflect the deep affinity between our peoples, one that is the product of centuries of interaction.

Even beyond our economic engagements, Thailand has proven to be a dependable and steadfast friend in times of need. For instance: in the aftermath of Typhoon Hagupit just last year, Thailand generously extended to us $100,000 in financial assistance and 500 metric tons of rice. Such an action only demonstrates the solidarity of your people with mine. On this note, please accept the deepest gratitude of my government and my people.

Might I also take this opportunity to express our condolences to the people of Thailand for the recent tragedy that occurred in your capital. As always, we Filipinos will stand with our brothers, the Thai people.

Ladies and gentlemen, this very solidarity between the Philippines and Thailand was reaffirmed in the meeting I had with the Prime Minister. Our discussions specifically focused on trade and investments, security, and the strengthening of our people-to-people ties.

In terms of investment activity, I noted that Philippine companies such as San Miguel Corporation, Liwayway Food Industries Company Limited, Goldilocks, and Monde Nissin have established their presence in Thailand, while Thai enterprises have likewise opened doors of opportunity for my countrymen. Siam Cement Group, Charoen Pokphand Foods Philippines Corporation, and the Dusit International are only some of the companies that have active operations here on our shores. We took note of how these companies have continued to expand in our respective countries, because of the sustained support that our governments and peoples have given them.

In terms of security, the Prime Minister and I also welcomed the signing of the Terms of Reference for the Working Group of the Philippine Army and Royal Thai Army in April this year. In the same way that the Prime Minister was instrumental in strengthening the partnership between our Armed Forces during his time as Chief of the Royal Thai Army, so too does he continue to work with us in order to forge the kind of defense relations that enables us to serve our peoples in a more holistic manner. We are confident that this agreement will further strengthen our defense and security cooperation for the welfare of our peoples and of our brothers in ASEAN.

Our two nations also committed to work towards the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Cooperation in Combating Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs, which reiterates our shared belief that our peoples must be protected from dangerous drugs. As part of our efforts, coordinated operations between Philippine and Thai agencies will be conducted; and through this process, we look forward to sharing information between our relevant law enforcement agencies.

As regards fostering our people-to-people ties, both the Prime Minister and I recognize that education is of prime importance in developing the abilities of our peoples, so that they themselves may have the wherewithal to fulfill their aspirations for their families, their communities, and the future we share as brother nations. This is the principle behind our continued work towards the signing of the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) on the Exchanges of Professional Teachers. Through this, we will have the opportunity to further enhance the capabilities and competencies of both our Filipino and Thai teachers.

We likewise took the opportunity to convey our gratitude to Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, through Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha, for including three Philippine schools in the Collaboration Project on Children and Youth Development. Without doubt, this will bolster the capacities of our institutions to further empower our youth.

Finally, we wish to congratulate Thailand for its successful term as the country coordinator for ASEAN-China relations, as well as thank Thailand for their support in our country’s efforts, namely in the United Nations and in other international organizations. Thailand has truly been a reliable companion of the Philippines in promoting understanding, peace, and stability not only within our community and region, but throughout the larger community of nations.

Mr. Prime Minister, in my remaining months in office, I can only assure you that Thailand will continue to enjoy the friendship of a Philippines that aspires to build a just, prosperous, and inclusive ASEAN Community, one that is a wellspring of opportunity for all peoples, one that continues on the straight path to stability and progress, and one in which no citizen is left behind.

Thank you. Good day.

____________________

Toast of President Aquino during the luncheon in honor of the Prime Minister of Thailand

Learn about the diplomatic relations between the Philippines and Thailand