Statement of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At a joint press conference with Prime Minister Stephen Harper of Canada

[Delivered in Ottawa, Canada, on May 8, 2015]

Mr. Prime Minister, please accept my gratitude for the hospitality the people and government of Canada have extended to me and my delegation on my first state visit to your country. The warmth and solidarity you have demonstrated is testament to the truth my mother spoke of 26 years ago, when she came to your shores as the leader of a free Filipino people: Cory Aquino on Canada: ours is a friendship that is old and tested . Canada was one of the first nations to give recognition to my mother’s government; and I am told that the Canadian ambassador to the Philippines at that time was the very first to present his credentials to her.

That friendship which we enjoy has grown deeper through generations. In the time of need, Canada was there, a partner ready to offer humanitarian assistance to the Philippines. As a concrete example: We saw this in the aftermaths of Typhoons Haiyan and Glenda. For Haiyan, in particular, your government deployed personnel from the Canadian Armed Forces to deliver much needed aid, provide medical care, and complete construction projects in devastated areas. The work done has helped our local communities get back on their feet. Canada has likewise never wavered in its commitment to our peace process, and your determination to see a peaceful and prosperous Mindanao, a Land of Promises Fulfilled, is truly encouraging.

Meanwhile, Canada’s support in helping local governments in the Philippines simplify their processes and implement economic development plans have helped communities maximize their potential as hubs of growth. Canada is also a partner in fully realizing the capabilities of the Filipino youth in advancing growth. A specific program that demonstrates this is Jobstart Philippines, which shows immense promise in its present stage. Just last week, I was able to attend one of Jobstart’s forums, which allowed me to see firsthand how this program has helped our Department of Labor and Employment, our local governments, and the private sector actively engage each other in developing the skills of Filipino high school graduates, so that they can find jobs in the soonest possible time.

Without doubt: The support that Canada has shown through such initiatives merits nothing less than the heartfelt gratitude of my people. Mr. Prime Minister, on behalf of my countrymen, I thank you for all of your country’s efforts.

Today, through this visit, we celebrate that special bond between our peoples, and thus aim to broaden the horizon of meaningful opportunities for our citizens and our region.

On the economic front, the Philippines expresses its appreciation as regards Canada’s offer of assistance through the Canadian Trade and Development Facility, which enables our Small-and-Medium Enterprises to better access the Canadian market. We also look forward to the commencement of exploratory discussions on a possible free trade agreement, the review of our bilateral investment agreement, and the convening of the Joint Working Group on Economic, Trade and Investment. Such steps will indeed redound to the benefit of our respective economies and societies.

I also look forward to sharing with the Prime Minister the prospects for growth in the Philippines, particularly in our PPP infrastructure sector, where Canadian investors may wish to capitalize on. I believe our friends in the Canadian business community will find delight in knowing that Canada has designated the Philippines as a priority emerging market, and I speak for my countrymen in saying that we are extremely eager to work with you in making trade and investment activity between our nations more fun, more inclusive, and ultimately, more beneficial for all parties.

As APEC economies, Canada and the Philippines share the belief that, in an era of rapid development, a unified determination with regard to each other’s growth is key if we truly wish to sustain, if not just build on, our momentum.

The Mutual Accountability Framework, which was signed earlier, sets in stone our shared desire to support broad-based and sustainable economic growth in the Philippines. This goes hand-in-hand with Canada’s decision to name the Philippines as a country of focus for development assistance—for which we are also truly grateful.

And just as we work to improve the lives of my countrymen at home, we also work to improve the plight of Filipinos living and working here in Canada. In Vancouver, we will sign a Memorandum of Understanding as regards Human Resource Deployment and Development in the province of British Columbia. We also welcome the conclusion of a bilateral instrument on Occupational Safety and Health, which strengthens labor cooperation between our two nations.

Finally, I wish to express the Philippines’ appreciation for the position taken by the G7 Foreign Ministers’ Declaration on Maritime Security this year. We welcome the growing consensus across the international community: a rules-based approach must be observed in managing maritime disputes in the sea to the west of my country, a sea known by many names. It is in our interest to uphold the freedom of navigation and over-flight in the South China Sea, a region that is of vital importance not only to Southeast Asia, but also to the rest of the global community.

Prime Minister Harper, I do not exaggerate when I say that the Philippines is grateful to have Canada as a reliable friend and partner. It is my belief that, as neighbors connected by the Pacific, our two nations can achieve so much more by standing shoulder-to-shoulder on the path of inclusiveness, openness, and cooperation. I believe we can harness the full potential of this partnership for the benefit of our peoples, our region, and the generations to come.

Thank you, and good day.