Toast of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the state luncheon in honor of Prayut Chan-o-cha, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Thailand, and his wife Naraporn Chan-o-cha

[Delivered at Malacañan Palace, on August 28, 2015]

Your Excellency, sawasdeekap . I’m trying to practice a little. [Laughter] I hope I don’t mispronounce anything. Nayok Ratthramontri.

On behalf of the Filipino people, it is a great honor to welcome you and your wife, Madam Naraporn, and your esteemed delegation on your first Official Visit to the Philippines as Prime Minister.

However, this is not the first time that Your Excellency has come to our country, in order to strengthen the relationship between our two nations. In December 2012, as Chief of the Royal Thai Army, you led a delegation of officials from the Royal Thai Army on a visit to the Philippines. This visit came just a few days after Your Excellency personally turned over $30,000 to our embassy representatives in Thailand for the victims of Typhoon Bopha—even as the Royal Thai Army expressed its willingness to lend assistance to our recovery operations. We would feel your country’s generosity and solidarity again, in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan and of the other calamities we have had to overcome. In the same vein, when many areas of Thailand were ravaged by severe flooding in 2011, the Philippines likewise extended financial assistance to the victims.

These expressions of support are but contemporary manifestations of the long history between our peoples. I am told, for instance, that lively trade between our countries predates the 1600s. Today, Thais and Filipinos are often mistaken for each other. In the streets of Bangkok, our people are often told, “Philippine-Thai same-same.” We see this even in our cultures. Our people are known for their friendly and cheerful natures, and their hospitality. We even have similar preferences in terms of our cuisine.  We use fish sauce—known as patis to us, and nam-pla to you—and coconut milk extensively in cooking. The Filipino snack nata-de-coco, or coconut jelly, has even found its way to bottles of your popular mogu-mogu drink. We also share a love for the same kinds of fruit. If I may share: When I was very much younger, I knew of only one product exported from Thailand: small oranges that were known as mandarin oranges. Today, there are many families who specifically buy fruits that Thailand export: lanzones to us, or longkong to you, and santol or kraton among many others. Of course, the past years have seen your country’s products and culture gaining renown all over the world: from food, to garments, to automobiles, and even to martial arts.

I must submit: Thailand has surpassed our country in terms of economic vibrancy. Even your unemployment rate is something to marvel at—at 0.88%. For our part, our government is working to reach the same, and I have every confidence that our partnership will contribute to our mutual growth. Aside from political and economic ties, our cooperative engagements now include exchanges in defense and security, tourism, air services, culture, agriculture, and law enforcement, amongst others.

Your Excellency, 66 years ago, we formalized our engagement through a Treaty of Friendship. Today, our two countries have agreed to “Partner for Prosperity,” a move that will certainly benefit our peoples who already regard each other as brothers. For instance, bilateral trade between our nations is robust, while tourism exchanges are growing. The Philippines and Thailand were among the founders of ASEAN, contributing to the core principles of ASEAN centrality—which we uphold to this day, not only through the realization of the ASEAN Economic Community, but also through our role in shaping the region’s security architecture.

Looking back on what we have achieved together, I can say, with all certainty: We look to the horizon with great optimism. Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, on this note, I wish to invite you and everyone to join me in a toast:

To the continued good health and happiness of His Majesty King Bhumibol Adulyadej;

To the continued good health and success of Your Excellency Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha, and your entire family;

To the enduring friendship between the Thai and Filipino peoples, now partners for prosperity determined to work for the progress, peace, and stability of each other’s nations and our region;

I understand you say Chaiyo , and we say Mabuhay : Chaiyo!

____________________

Statement of President Aquino during the official visit of the Prime Minister of Thailand

Learn about the diplomatic relations between the Philippines and Thailand