Toast of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines For the state dinner in honor of President Francois Hollande of France

[Delivered at Malacañan Palace on February 26, 2015]

Mr. President, it does me and my nation honor to return the courtesies you demonstrated when I visited Paris last September. Like myself, my mother was once a guest of your nation, when France welcomed her for the bicentennial of the French Revolution in 1989. One can say that the people of France share a kinship with my own people, based on principles. Minister Laurent Fabius, who was already with the French Government at the time, might recall that after the 1986 EDSA People Power Revolution, France was one of the first nations to extend recognition to my mother’s newly-formed government.

Today, I welcome you as the first President of France to come to our shores. Your visit indeed marks a historic moment in our countries’ enduring friendship.

In Paris, we celebrated the renaissance of our nations’ partnership. It was marked by our determination to find new avenues of cooperation in security and to solidify our shared resolve as regards climate change adaptation. We recognize full well that these serve as vital strategies towards our common security and prosperity.

This much is true: As leaders of our respective peoples, you and I are bound by fraternité; ours is a brotherhood pledged to protecting the principles that serve as the firm foundation of our nations: the belief in the democratic way of life, the pursuit of justice and the preservation of one’s rights, and the promotion of the rule of law. Thus, I could not help but be appalled when I heard of the tragedy that struck the Charlie Hebdo offices in Paris. Such savagery should have no place in this world, and my countrymen and I are in full support of the people of France, as you uphold human dignity and work to protect the blessings of democracy.

Whether in denying haven to those who seek to undermine freedom and justice through extremist means, in fighting for peace and order, or in building a world that is more resilient and more inclusive, your efforts truly reflect your deep commitment to the principles that we share. I assure you: I am one with you in treading this path towards a better, more sustainable future for both our peoples and the wider community of nations.

With that, may I ask you and everyone to join me in a toast:

To the good health, well-being, and success of Your Excellency;

To the deepening friendship and solidarity between the peoples of France and the Philippines;

And to the realization of our shared aspirations for our citizens, our regions, and the rest of humanity.

Mr. President, in our respective languages, we greet friends by wishing them long lives. Tonight, we say: vive la France  or in Filipino: Mabuhay ang Pransya.

____________________________

Related:

Statement of President Aquino at the launch of the Manila Call to Action on Climate Change

Statement of President Aquino at the joint press conference during the state visit of President Hollande of France