Toast of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines For the luncheon in honor of Dr. Jim Yong Kim, president of the World Bank Group

First of all, it is my honor to welcome you, Dr. Kim, on your first visit to the Philippines as president of the World Bank Group. While your visit may be brief, I do hope that you have had enough time to experience the warmth and hospitality that our people are known for, and to witness firsthand the large-scale transformation of the Philippines.

Dr. Kim, you and I share the aspiration that is fittingly encapsulated in the World Bank’s vision: a world free of poverty.

I submit that—in either of our positions—working towards such a vision is a difficult task, especially given the circumstances we had to contend with when we assumed our respective offices. We were confronted by the ever-changing dynamics of an uncertain world economy, the persisting reality of inequality, and the clamor of peoples all around the world for a more inclusive economic system—one that leaves no one behind.

These circumstances, however, failed to discourage us. In fact, these made us all the more determined to end the scourge of poverty. This is because we know full well that the challenge of development can only be hurdled if we have the resolve to pursue much-needed reform, and encourage even more people to walk alongside us along the path to progress.

Dr. Kim, you yourself have demonstrated this in your own work as a medical doctor, public health expert, and leader—whether in finding low-cost methods to treat infectious diseases in developing nations, in helping combat HIV and AIDS throughout the world, or even in accelerating and directing the World Bank’s efforts towards improving economic growth and stability, public health, transparency, and innovation in vulnerable countries and communities.

Such efforts are most clearly seen in the World Bank’s programs in the Philippines. They have helped enhance our capacity to strengthen public-private partnerships and contributed to the improvement of livelihood opportunities for vulnerable urban communities. The World Bank also continues to assist my countrymen affected by Typhoon Haiyan in rebuilding their lives and communities; expand health services for those in the margins; and also extends support to my administration in creating mechanisms fundamental to realizing the objectives of the Open Government Partnership, particularly through the Open Data Philippines initiative.

All these, without doubt, complement my administration’s strategy: to do right by our people, accelerate meaningful economic growth, and instill a culture of integrity, excellence, and inclusiveness. Indeed, the partnership we share serves as a firm foundation as my country works to build back better, and as we open more doors of opportunity for the Filipino people. And I look forward to deepening this partnership with you, Dr. Kim and the entire World Bank Group.

On this note, may I ask everyone to now rise and join me in a toast:

Firstly, to the greater success of Dr. Jim Yong Kim and the World Bank Group;

Second, to the further growth and development of the Filipino people and of all nations of goodwill;

And lastly, to the realization of our shared vision of a world that is free from poverty and injustice, a world in which no one is left behind.