Toast of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At a dinner hosted by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe

[Delivered at Akasaka Guest House, Tokyo, on June 4, 2015]

It has been my fortune to work with a lot of leaders, who, when confronted with how things were, were unafraid to challenge the status quo by asking: “Why not?” With your indulgence, allow me to explain what I mean by this.

During the early parts of our campaign for the presidency, I told those who supported me that, if I were given the privilege of holding the highest office in the land, I would not simply take my turn on a merry-go-round that goes round and round, and therefore goes nowhere—or at worst, exacerbates the conditions that we would inherit. Instead I proposed that, if elected, our task should be to lead our people towards greater heights by battling the status quo and curing the infirmities it represents. Our responsibility would be to seek the improvement of our people’s lot in life. In the Philippines, we have worked to transform our society, living by the principle that inclusive growth is the end-all and be-all of our efforts. For this reason, we pursued widespread reform, even if this entailed rattling the rice bowls and upsetting the comfortable conditions of those who benefited from the old and broken systems.

In Prime Minister Abe, we see the same kind of leader who returned to his exalted office with the same commitment to do right by his people, even if it meant disrupting the status quo, a very risky and perhaps revolutionary act, perhaps most especially when we speak of Japanese society. As a leader, he has faced and continues to face so many complex challenges, as we all do in this ever changing-world: from the threat of pandemics, to global climate change, and even to tensions and instabilities emerging in various parts of the world. He knows full well what must be undertaken in order to effectively serve his people, and the boldness of his leadership has inspired even greater trust and confidence in what we can achieve as partners on the path to equitable progress.

Mr. Prime Minister, I have to admit that, despite Japan having to contend with its fair share of challenges, your country has been nothing less than a dependable partner and friend to my people. We deeply appreciate the constancy of the support the Japanese people and their government have demonstrated over the past 59 years. Even when there were times in the past when our former leaders could have utilized the assistance extended to our country more judiciously, Japan’s commitment remained unshakeable.

Thus, it is an unarguable fact that the relationship between our peoples is characterized by an intense solidarity. One can also say that this solidarity is exemplified by the automatic assistance we extend to each other in times of natural calamities. Whether in being our biggest country contributor of official development assistance; in sharing your expertise in areas of economic and infrastructure development; or in working with us to strengthen our people-to-people interactions by means of education and youth exchange programs, Japan has been steadfast in its commitment to fostering a relationship where we are seen as an equal.

I will always recall with the deepest appreciation how, in 2011, when talks with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front had reached an impasse, Japan, even at a very short notice, opened its doors to us. That was my first face-to-face meeting with MILF Chairman Al Haj Murad Ebrahim, and that meeting facilitated the start of trust between us, which has led us to this opportune moment.

In addition, Japan has supported our peace process through your involvement in the International Contact Group, the International Monitoring Team, and the Independent Commission on Policing; and through the initiatives supported under the Japan-Bangsamoro Initiatives for Reconstruction and Development, and through your international development agency, JICA.

Indeed: through the decades, the level of positive interaction between our nations has gone beyond what one would deem as a matter of obligations arising from the tragedies of the past. Ours is a strategic partnership bound by a shared affinity for mutual advancement, democracy, freedom, equality, and the rule of law. Our bond has fostered in us a confidence that we can rely on each other in building a better, more peaceful, and more stable future for our peoples, our region, and the rest of the global community.

Mr. Prime Minister, in the region that I come from, there is a dialect, which I speak, called Kapampangan. Coincidentally, in Kapampangan, the word “Abe” means “friend.” And I must say: you have been a true “Abe” to me and to my people. I consider you a kindred spirit, and my countrymen and I wish you even greater success. We are also truly grateful for the friendship of the Japanese people, who, like my countrymen, have questioned the status quo for the better, thereby granting us the promise of an even stronger, deeper, and better relationship, one that enables us to more effectively address the challenges of our time.