Toast of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines At the state dinner hosted by His Excellency The Right Honourable David Johnston, Governor-General of Canada

[Delivered in Rideau Hall, Ottawa, Ontario, on May 7, 2015]

Can I state on the onset, my first experience of Canada was when I was living in Boston with my family and we had a taste of your weather. [Laughter] And may I just state that the coldness there is really matched by the warmth and hospitality you have shown me and my delegation ever since we’ve arrived, and from the bottom of our hearts we’d like to thank each and every one of you.

Canada is a nation that is indeed close to the hearts of many Filipinos. Over the decades, my countrymen have seen many friends and family members set their roots in this nation. I understand that there are now over half a million members of the Filipino community who work and live dignified lives here. We thank you for the hospitality that your people and government have shown my countrymen. A primary intention of my visit is to express my nation’s gratitude for Canada’s enduring support. For instance, when Typhoon Haiyan struck our nation, Canada came to our aid, deploying a contingent of the Canadian Royal Force to help rebuild devastated communities. We also thank you for your active support for our peacemaking efforts that will hopefully end decades of conflict in our Mindanao region.

In the aspect of economic and social development, Canada has likewise demonstrated a profound belief in the capacity of my nation to succeed. We thank you for choosing the Philippines as a Country of Focus and for designating us as a Priority Emerging Market in our part of the world. The determination of Canada to see the Philippines attain greater heights is without doubt evident in the doubling of official development assistance from your country.

Today, just as the Philippines thanks Canada, we also commit ourselves to strengthen the already robust friendship between us, and endeavor to forge a kind of economic relationship that redounds to the betterment of the peoples of Canada and the Philippines. Through our close cooperation with Canada, we carry an unparalleled optimism: that together, as neighbors connected by the Pacific, we can achieve our collective aspirations. At this point, may I ask everyone to join me in a toast:

To the good health and happiness of Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth II of Canada;

To the success and continued good health of His Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston, Governor General of Canada, and Her Excellency Sharon Johnston;

And may I also offer a toast to the success and continued good health of the Right Honourable Stephen Harper, Prime Minister of Canada, and Mrs. Laureen Harper.

Finally, may I offer a toast to the deepening partnership between the peoples of Canada and the Philippines. Thank you.