Toast of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the State Dinner in honor of Indonesian President Joko Widodo

[Delivered in Malacañan Palace on February 9, 2015]

Mr. President, in 1944, an Indonesian journalist named Rosihan Anwar came across a poem written by our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, entitled Mi Ultimo Adios , or “My Last Farewell.” Struck by Dr. Rizal’s words, he would translate this into Bahasa Indonesia. Just as Dr. Rizal’s death inspired our forebears to persevere in the fight for justice and independence, it is said that Rosihan Anwar’s translation of his words inspired Indonesians during your country’s struggle for independence. This speaks to our shared values and to the importance our people give to democracy, true freedom, and inclusive prosperity.

Throughout the years, Indonesia and the Philippines have both sought to nurture our relations, not only for the benefit of our peoples, but also for our partners in ASEAN and for the entire global community. Together, our countries proved that friends can sit across from each other, engage in open dialogue, and resolve differences under the rule of law. In a similar vein, our people will never forget the assistance that Indonesians lent us in the aftermath of calamities and in our pursuit of peace. In particular, your staunch support in many aspects was instrumental to the significant steps that we have taken towards peace.

With your visit here, we continue this exciting chapter in the relations between the Indonesian and Filipino peoples. The productive discussions we had earlier this afternoon give me great confidence that we can lengthen our strides towards benefiting our peoples: in particular, on the protection of migrant workers, and the exploration of new areas in trade and investment. By continuing to work together, we will overcome any challenge.

Your Excellency, you and I share the fundamental belief that the fight against corruption is a fundamental part of our quest to ensure that democracy must deliver a better life for our peoples. On that note, let me express how much I welcome this opportunity to build on the trust and confidence that I enjoyed with your predecessor, and to ensure that it is carried forward and enriched during your watch. Without sounding too presumptuous, kakak laki-laki or adik laki-laki —big brother or little brother—may not be the most applicable for us, since we are of similar age and are from the same sector: namely the youth. [Laughter] But perhaps there will be opportunities for us to be each other’s saudara, or brother, whether in sharing with experiences in governance, or, on a lighter note, recommending new music to listen to when we need to relax.

With that, may I ask you and everyone to join me in a toast:

To the good health and well-being of Your Excellency, your wife, Madam Iriana Widodo, and your entire family;

To the enduring friendship and solidarity between the Indonesian and Filipino peoples;

And to the further deepening of the relations between our two countries, and with our brothers in ASEAN: May the future we share be characterized by more meaningful cooperation, as we work to realize our goals of sustainable development, stability, inclusiveness, and continued progress not only for our peoples, but for our community and our world.