Toast of His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III President of the Philippines During the luncheon in honor of Prince and Grand Master Fra’ Matthew Festing of the Order of Malta

[Delivered at Malacañan Palace on March 3, 2015]

The Sovereign Order of Malta has the distinction of being the oldest order of chivalry, an association defined by a religious, moral, and social code. As an order, however, it was unique in the sense that it began as a hospice founded in 1050 in Jerusalem, by Italian merchants dedicated to the care of Christian Pilgrims. To this day, it remains true to its beginnings: an order exemplifying valor, charity, and devotion.

The Sovereign Order of Malta had a presence in the Philippines even before the Second World War. Prominent members of society began to be received into the Order in 1948, and the Philippine Association was officially established in 1957. Diplomatic relations between our sovereign states were officially established in 1965. In all that time, the Filipino people have been a witness to the commitment the Sovereign Order of Malta has displayed to its mission: how you have fulfilled your responsibility to serve the poor and nurture the sick. The most recent example of your work in our country is seen in communities affected by Typhoon Haiyan—or Yolanda as it is locally called—for whom you have built new homes for families who survived the calamity. For this, and the many years of devoted service in our country, allow me to convey the sincere gratitude of the Filipino people.

As an expression of our nation’s gratitude, we conferred upon Your Highness the Order of Sikatuna, with the rank of Raja, or Grand Collar. Conferred once before on His Highness Fra’ Angelo de Mojana di Cologna in 1979, our order of diplomatic merit is conferred on true friends and partners who have rendered exceptional and meritorious services to the Philippines. As the 50 years of our diplomatic relations has been characterized by Christian brotherhood, so too may we take even greater strides forward, sharing the goal of uplifting the poor and the suffering.

On a personal note, the Sovereign Order of Malta has long been part of my family’s history. My maternal grandparents, Jose and Demetria Cojuangco, and my paternal grandmother, Aurora Aquino, were members of this noble order. This makes your conferment of your Order of Merit Pro Merito Melitensi all the more meaningful to me. Your Highness, I accept the conferment of this order on behalf of the Filipino people, as a symbol of our shared commitment to serve the poor.

At this point, I invite everyone to raise their glasses:

To the good health, happiness, and success of Your Highness;

To the enduring ties between the Philippines and the Sovereign Order of Malta;

And to the continued success of the Sovereign Order of Malta: may it remain a strong and faithful witness of our faith, bringing the charity and mercy of our Lord to the lives of millions across the world.

[To His Highness] In the Philippines, we say,   “Mabuhay!”