MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 168

RULES GOVERNING THE ADMISSION AND STAY IN THE PHILIPPINES, AS TEMPORARY VISITORS, OF CHINESE NATIONALS

WHEREAS, it is declared policy of the Government to attract and promote trade, investment and tourism as instruments of economic growth and national development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby promulgate the following rules governing the entry and stay in the Philippines, as temporary visitors, of Chinese nationals who are holders of People’s Republic of China (PROC), Taipei, Hongkong-British and Macao-Portuguese passports (collectively referred to as “Chinese Nationals”):

Section 1. Admission and Stay of Chinese Nationals. Chinese nationals coming to the Philippines for business or pleasure may be issued multiple entry visa valid up to six (6) months.

Section 2. Conditions/Requirements for Visa Issuances. Philippine Foreign Service establishments may issue temporary visitor’s visas under Section 9 (a) of the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940, as amended, without prior authorization from the Department of Foreign Affairs, to Chinese nationals upon compliance with the following requirements:

a) duly accomplished visa application form (FA form No. 2);

b) passport valid for six months beyond the period of authorized stay in the Philippines;

c) valid entry visa to the next port of destination or re-entry to the country of origin or residence;

d) confirmed return or onward passage ticket;

e) proof of bona fid e status (as tourist or businessman) of applicant; and

f) such other requirements as may be deemed necessary by the consular officer.

Section 3. Visa Fees. The following schedule of visa fees is hereby prescribed for services rendered by the Philippine Foreign Service establishment:

Section 4. Repealing Clause. Any executive order and other presidential issuances, administrative in nature, as well as rules and regulations, or any part thereof, which may be inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Executive Order is hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 5. Effectivity Clause. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately. The Department of Foreign Affairs and the Bureau of Immigration are hereby directed to issue the implementing circulars.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 11 th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Executive Order Nos. : 126 – 300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.