MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 284

DECLARING CIVILIAN VICTIMS OF INTERNAL ARMED CONFLICTS AS PART OF A PRIORITY SECTORS UNDER THE SOCIAL REFORM AGENDA

WHEREAS, the Executive Branch is undertaking a comprehensive peace process along the so-called Six Paths to Peace as mandated under Executive Order No. 125;

WHEREAS, one the components of the comprehensive peace process is the undertaking of programs to address the legal status and security of former rebels, as well as community-based assistance programs for the economic, social and psychological rehabilitation needs of former rebels, demobilized combatants and civilian victims of internal armed conflicts;

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen current government programs for civilian victims of internal armed conflicts;

WHEREAS, the Social Reform Agenda is a major agenda of the Government which has been formulated to ensure the minimum basic survival and security of identified disadvantaged sectors;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The priority sector of victims of disasters and calamities, whose concerns are being addressed under the Social Reform Agenda, shall include victims of man made disasters such as internal armed conflicts. Henceforth, civilian victims of internal armed conflicts shall be treated a sub-sector under the priority sector of the victims and disasters and calamities.

SEC. 2. As victims of man-made disasters, civilian victims of internal armed conflicts shall be granted access to government assistance programs and services available under the Social Reform Agenda, to include the Flagship Program and Comprehensive Integrated Delivery of Social Services.

SEC. 3. The Chairman of the National Program for Unification and Development Council shall coordinate with the concerned Agency Champions for each of the Flagship Programs to ensure that the needs of civilian victims of internal armed conflicts are adequately addressed.

SEC. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Executive Order Nos. : 126 – 300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.