MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 464

GOVERNING THE ADMISSION AND STAY OF FOREIGN NATIONALS IN THE CLARK SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE AS TEMPORARY VISITORS

WHEREAS , it is declared national policy to attract and promote foreign trade, investment and tourism in the country especially in the special economic zones such as Clark Special Economic Zone (“EcoZone”) to promote economic growth and national development.

WHEREAS , it is expected that visits to the Clark EcoZone by foreign nationals for business, tourism and recreation purposes will increase significantly due to the development, and the growing attraction of the Clark EcoZone as an investment, tourism, recreational and industrial destination;

WHEREAS , the Clark International Airport has likewise attracted interest from international airlines as a destination point for chartered and commercial flights which will contribute immensely to the development of the Clark EcoZone, the Central Luzon Region, the entire Philippines and ultimately the entire Asian Region;

WHEREAS , it is crucial to allow uncomplicated access to the Secured Area of the Clark EcoZone as defined in relevant issuances for foreign nationals in order to realize the above-declared national policy.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Foreign nationals, not categorized as “restricted” as determined by the DFA, visiting the Clark EcoZone for business and/or tourism purposes may be allowed to enter all ports of entry of the Clark ECOZONE and stay at herein without visa for a maximum period of fourteen (14) days; provided that upon arrival, they present their passports, Certificates of Identity or travel documents valid for at least six (6) months beyond the intended stay in the Clark EcoZone and confirmed onward flight tickets. The determination of the identity and admissibility of the foreign national seeking to enter the Clark EcoZone under this Executive Order shall be the primary responsibility of the Bureau of Immigration (BI).

SECTION 2. Foreign nationals who enter the Clark EcoZone under this Executive Order shall be subject to the following restrictions:

a. they shall leave or depart from the Philippines only through the Clark International Airport except as hereinafter provided;

b. they shall not be allowed outside the Secured Area of the Clark EcoZone, except to visit areas outside the Secured Area but within the Clark EcoZone, provided , that they are escorted by BI officers and/or Clark Development Corporation (CDC) officers duly deputized by the BI;

c. those who intend to visit areas outside the Clark EcoZone at any given time and/or extend their stay in the Clark EcoZone for any reason beyond the 14 day period must secure a visa waiver from the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA); provided , that upon securing such visa waiver, the restrictions as provided herein shall no longer be applicable.

SECTION 3. The head of the CDC may, in case of extreme emergencies or under exceptional circumstances, allow foreign nationals who enter the Clark EcoZone under this Executive Order to visit areas outside the Clark EcoZone under special permit or escort, subject to confirmation of visa waiver by the DFA.

SECTION 4. The DFA, BI and CDC shall jointly implement this Executive Order by issuing appropriate guidelines and circulars. They are hereby authorized to collect reasonable fees for processing of non-visa entry and application for visa waivers.

SECTION 5. Any foreign national who violates the provisions of this Executive Order or its implementing guidelines and circulars shall be subject to appropriate sanctions under existing Philippine immigration laws.

SECTION 6. The privilege accorded hereunder shall not in any way impair more favorable no-visa privileges accorded to foreign nationals under any existing executive order, letter of instruction, administrative order or issuance.

SECTION 7. All previous executive orders, letters of instruction, administrative orders and/or similar issuances inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 8. Special Clark Investors/Working Visas issued by the CDC in coordination with the BI shall be deemed regular visas for entry and exit in the Philippine ports of entry.

SECTION 9. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately after publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Executive Order Nos. : 441-488]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.