MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 85

ESTABLISHING THE COORDINATIVE AND MANAGEMENT MECHANISM FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CAGAYAN DE ORO-ILIGAN CORRIDOR SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

WHEREAS, it is the policy of government to promote the dispersal of industries in order to balance the growth of the different regions of the country and to harness the vast potential of the countryside;

WHEREAS, the development of the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor (CIC) into a major growth area is supportive of this policy and concern for accelerated socio-economic growth and development of Mindanao;

WHEREAS, the National Economic and Development Authority Board has approved in principle the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor Master Plan on 8 September 1992;

WHEREAS, there is a need for an effective mechanism to coordinate and manage the implementation of the CIC Master Plan within the framework of the government’s decentralization and regionalization policy as provided under Executive Order No. 363 and the overall coordinative mechanism for the development of Mindanao as provided under Executive Order No. 512 and Executive Order No. 7.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SEC. 1. Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor Special Development Project . The Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor Master Plan is hereby translated as the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor Special Development Project (CICSDP) for its implementation. The CICSDP shall articulate the development goals, objectives, strategies, programs and projects of the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor Master Plan and its subsequent refinement and updating.

SEC. 2. Project Steering Committee . The Project Steering Committee shall be responsible for the overall coordination and supervision of the implementation of the CICSDP. It shall coordinate with the Mindanao Economic Development Council (MEDCO) in harmonizing policies, programs and projects within the CICSDP which have Mindanao-wide impact. It shall be composed of the following members, who shall elect among themselves their Chairman and Co-Chairman:

The Provincial Governor of Lanao del Norte The Provincial Governor of Misamis Oriental The City Mayor of Cagayan de Oro The City Mayor of Iligan City The DTI Regional Directors, Regions X and XII The NEDA Regional Directors, Regions X and XII The Representative of the Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Cagayan de Oro City and Iligan City One NGO representative each, Cagayan de Oro/Misamis Oriental and Iligan City/Lanao del Norte The Representative of Regional Line Agencies involved in the Project

The Project Steering Committee shall have the following functions:

Cause the update, refinement, and endorsement of the CIC Master Plan within the context of the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, Mindanao Development Plan, Regional Development Plans of Regions X and XII, and the Local Development Plans of the local government units (LGUs) covered by CICSDP;

Cause the formulation of the CICSDP based on the development goals, objectives, strategies, programs and projects of the CIC Master Plan and its subsequent refinement and updating;

(c) Cause the feasibility study, evaluation, and financing of the project components of the CICSDP;

Provide overall direction, coordination, and supervision in the planning, implementation, and monitoring of the CICSDP;

Encourage the support and assistance from government and non-government institutions in planning and implementing the CICSDP;

Represent the CICSDP in national and international fora relevant to the financing and implementation of the CICSDP;

(g) Review and endorse to the Department of Budget and Management the annual budget for the CICSDP, including the amount required for the operation of the CICSDP Project Management Office;

(h) Organize the Project Management Office, define its organizational set-up, establish its staffing pattern, and appoint its Project Director;

(i) Review and confirm contracts entered into by the Project Director;

(j) Formulate implementing rules and regulations pertaining to the internal operations of the Project Management Office; and

Submit to the President, the MEDCO, and the NEDA Board, and Congress quarterly progress reports on the Project and such other reports as may be required.

SEC. 3. Project Management Office . The Project Management Office shall serve as the technical and administrative secretariat of the Project Steering Committee and, as such, undertake the day-to-day activities of the CICSDP. It shall perform the following functions:

(a) Coordinate with local government units, line agencies, financing institutions, non-government organizations and other concerned entities in the updating, refinement, endorsement, and implementation of the CIC Master Plan;

Coordinate the formulation and updating of the CICSDP based on the development goals, objectives, strategies, programs, and projects of the CIC Master Plan and its subsequent updating and refinement;

(c) Coordinate the preparation of feasibility studies of the project components of the CICSDP and the evaluation and financing of feasible projects;

(d) Coordinate the preparation of the annual budgetary requirements of the CICSDP and submit the same to the Project Steering Committee;

(e) Enter into contracts, through its Project Director, as may be necessary for the administrative operations of the CICSDP subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;

(f) Undertake periodic review and evaluation of the CICSDP and shall, for the purpose, design and operate a program implementation, monitoring and evaluation system consistent with the Regional Project Monitoring and Evaluation System (RPMES); and

(g) Perform such other functions and responsibilities as the Project Board may direct.

SEC. 4. Project Champions . The Secretary of Trade and Industry, and the respective Cabinet Officer for Regional Development (CORD) of Regions X and XII, in concurrent capacity, are hereby designated as Project Champions. They shall serve as the NEDA Board focal persons in matters pertaining to the CICSDP. As such, they shall have the following functions:

Ensure that the development goals, policies, and programs formulated by the Project Steering Committee are properly coordinated with the overall national goals, policies and programs;

(b) Maintain liaison with central offices and, as necessary, arrange the needed support for the project from central agencies, including funding agencies;

Monitor and conduct periodic review of the CIC Master Plan with respect to the attainment of targets, objectives, priorities, and goals, and facilitate expeditious implementation of its project components;

Provide national leadership in the investment promotion of the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan Corridor;

Act on problems referred to it by the Project Steering Committee on matters requiring national government attention; and

Perform such other functions as the President may direct.

The Project Champions shall work out among themselves the delineation of their responsibilities and consult the following persons and other agencies, as the need arises, on matters related to the CICSDP and within their respective areas of responsibility and jurisdiction:

The Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority The Secretary, Department of Budget and Management The Secretary, Department of Agrarian Reform The Secretary, Department of Agriculture The Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment The Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural Resources The Secretary, Department of Science and Technology The Secretary, Department of Interior and Local Government The Secretary, Department of National Defense The Secretary, Department of Public Works and Highways The Secretary, Department of Transportation and Communications The Secretary, Department of Tourism The Mindanao Representative of the Board of Directors, National Power Corporation The Chairman, Coordinating Council for the Philippine Assistance Program The Chairman, Mindanao Economic Development Council The Congressman of Misamis Oriental, District I The Congressman of Misamis Oriental, District II The Congressman of Lanao del Norte and Iligan City, District I The Congressman of Lanao del Norte, District II The Congressman of Cagayan de Oro City

SEC. 5. Role of the Regional/Local Development Councils . The Regional Development Councils and the Local Development Councils of the project area shall perform the following powers and functions:

a) Ensure that the development thrusts and policies formulated by the Project Steering Committee are consistent with the Regional/Local Development Plans;

(b) Approve the respective regional/local components of the multi-year and annual plans and investment programs under the CICSDP; and

(c) Monitor and conduct periodic review of the regional/local project component with respect to achievement of goals, objectives and targets of the CICSDP.

SEC. 6. Role of National Line Agencies/Local Government Units. National Line agencies and/or local government units shall, as appropriate, serve as implementing entities of the CICSDP. In cases where national line agencies are designated as lead implementing entity, implementation shall be undertaken in close coordination with concerned local government units.

SEC. 7. Operational Requirements . In order to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order, the 1993 funding requirements of the Project Management Office (PMO) shall be sourced by the Project Steering Committee from any appropriate ODA technical assistance program and/or from contributions from the concerned local government units and participating line agencies. Thereafter, the NEDA and DBM will assist in the identification of the appropriate funding source for the continued operations of the PMO.

SEC. 8. CICSDP Project Management Office Term . The CICSDP Project Management Office shall have a term corresponding to the implementation of its components as approved by the NEDA Board.

SEC. 9. Implementing Authority . The Project Steering Committee is hereby authorized to promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Executive Order and inform accordingly the NEDA Board.

SEC. 10. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

APPROVED in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 5th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 125]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.