MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 161

PRESCRIBING THE ADOPTION OF NEW STANDARD FORMS TO BE ACCOMPLISHED BY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES FOR OVERSEAS TRAINING

WHEREAS , officials and employees proposed for travel abroad, whether on official mission for the government or for training or scholarships, are required to fill up a travel data sheet and, in proper cases, a training/scholarship agreement;

WHEREAS , under Executive Order No. 129, as amended, a training contract shall bind the scholar with his/her country and agency to render service corresponding to the period of his training or scholarship grant;

WHEREAS , a training contract should clearly define the effects for failure to comply with the conditions set forth giving the award to a grantee;

WHEREAS , in previous years, the extent of implementation of the training contract indicates a non-uniform enforcement by the agencies/offices of scholars as proven by numerous breaches of contracts;

WHEREAS , to enforce a stricter and more binding commitment between the agency and the grantee, a modification of the existing training contract to include a guarantor, who is a close relative of the grantee to defray the total cost of expenditures, is recommended;

WHEREAS , the Special Committee on Scholarships has approved in Resolution No. 4, dated June 26, 1992, the adoption of a modified scholarship service contract.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order all agencies and offices of national and local government to adopt the attached scholarship service contract.

All issuances or orders providing additional requirements and prescribing standard forms for travel abroad, which are inconsistent herewith, are modified, amended, or repealed accordingly.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18 Th day of February in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Reference: Scholarship Service Contract

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Executive Order Nos. : 126-300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.