MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 470

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE COUNCIL FOR MENTAL HEALTH

WHEREAS , the Philippine Constitution provides that the State shall protect and promote the right to health of the people, instill health consciousness among them and adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development which shall endeavor to make essential goods, health and other social services available to all the people at affordable cost;

WHEREAS , the World Health Organization (WHO) wholistically defines health as the state of physical, social and mental well-being, rather than merely the absence of physical diseases. Good mental health means not simply the absence of detectable mental disorder but a state of well-being in which the individual is able to utilize his abilities, work productively and fruitfully and contribute to the community;

WHEREAS , the scope of Mental Health covers not only mental disorders and substance (drug and alcohol) abuse but also other mental health-associated issues and problems, such as those arising from a) medical illnesses; b) psychosocial issues of daily living; c) being part of high risk groups such as victims of disasters, children, women and the elderly; d) family disruptions due to overseas employment and internal migration; and, e) changing lifestyles brought about by rapid urbanization and globalization; and,

WHEREAS , present responses of the government, non-government, private and academic institutions at the national, regional, and local levels on mental health indicate that there is need to improve public awareness of mental health as an integral component of the total health care, to ensure its inclusion in the Government’s package of health care programs.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order the creation of the Philippine Council for Mental Health (PCMH) which shall serve as the policy-making and advisory body on all government programs on mental health and which shall hereinafter be referred to as the “Council”.

SECTION 1. Composition. The Council shall be chaired by the Secretary of Health and composed of the following as members:

a. Secretary, Department of Social Welfare and Development; b. Secretary, Department of Education, Culture and Sports; c. Secretary, Department of Justice; d. Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment; e. Secretary, Department of Interior and Local Government; f. Medical Center Chief, National Center for Mental Health; g. Chairman, Department of Psychiatry, UP-PGH; h. Chairman, Commission on Higher Education; i. Director General, Technological Education and Skills Development Authority; and, Three (3) representatives from the non-government organizations concerned with mental health to be appointed by the Chairman of the Council.

SEC. 2. Functions of the Council. The council shall undertake the following:

a. Formulate policies and guidelines on mental health issues and concerns; b. Develop a comprehensive and integrated national plan on mental health; c. Conduct periodic monitoring, evaluation and research in support to policy formulation and plan on mental health; d. Promote and facilitate collaboration among sectors and disciplines for the design, development and implementation of sectoral Mental Health plans; e. Review all existing laws related to mental health and recommend legislations which will sustain and strengthen existing programs and services and other mental health initiatives; f. Advise the President in the field of mental health; and, g. Submit annual report to the President.

SEC. 3. Institutional Support. The Council is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office or instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCC) to extend all necessary assistance to the Council. The DOH shall provide the technical, administrative and secretariat support to the Council.

SEC. 4. Funding. The Council shall derive its funding from the DOH 1998 budget. Appropriations for the succeeding years shall be incorporated in the regular budget of the DOH.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24 th day of February, in the year of our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Executive Order Nos. : 441-488]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.