MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 374

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON WATER RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to ensure sustainable, adequate, safe and affordable water supply to meet the requirements of the country’s development;

WHEREAS, growing contamination and pollution limits the available water supply to meet the present and future requirements of the population and water consuming sectors of economy;

WHEREAS, the development and management of our water resources requires the efficient rationalization of the competing demands for such resources;

WHEREAS, the timely and effective provision of the needed infrastructure and organization support are essential for ensuring the widest access to water resources by these sectors;

WHEREAS, there is a need for an apex body that will oversee and coordinate government policies and programs to enhance the development and management of water resources.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Presidential Task Force on Water Resources Management. There is hereby created a Presidential Task Force to ensure the efficient development and management of the country’s water resources.

SEC. 2. Composition. The Task Force shall have the following composition:

SEC. 3. Powers and Functions. The Task Force shall serve as an oversight body for ensuring the efficient sourcing and use of water resources, in particular the provision of policy and program recommendations on the following:

a. Water supply planning and coordination, including the efficient allocation of water resources to its different users;

b. Prioritization of programs and projects critical for ensuring sustainable, adequate, safe and affordable water supply;

c. Coordination and monitoring of water policies and programs; and

d. Pricing policies on water resources.

The Task Force shall also perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the President.

SEC. 4. Secretariat. The DENR shall provide secretariat support of the Task Force. To meet technical requirements of Task Force, the DENR may also tap the technical assistance of other government agencies.

SEC. 5. Reports. The Task Force shall submit a quarterly report to the President on its activities, including the status of implementation of the critical water policies, programs and projects.

Section 6. Funding. The amount of P50 Million for the organization and operation of the Task Force, to include its regional, provincial and community components and its secretariat, for the current year shall be provided from the savings/reserves of the Department of Budget and Management and the Office of the President. Thereafter, the yearly budget of the Task Force shall be sourced from the contributions of its member Agencies.

Section 7. Repealing Clause. All executive issuances, orders, rules and regulations and/or similar issuances inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby revoked, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th Day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 440]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.