MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 33

AMENDING SECTIONS 1 AND 2 OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 115, S. 1986 ENTITLED “REORGANIZING THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL AND DEFINING ITS MEMBERSHIP, FUNCTION, AND AUTHORITY AND OTHER PURPOSES”

WHEREAS , the restoration of political stability and the enhancement of economic development are interdependent, requiring the active participation and support of all branches of government and all sectors of society;

WHEREAS , there is a need for a mechanism to enhance coordination between the executive and the legislative branches in the formulation and integration of policies affecting national security;

WHEREAS , the National Security Council as presently constituted is limited to the members of the executive department;

WHEREAS , there is a need to expand the membership of the National Security Council to meet the increasing needs and requirements of the national leadership for reliable information and competent advice coming from a broader segment of society;

WHEREAS , under the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize agencies or units under the Office of the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct:

SECTION 1. Section 1 of Executive Order No. 115 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION. 1. The National Security Council (hereinafter referred to as the NSC) is hereby reorganized. It shall henceforth be composed of the following:

and such other government officials and private citizens as the President may designate from time to time.

The Director-General of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Chief of the Philippine National Police, the Director of the National Bureau of Investigation and the Governor of Central Bank shall attend the meetings of the Council as may be necessary to advise and assist in the deliberations.”

SECTION 2. Section 2 of the same Executive Order is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION. 2. The NSC shall have an Executive Committee composed of the following:

and such other members or advisers as the President may designate from time to time.

The Executive Committee shall review national security issues and corners, and formulate positions and/or solutions for consideration by the NSC. It shall determine the agenda and order of business of the NSC, and shall ensure that decisions of the NSC are clearly communicated to the agencies concerned. It shall advise the President on the implementation of decisions.

To carry out the functions of the Executive Committee, the Chairman shall utilize the facilities and expertise of any of the government agencies and instrumentalities, and shall promulgate rules and regulations to govern the operations of the Executive Committee.”

SECTION 3. The NSC shall be an advisory body to the President. The National Security Director General shall ensure that policies formulated by the NSC and approved by the President are effectively and efficiently implemented.

SECTION 4. All orders, issuances, rules and regulations or any part thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President;

(Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-125]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.