MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 411

INSTITUTIONALIZING THE PRESIDENT RAMON MAGSAYSAY OUTSTANDING FILIPINO WORKER AWARD

WHEREAS, the government recognizes the important role played by Filipino workers toward achieving the country’s economic goals;

WHEREAS, there is a need to give recognition to, and further encourage, the invaluable support and contribution of Filipino workers to national development;

WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper to accord distinction to Filipino workers who are honest, hardworking, persevering, highly skilled and successful in their respective fields;

WHEREAS, the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), created pursuant to R.A. No. 7796 dated 25 August 1994, was tasked to promote and strengthen the quality of technical education and skills development program to attain international competitiveness and inculcate desirable values among Filipino workers through the development of moral character with emphasis on work ethics, self discipline and self-reliance; and

WHEREAS, the late President Ramon Magsaysay was a strong advocate for, and whose government service was a model of, excellence, commitment and hardwork.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the President Ramon Magsaysay Outstanding Filipino Worker Award. There is hereby created the President Ramon Magsaysay Outstanding Filipino Worker Award to accord recognition to highly skilled and successful Filipino workers nationwide. There shall be two categories of the award, namely: the Wage-Employed Category and the Self-Employed Category.

The selection process for the awardees shall be undertaken at the regional and national levels.

SEC. 2. Awards Committee. There is hereby created an Awards Committee (AC) composed of TESDA Director-General as Chairman, with the following as members:

1. Assistant Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment;

2. Assistant Secretary, Department of Interior and Local Government;

3. Representative, Galing Pinoy Foundation; and

4. Four (4) private sector individuals who are recognized experts in their respective fields, to be determined by the Awards Committee.

Technical and Secretariat support to the Awards Committee shall be provided by TESDA.

Sec. 3. Functions of the Awards Committee. The Awards Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Initiate and coordinate necessary activities for the successful implementation of the awards;

2 Set guidelines/criteria for the evaluation of the regional and national nominees;

3. Report to the President on the status of the implementation of the awards; and,

4. Undertake other tasks or functions that may be assigned by the President.

Sec. 4. Funding. The necessary amount that may be incurred in connection with the implementation of this order shall be charged against the regular budget of TESDA and the concerned agencies. TESDA may also engage in resource generation and mobilization activities, as may be allowed by law, to ensure the successful implementation of the awards.

Sec. 5. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Executive Order Nos. : 301 – 440]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.