MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 38

RECONSTITUTING THE ASEAN FREE TRADE AREA (AFTA) COMMISSION AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 510 (1992) created the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) Multisectoral Study Commission to conduct studies that would identify the impact of AFTA on sectors of the Philippine economy and to propose a work program, in consultation with the private sector, on enhancing Philippine competitiveness in the ASEAN market;

WHEREAS, the AFTA Multisectoral Study Commission was dissolved after it submitted its report to former President Corazon C. Aquino and since then there has been a need for an Advisory Commission to pursue the evaluation of the impact of AFTA during the next fifteen (15) years;

WHEREAS, the Commission shall ensure that its studies and recommendations incorporate the principles of a just, equitable and sustainable development, through investments in the human capital of the poor that are consistent with long-term growth and shared prosperity, and define the roles of each sector in the attainment of these goals that would balance market competition with human development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Organization of AFTA Advisory Commission . The AFTA Advisory Commission (hereinafter known as “Commission”) is hereby organized under the Office of the President to be composed of fifteen (15) representatives from the private sector and fifteen (15) representatives from the public sector.

SECTION 2. Composition of the Commission . The Commission shall be chaired by Hon. Rizalino S. Navarro, Secretary of Trade and Industry and Co-Chaired by Mr. Jose Pardo, President of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry. The Commission shall be composed of the following members:

A. PRIVATE SECTOR

B. EXECUTIVE BRANCH

C. LEGISLATIVE BRANCH

1. Two (2) Senators to be designated by the Senate President.

2. Two (2) Members of the House of Representatives to be designated by the House Speaker.

The Commission, by a majority vote of its members, is hereby authorized to replace present members or include other members when circumstances so warrant.

SECTION 3. Functions of the Commission . The Commission shall be an advisory body to the President and shall have the following functions:

1. Prepare studies identifying the issue and implications of AFTA and ASEAN economic cooperation on the Philippine economy and its industrial, agricultural, financial and service sectors, including labor and peasantry and propose a concomitant work program, including legislation where needed, private sector initiatives and technological innovations to enhance our competitive advantages in the regional market.

2. Recommend directions, policies and guidelines for the government and its continuing discussions and negotiations with the ASEAN governments and the dialogue partners in all areas of economic cooperations;

3. Enhance collaboration and build consensus among the various sectors such as business and industry, agricultural and service sectors, science and technology centers, labor and non-government organization; and

4. Create such sub-committees and task forces as may be necessary to accomplish these functions.

SECTION 4. Technical/Sectoral Support . Government and private organizations such as academic institutions, research organizations, professional firms, and other similar groups shall be tapped to provide technical and Secretariat support to the Commission.

SECTION 5. Relationship with PCAC . The Commission shall report and submit studies, proposals and recommendations to the Philippine Council on ASEAN Cooperation-Cabinet level (PCAC-Cabinet). It shall also be represented at the PCAC-Cabinet and at the PCAC-Technical Board for ASEAN Economic Cooperation.

SECTION 6. Funding . The amount of ONE MILLION PESOS (P1,000,000.00) which shall serve as initial government contribution is hereby authorized for expenditure by the Commission from the contingent funds of the President.

SECTION 7. Effectivity . This order shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-125]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.