MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 246

RECONSTITUTING THE NATIONAL ACTION COMMITTEE ON ANTI-HIJACKING AS THE NATIONAL ACTION COMMITTEE ON ANTI-HIJACKING AND ANTI-TERRORISM

WHEREAS, terrorism has indiscriminately caused great havoc and destruction to lives and properties in this country in recent months:

WHEREAS, the threat of terrorism is undermining the positive image our country has promoted abroad thereby causing ill effects to our growing economy;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish linkage with international anti-terrorist agencies for as to actively participate in the global crusade against terrorism;

WHEREAS, the existing anti-hijacking measures need to be complemented with a more expanded law to enable our authorities to effectively counter not only hijacking but all other forms of terrorism;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that further appropriate and forceful measures be undertaken to develop the capability of our law enforcement agencies to fight terrorism by reconstituting the National Action Committee on Anti-Hijacking (NACAH);

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The National Action Committee on Anti-Hijacking (NACAH) is hereby reconstituted and renamed as the National Action Committee on Anti-Hijacking and Anti-Terrorism (NACAHT).

SEC. 2. The composition of NACAHT shall be the following:

SEC. 3. In addition to the provisions of Letter of Instruction No. 399 dated 28 April 1976 and Sections 2 and 3 of Executive Order No. 393 dated 24 January 1990, NACAHT shall (a) formulate plans to direct, control, supervise and integrate all measures aimed at preventing and suppressing hijacking, other threats to civil aviation, and all other forms of terrorism with the end in view of protecting national interests, and (b) adopt measures geared towards the implementation of the following main objectives: (1) to effectively monitor the activities of suspected terrorists, and (2) to develop the capability of local law enforcement agencies to contain the threats of terrorism. These measures shall include a provision for an adequate organization for planning and implementation at all levels as well as guidelines for a clear delineation of authority and functions among committee members.

SEC. 4. NACAHT shall establish close coordination and cooperation with concerned agencies of countries which are vigorously opposing international terrorism to enable our government to actively participate in the united fight against the global threat to universal peace and security. NACAHT shall further enhance the intelligence and operational functions of concerned entities and authorities in dealing with crimes perpetrated by terrorist.

SEC. 5. NACAHT is hereby authorized to call upon other departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government to provide assistance in the effective implementation of this Executive Order.

SEC. 6. All powers, functions, and resources of NACAH, as stipulated in Letter of Instruction No. 399 dated 28 April 1976, as amended by Executive Order Nos. 393 and 452, shall be absorbed by NACAHT.

SEC. 7. Letter of Instruction No. 399, series 1976, and Executive Orders No. 393, series 1990 and No. 452, series 1991 are accordingly modified.

SEC. 8. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18 th day of May , in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Executive Order Nos. : 126-300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.