MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 230

CREATING A NATIONAL SECRETARIAT OF THE NATIONAL CORRECTIONAL CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK

I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The Secretaries of the Department of Justice, Interior and Local Government and Social Welfare and Development; the Directors of the Bureau of Corrections, of Jail Management and Penology, the Probation Administrator and the Chairman of the Board of Pardons and Parole, and an appropriate number of representatives from the private sector, representing the media, the concerned national and major academic, civic and religious organizations, shall compose the National Secretariat for the celebration of the “National Correctional Consciousness Week.” The Judiciary, the Legislature and the Commission on Human Rights shall be encouraged to participate.

Section 2. The National Secretariat shall be responsible for the formulation of a national plan of activities, and for encouraging and coordinating with local groups for the celebration.

Section 3. The Secretariat is authorized to call directly on other departments, bureaus, offices, and other instrumentalities or agencies of the government and to encourage active participation and involvement of the private sectors in the accomplishment of the above tasks.

Section 4. The annual theme of the celebration shall be explored by means of print, radio and TV media, lectures, symposia, conferences, seminars, congresses, and other fora.

Section 5. The occasion shall promote activities that will improve the living conditions, basic services to and administration of offenders, including their rehabilitation and reintegration and safeguarding programs.

Section 6. Corresponding awards shall be given to outstanding organizations, groups and individuals who have excelled and contributed considerably to enhancing and promoting the well-being of the correctional system in general and the offenders in particular.

Section 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Executive Order Nos. : 126 – 300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.