MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 180

STRENGTHENING THE EXPORT DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (EDC) AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE EXECUTIVE ORDER (E.O.) NO. 110, FURTHER AMENDING E.O. NO. 98

WHEREAS, a strong growth of exports is the linchpin for economic recovery;

WHEREAS, the Export Development Council was created as government’s commitment to support Proclamation No. 167 (1993) declaring export development as the key to a Philippine balanced agri-industrial economic growth;

WHEREAS, a more direct link with the President will strengthen the authority of the Council;

WHEREAS, human resource development is needed to improve the productivity of the workforce of the export industry;

WHEREAS, increasing the Council’s membership to include the Secretary of Labor and Employment is necessary to strengthen the resolve to improve productivity;

WHEREAS, there is a need for an additional representation from the private labor sector to achieve balanced representation.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 3 of EO 98 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section. 3. Powers and Functions. – The Council shall:

a. Recommend approval of the Philippine Export Development Plan; coordinate, monitor and assess the implementation thereof, and, when necessary, recommend appropriate adjustments thereon in the light of charging conditions in both the domestic and international environment;

b. Periodically review and assess the country’s export performance, problems and prospects;

c. Identify the main bottlenecks, problem areas and constraints in all areas/sectors/activities influencing the development of exports, including but not limited to, such matters as policy framework, physical infrastructure, finance, specialized support services, production, promotion and marketing;

d. Report directly to the President on Specific measures required to remove the bottlenecks/problems constraining the development of exports in any of the areas mentioned in (c).”

SECTION 2. Section 1 of EO 110 further amending EO 98 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 1. Composition – The Export Development Council (“Council”) shall be composed of the following:

This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8 th day of June in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Executive Order Nos. : 126 – 300]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.