MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 57

CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, the Philippine Constitution recognizes the right of the people to information on matters of public concern;

WHEREAS, pursuant to this right, it is the policy of the government to keep the people informed of the activities and functions of the President of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish an office that will provide the mechanism for a relevant and effective information and communication management program that will present the activities, policies and directions of the Presidency; and

WHEREAS, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize his Office pursuant to the Revised Administrative Code of 1997 (Sec. 31, Chapter 10).

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson . There is hereby created the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson to be headed by a Secretary who shall have the rank of a Cabinet Member with all the rights and privileges appurtenant thereto. The Presidential Spokesperson shall report directly to the President to give advice on all matters and concerns related to the Presidency as it may affect the information demands of the public.

SECTION 2. Functions . The Presidential Spokesperson shall have the following functions:

1. Act as the official spokesperson of the President;

2. Monitor and evaluate developments affecting the Presidency and submit draft Presidential statements on issues emanating therefrom;

3. Coordinate with the Office of the Press Secretary, the Office of the Executive Secretary, and the Presidential Management Staff and other concerned government agencies in addressing public issues affecting the Presidency; and

4. Undertake other functions that may be deemed necessary by the President.

SECTION 3. Organization . The Presidential Spokesperson shall be assisted by a Deputy Spokesperson with the rank of Undersecretary and by an appropriate number of staff complement. Upon issuance of this order, the Department of Budget and Management, in coordination with the Presidential Spokesperson, shall recommend to the President the organizational structure and staffing pattern of the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson.

SECTION 4. Budget . Budget for the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson for this year shall be sourced from the funds of the Office of the President. Thereafter, the budget of the Office shall become part of the General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 5. Effectivity . This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of March, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President (Sgd.) RAMON B. CARDENAS Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia