MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 78

CREATING THE PROGRAM TO ENGAGE THE SERVICES OF CAREER EXECUTIVES IN ALTERNATIVE GOVERNMENT ENDEAVORS

WHEREAS , there is a need to optimize the services of government’s executive manpower and at the same time attain the administration’s development goals.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. Creation . There is hereby created the Presidential Initiative to Engage Career Executives’ Services (PIECES) Program to facilitate the detail of specific Career Executive Service (CES) members in particular government/Presidential endeavors.

Section 2. Scope and Coverage . The Program shall provide placement assistance to those CES members who are enjoying security of tenure (i.e., receiving salaries and other emoluments from the government) but are not or cannot be assigned by their superiors with the position and/or functions through which the CES members may provide meaningful contributions towards attaining their respective organizations’ mandate.

These CES members shall be detailed in any government agency, group, or concern that is in need of management level assistance; has existing funds, personnel, and office; and has a term of at least one (1) year.

For the duration of the detail/temporary assignment, the salaries and other emoluments of concerned CES members shall be borne/drawn from their mother Departments/Agencies.

Section 3. Program Administrator . The Program will be managed by the Office of the Executive Secretary who may appoint, on a concurrent capacity, an administrator and assign an existing office within the Office of the President to carry out the Program’s objectives.

Section 4. Guidelines for Implementation . The Program administrator shall adhere to the following guidelines:

1. Ensure that the executive’s qualification and competence match the managerial/technical requirements of the host government agency/program/activity.

2. Ensure that consultations are undertaken and that the concurrence of everyone concerned, i.e., the head of the host agency, the affected CES member, the head of the mother agency, is obtained. Matching efforts shall continuously be undertaken until all the concerned CES members are placed in acceptable fields of endeavor.

3. The detail order for the movement of CES member from one agency to another shall be issued by the Executive Secretary. Only after the detail order has been signed shall the concerned CES member physically transfer to the new but temporary area of assignment.

4. The detailed CES member’s performance shall be evaluated through the CES Performance Evaluation System (CESPES). The CESPES will be undertaken by the host entity and endorsed by the Program Administrator to the Career Executive Service Board (CESB). The President’s Personnel Group (PPG) and the mother agency will each be furnished a copy of the CESPES reports.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6 Th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia