Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 38

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES IN CONTRACTING THE SERVICES OF ACCREDITED PRIVATE SECURITY PRINTERS FOR THE PRINTING OF ACCOUNTABLE FORMS WITH MONEY VALUE AND OTHER SPECIALIZED ACCOUNTABLE FORMS

In order to effectively monitor and safeguard the quality and integrity of accountable forms with money value and other specialized accountable forms for the requisitioning office or agency, as provided under Executive Order No. 285 dated July 25, 1987, all heads of departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the government, including local governments and government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to adhere to the following guidelines in contracting the services of accredited private security printers for the printing of accountable form with money value and other specialized accountable forms:

1. All requisitions for the printing of accountable forms with money value and those which are specially designed for the agency’s requirements shall be submitted to the NPO.

2. The NPO shall fill in the requisition and perform the printing job. If it cannot undertake the job because of incapacity, the NPO shall immediately conduct a public bidding to be participated in by NPO-accredited private security printers only, and the printing job shall be awarded to the lowest complying bidder.

3. The printing of the requested forms shall be done under the strict control and supervision of the NPO and in the presence of its representative together with the representatives from the Commission on Audit and from the requisitioning agency.

4. The NPO shall be the sole distributor of all the forms printed by the accredited security printers which will be paid by the NPO for the services they have rendered.

5. All flats, cuts and types used for the specific printing job shall be surrendered to the requisitioning office or agency after the completion of the printing job.

For strict compliance.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Manila, NOV 19, 1998.

Source: CDAsia