Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER 22

1.) In order to strengthen the mandate of the Presidential Action Center and to provide a most efficient public service to the citizenry, a coordinating council to be known as the Executive Response and Action for the People (ERAP) is hereby created.

2.) Effective immediately, the Heads of the different Departments are enjoined to assign one Undersecretary from their respective departments who will sit as members of the coordinating council, with the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary, Office of the President as Chairman and the Director of the Presidential Action Center as Executive Director.

3.) The primary function of the Council is to act as coordinating body which will formulate policies and recommendations in providing immediate and effective assistance to the clients of the Presidential Action Center.

The Council shall also perform the following specific functions:

a.) To make studies and recommendations to effectively pursue the social contract with the poor pursuant to this administration’s policy to increase the poor’s access to services and resources that reduce their vulnerability and build the poor’s productive assets and opportunities to raise their incomes.

b.) To draw up plans to realign priorities and put the limited resources of this government where the poor will benefit the most.

c.) To make recommendations on how the PACE can initiate fund generating activities so as to provide and facilitate the public’s requests for financial assistance subject to the existing rules and regulations of the government.

d.) To study the possibilities of creating offices of the Presidential Action Center in various parts of the country.

e.) To provide coordination and networking with private corporations so as to effectively find ways in carrying out the welfare programs of this administration primarily taking into consideration the interest of the poor and the needy among our citizenry.

f.) To perform other functions and responsibilities as the President or the Executive Secretary may direct.

4.) All Department Heads are hereby instructed to activate public assistance and action units in their respective offices and designate an Action Officer who shall perform liaison work between his/her office and the Presidential Action Center.

5.) All branches of the Executive Department shall take steps to support and assist the Council in all its programs, policies and recommendations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18 th day of SEPT. in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President Republic of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia