MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 119

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CENTER HOUSING PROJECT (NGCHP) UNTIL DECEMBER 31, 2001AND FURTHER STRENGTHENING THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CENTER HOUSING COMMITTEE (NGCHC)

WHEREAS , pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 3038, Proclamation No. 137, series of 1987, declared a certain portion of the National Government Center site at Quezon City, consisting of one hundred fifty (150) hectares (184 hectares per actual survey), open for disposition;

WHEREAS , Memorandum Order No. 151, dated 27 January 1988 created the National Government Housing Committee (NGCHC), referred to as the Committee, to take charge of the implementation of the National Government Center Housing Project, referred to as the Project, which is aimed at replicating new alternative strategies of project implementation for social housing in areas identified as Areas for Priority Development (APDs);

WHEREAS , provisions of Proclamation No. 248 necessitate major adjustments in the activities and timetable of the NGCHP, foremost of which are the expropriation, consolidation / subdivision of lots/titles, and finally conveying the individual titles to bona fide beneficiaries; and

WHEREAS , the completion of the Project necessitates the extension of the term of the NGCHP beyond 31 December 2000 and the strengthening of the Committee to make the Project more responsive to the needs of the housing beneficiaries;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Sec. 1. Extension of the National Government Center Housing Project . The term of the NGCHP is hereby extended until 31, December 2001.

Sec. 2. NGCHC Meetings . For purposes of resolving issues that greatly affect the fast tracking of the Project, NGCHC meetings shall be held regularly, at least once a month. In the event that the Chairman cannot attend the meetings, he/she may designate a member of the Committee to preside over the meeting. Likewise, in his/her absence, the Chairman may designate the Project Administrator as his/her representative to the Committee, and as such, likewise be designated to preside over the meetings.

Sec. 3. Support Agencies . In addition to the support agencies identified in Memorandum Order No. 151, the following agencies are hereby ordered to perform their specific functions:

a. Home Guaranty Corporation (HGC) — being the Project Trustee, to provide all the necessary financial assistance needed for the fast tracking of the Project activities such as the expropriation, reconstitution, consolidation/subdivision of titles chargeable to the NGCHP Trust Fund;

b. Office of the Solicitor General (OSG) — to handle and give priority to legal cases needed for the fast-tracking of the Project and in dealing with expropriation of lots, reconstitution of burnt/lost titles and assist in the ejection of non-beneficiaries of the Project;

c. Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG)/Local Government of Quezon City — to assist in the prevention of the professional squatters, squatting syndicates, new entrants and the likes, and facilitate the reconstitution of burnt/lost titles and other development requirement(s) of the Project;

d. National Police Task Force on Squatting Syndicates and Professional Squatters (Task Force) — to assist in apprehending squatting syndicates and professional squatters;

e. Land Registration Authority (LRA), Land Management Bureau (LMB) and the Registry of Deeds (RD) — to assist in the land verification, technical research, transfer and registration of titles, administrative reconstitution of titles within the Project and exempting the Project from the existing policy of subdivision approval limited to four lots;

f. Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) — to assist in the resolution of Homeowners Associations’ (HOAs) disputes pursuant to the new HGC charter and facilitate the issuance of Certificate of Registration and License to Sell of subdivisions / Community Development Plans (CDPs) prepared by HOAs and approved by the NGCHC;

g. Department of Health (DOH) — to provide additional health facilities / structures to the Project beneficiaries.

Sec. 4. Saving Clause . All provisions of Memorandum Order No. 151 and Memorandum Order No. 391, not inconsistent herewith, shall remain valid and effective.

Sec. 5. Effectivity . This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 24 Th day of October in the year of our Lord Twenty Hundred.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia