MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 17

DEFINING THE DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS AND DELINEATING THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SENIOR OFFICIALS OF THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT PROPER

In the interest of public service and in order to promote efficiency and proper coordination of work, the delineation of duties, functions and responsibilities of the senior officials in the Executive Office of the Office of the President Proper are as follows:

DEPUTY AND ASSISTANT EXECUTIVE SECRETARIES — The duties and functions of the Deputy Executive Secretaries and Assistant Executive Secretaries shall be based on the mandated function of the Executive Secretary as head of the Executive Office pursuant to the provisions of Sections 25, 26 and 27, Title III, Book IV of the Revised Administrative Code of 1987. Secondly, their special assignments by the President or the Executive Secretary shall be issued through an appropriate executive issuance.

DEPUTY EXECUTIVE SECRETARIES

A. HON. RAMON B. CARDENAS Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

1. Directly assist the Executive Secretary in the performance of his functions as provided for in Section 27 Sub-Chapter B, Chapter 9, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987.

2. Perform the duties of the Executive Secretary upon express designation and delegation during his absence or when the Secretary is unable to perform his duties owing to illness and other causes.

3. Attend with the Executive Secretary Cabinet meetings or in such other occasions where the President needs the presence of the Executive Secretary and he is unable to do so.

4. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the management and supervision over the various units of the Office of the President.

5. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the formulation and implementation of policies, plans, programs and projects, rules and regulations pertinent to the general management and administration of the Office of the President.

6. Oversee, for the Executive Secretary, the operations of the offices and agencies under or attached to the Office of the President.

7. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on economic and related matters.

8. Coordinate the corporate planning and budgeting processes under the Office of the President.

9. Act on requests for travel authority of line agency secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank.

10. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on Agro-Industrial Development, Macro-Economy & Finance, Physical Infrastructure & Energy Support and on International Relations, and advise and assist the Executive Secretary on pertinent matters and concerns that may arise from these meetings.

11. Provide consultative research, fact finding and advisory service to the Executive Secretary in his assigned areas of responsibility.

12. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relative to legislation involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

13. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the preparation and implementation of presidential orders and decisions involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

14. Advise and assist Executive Secretary in the administration of the President’s special projects and programs.

15. Perform such other functions as the President and/or Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

B. HON. VICENTE M. DELA SERNA Deputy Executive Secretary

1. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relating to regional development concerns.

2. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relating to the concerns of the indigenous and marginal sectors.

3. Coordinate, for the Executive Secretary, the duties and functions of the various Presidential Assistants particularly in implementing regional development concerns.

4. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the performance of functions pertaining to local government supervision.

5. Act for and on behalf of the Executive Secretary on matters involving the Office of the Executive Secretary relative to the concerns of the Visayas and Mindanao regions.

6. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on Human Resources & Development and on National Security & Political Development, and advise and assist the Executive Secretary on pertinent matters and concerns that may arise from these meetings.

7. Provide consultative research, fact finding and advisory service to the Executive Secretary in his assigned areas of responsibility.

8. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relative to legislation involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

9. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the preparation and implementation of presidential orders and decisions involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

10. Advise and assist Executive Secretary in the administration of the President’s special projects and programs.

11. Perform such other functions as the Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

C. HON. RIC T. LEGADA Deputy Executive Secretary for Finance & Administration

1. Oversee and supervise the following units of the Office of the President pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 2, series of 1998:

1.1 Human Resource Management Office

1.2 Finance Office

1.3 Accounting Office

1.4 Property and Procurement Office

1.5 Administrative Office

1.6 Malacañang Motor Pool

2. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on Development Administration and on National Security & Political Development, and advise and assist the Executive Secretary on pertinent matters and concerns that may arise from these meetings.

3. Provide consultative research, fact finding and advisory service to the Executive Secretary in his assigned areas of responsibility.

4. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relative to legislation involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

5. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the preparation and implementation of presidential orders and decisions involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

6. Advise and assist Executive Secretary in the administration of the President’s special projects and programs.

7. Perform such functions as the Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

D. HON. LUIS C. LIWANAG II Deputy Executive Secretary

1. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relating to government re-organization, management and performance evaluation of government agencies.

2. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters pertaining to the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office.

3. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on Development Administration and advise and assist the Executive Secretary on pertinent matters and concerns that may arise from these meetings.

4. Provide consultative research, fact finding and advisory service to the Executive Secretary in his assigned areas of responsibility.

5. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relative to legislation involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

6. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the preparation and implementation of presidential orders and decisions involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

7. Advise and assist Executive Secretary in the administration of the President’s special projects and programs.

8. Assist the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary on matters pertaining to requests for travel authority of department secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank.

9. Perform such functions as the Executive Secretary and/or the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

ASSISTANT EXECUTIVE SECRETARIES

A. HON. ERNESTO P. MARTINEZ Assistant Executive Secretary

1. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on fiscal and administrative matters.

2. Prepare implementing action documents of Presidential orders, instructions and decisions involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

3. Assist and advise the Executive Secretary on matters relative to organizational development, management audit and improvement and internal control policies, programs and activities in the Office of the President.

4. Prepare, in coordination with the concerned offices and operating units, the annual report of the Office of the President.

5. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on Development Administration, International Relations and on Foreign Travel Briefings, and advise and assist the Executive Secretary on pertinent matters and concerns that may arise from these meetings.

6. Perform such functions as the Executive Secretary and/or the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

B. HON. GAUDENCIO A. MENDOZA Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs

1. Provide advise and legal assistance to the Executive Secretary on matters requiring legal action, including matters pertaining to legislation;

2. Manage, oversee and supervise the Legal Office;

3. Review and draft decisions for the consideration and approval of the Executive Secretary or the President on appealed cases from departments, agencies or offices; decisions on administrative investigations of employees or officials from the rank of assistant bureau director and above; suspension, cancellation or modification of licenses, permits and other privileges;

4. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on national Security and Political Development, Water Resources Management and on International Relations and advise and assist the Executive Secretary on the concerns of the cabinet clusters that may require legal action;

5. Perform such functions as the Executive Secretary and/or the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary may assign from time to time or as may be provided by an appropriate issuance or directive.

C. HON. ANTONIO E. NERY Assistant Executive Secretary

1. Oversee, manage and supervise the operation of computer-based information systems and databases in support of the Office of the Executive Secretary and all offices and operating units under its supervision.

2. Oversee and supervise all Information Technology (IT) and telecommunications related programs, projects and activities of the Office of the Executive Secretary and all offices and operating units under its supervision.

3. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters involving devolution local government, social and community development concerns including housing, livelihood and employment, health and education and community-based infrastructure programs and projects.

4. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the conceptualization and initiation of social impact and special projects.

5. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on Human Resources & Development, Agro-Industrial Development, Physical Infrastructure & Energy Support and Water Resources Management, and advise and assist the Executive Secretary on pertinent matters and concerns that may arise from these meetings.

6. Provide consultative research, fact finding and advisory service to the Executive Secretary in his assigned areas of responsibility.

7. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relative to legislation involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

8. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the preparation and implementation of presidential orders and decisions involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

9. Advise and assist Executive Secretary in the administration of the President’s special projects and programs.

10. Perform such functions as the Executive Secretary and/or the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

D. HON. JULIUS MARCELINO G. TOPACIO Assistant Executive Secretary for Budget & Corporate Affairs

1. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary and/or the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary on government budgeting and corporate matters.

2. Oversee, manage and supervise the Office of Budget and Corporate Affairs.

3. Attend the cabinet cluster meetings on Macro-Economy & Finance and the meetings of the technical committees of the NEDA-ICC, the DBCC, the GCMCC, the TTRM and advise and assist the Executive Secretary and/or the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary on pertinent matters and concerns that may arise from these meetings.

4. Provide consultative research, fact finding and advisory service to the Executive Secretary in his assigned areas of responsibility.

5. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary on matters relative to legislation involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

6. Advise and assist the Executive Secretary in the preparation and implementation of presidential orders and decisions involving his assigned areas of responsibility.

7. Advise and assist Executive Secretary in the administration of the President’s special projects and programs.

8. Perform such functions as the Executive Secretary and/or the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary may assign from time to time.

The foregoing definition of duties and functions and delineation of responsibilities of senior officials under the Office of the Executive Secretary should not preclude the Executive Secretary from exercising the same powers and functions.

The Executive Secretary may delegate such duties and functions or responsibilities to his deputies and other senior officials in the Office of the President, as he deems fit, in the interest of public service.

The provisions of Memorandum Order No. 1 series of 1998 on the flow of documents processed by the Office of the President are hereby reiterated. Furthermore, the Executive Secretary and the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary are hereby authorized to sign papers “By Authority of the President” and attest executive orders and other presidential issuance unless attestation is specifically delegated to other officials by the President pursuant to the pertinent provisions of the Revised Administrative Code.

Memorandum Order Nos. 73 and 128 series of 1993 and similar issuances are hereby revoked.

All previous issuances and/or provisions thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby superseded and/or modified accordingly.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7 th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia