MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 67

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE NATIONAL URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING FRAMEWORK, 1999–2004

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 6 of Republic Act 7279, otherwise known as the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992, a National Urban Development and Housing Framework has been formulated by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board under the direction of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council in coordination with all local government units and other concerned public and private sector within one (1) year from the effectivity of said Act;

WHEREAS, supervening economic and social developments and, more specific, housing and urban development thrusts necessitate the reformulation and updating of the existing NUDHF to incorporate policy redirections;

WHEREAS, there is a need for a coordinative body to facilitate and expedite the NUDHF updating and formulation, to strengthen linkages and coordination towards this end among the LGUs, government agencies concerned, the private sector and civil society, and to assume overall responsibility for the formulation and updating process;

NOW, THEREFORE, I JOSEPH E. ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Formulation of the National Urban Development and Housing Framework, 1999–2004. — It is hereby directed that the existing NUDHF be reformulated and updated, the same to be known as the National Urban Development and Housing Framework, 1999-2004.

SECTION 2. Creation of a National Steering Committee for the NUDHF Formulation and Updating. — There is hereby created, for the purpose stated in Section 1, a National Steering Committee (NSC) for the NUDHF Formulation and Updating, which shall be composed of the following:

Chairman:

President, Federation of Regional Development Council Chairman Nine Representatives of Civil Society Organizations (one each, older person’s organizations, persons with disabilities organizations, environmental organization, professional organizations, and business)

SECTION 3. Functions and Responsibilities. — The National Steering Committee shall exercise the authority to promulgate the guidelines for the design and implementation of the formulation and updating of the NUDHF for 1999-2004. It shall also establish the appropriate coordinating and communication mechanisms necessary for the implementation of the formulation process.

Through the NSC, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) shall provide overall policy and operational directions in the formulation of the NUDHF. In the exercise of said function, it shall closely coordinate with the government’s shelter agencies, other national government agencies concerned, civil society organizations and sectoral groups directly or indirectly involved in housing and urban development. The HUDCC, with the assistance of HLURB, shall likewise serve as the secretariat of the NSC. At the regional level, the HUDCC shall mobilize its Regional Shelter and Urban Development Coordinating Committees (RSUDCCs) to assist in establishing the coordinating mechanism necessary for conducting relevant activities involved in the formulation process at the local level around the country.

SECTION 4. Role of Other National Government Agencies and Local Government Units. — The local government units, government departments/agencies concerned and the civil society organizations concerned shall provide inputs in the formulation process and integrate these concerns in their respective plans and programs pursuant to the NUDHF 1999-2004.

The NSC, through the LGUs and other government agencies, shall ensure that all sectors of society, public, private and civil society, are duly consulted to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related to the formulation and updating of the NUDHF.

SECTION 5. Funding. Budgetary requirements of the exercise shall be funded from available appropriations of HUDCC, HLURB and/or other participating agencies.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. — This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28 th day of JUNE in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.

B(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia