MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 76

REORGANIZING THE NGC-EAST-SIDE DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1169, s. 1998, declared Two Hundred Thirty-Eight (238) hectares of the NGC site as a mixed use area for government complexes, buildings and offices, socialized housing units and other purposes, excluded from the operation of Proclamation No. 1826, establishing the National Government Center, now referred to as the “NGC East-side”;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 471, s. 1998 created the NGC East-side Development Committee and provided the guidelines for the implementation of Proclamation No. 1169;

WHEREAS, the completed survey and census of the NGC East-side showed that 150.583 hectares has been occupied by urban poor families;

WHEREAS, the urban poor families, estimated at more than twenty thousand (20,000) have signified their intention to purchase the lots they occupy with no further need of government assistance under the National Shelter Program of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council;

WHEREAS, the poverty eradication program seeks to provide tenurial security and long term development assistance to the urban poor in fulfillment of the mandate of social justice;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby reorganize the NGC Eastside Development Committee for the purpose of providing tenurial security and long term development assistance to the urban poor families residing therein, including decent livelihood opportunities and a healthy environment consistent with the government’s poverty eradication program.

Sec. 1. REORGANIZATION . The NGC Eastside Development Committee is hereby reorganized as follows:

The President shall appoint all the members of the PMB who shall serve at his pleasure. Pursuant to NGC-EDC Resolution No. 001-98, the NGC East-side urban poor federation shall be the Samahang Nagkakaisa sa Palupa (SANAPA Federation), unless otherwise revoked by the President upon recommendation of the three (3) urban poor organizations. The records of the NGC Eastside Development Committee shall be immediately turned over to the PMB.

Sec. 2. Project Administrator . There shall be a Project Administrator appointed by the President, upon recommendation of the PMB, with a term of three years; provided that a vote of “no confidence” by the PMB shall cause immediate termination prior to the expiration of the term. The Project Administrator shall implement the policies and programs agreed upon by the PMB, and shall be accountable to it. The Project Administrator may appoint two deputies. The PCUP Chairman shall exercise administrative supervision over the Project Administrator and his deputies.

Sec. 3. Funding . The amount of THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (P300,000.00) is hereby released to the PCUP from available unallocated funds for the purpose of implementing this order this year. Henceforth, the PMB budget shall be incorporated in the PCUP annual budget. The PCUP is further authorized to raise funds from the public and private sectors for the implementation of programs of the NGC-UPDC and cover the administrative cost of its operations.

Sec. 4. Repeal/Modification Clause . Memorandum Order No. 471 dated 6 April 1998 is hereby repealed. All executive orders, proclamations, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are deemed repealed or modified accordingly.

Done in Manila this 19 Th day of October, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) Ronaldo B. Zamora

Source: CDAsia