Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 100

GUIDELINES IN THE GRANT OF OVERTIME SERVICES

1. The official working hours in the Office of the President shall be as follows:

a. 7:00 AM to 4:00 PM b. 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM c. 9:00 AM to 6:00 PM d. 10:00 AM to 7:00 PM; and e. 1:00 PM to 10:00 PM

The lunch and dinner break shall not exceed one hour;

2. An employee who is officially on 7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. schedule may report any time between 7:00 A.M. and 8:00 A.M. and complete an eight-hour service for the day. Those on schedule from 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM may report any time between 8:00 AM and 9:00 AM and also complete an eight-hour service for the day. Those on schedule from 9:00 AM to 6:00 PM may report any time between 9:00 AM and 10:00 AM and also complete an eight-hour service for the day. Those on schedule from 10:00 AM to 7:00 PM shall report on or before 10:00 AM. Those on schedule from 1:00 PM to 9:00 PM shall report to work on or before 1:00 PM. Any one who arrives later or leaves earlier than his/her official schedule shall be considered late or on undertime;

3. In adopting the above schedules, heads of offices must see to it that public service is not prejudiced. They shall prepare a fair and equitable distribution of their respective employees to the four (4) work schedules and submit the same to the Personnel Office;

4. With regard to urgent office work, unless extremely necessary, the overtime work shall start after the eight-hour work schedule but shall not go beyond three (3) hours;

Breaktime is not required when overtime does not exceed three (3) hours; (COA Circular 85-55-A)

5. Overtime work of less than one hour’s duration shall not entitle an employee to overtime pay;

6. An employee following a flexi schedule who reports for work late beyond his/her authorized flexi-hours, or reports only for half-day service on a particular day, shall not be entitled to claim overtime compensation. Overtime cannot be used to offset undertime;

7. In no instance shall an officer or employee who is on travel status be allowed to claim compensation for overtime services rendered during said travel;

8. Officials and employees on assignment with special projects and are paid honoraria, allowances and other forms of compensation, are barred from receiving overtime compensation;

9. In case of fortuitous events wherein employees are unable to register their overtime on the bundy clock after rendering overtime service, they shall have the handwritten or typed entries signed by their respective heads of offices or the latter’s authorized representatives;

10. The Finance Office shall be furnished the names and specimen signatures/initials of the authorized representatives who will confirm the typed/handwritten entries in the DTRs;

11. Drivers and security aides who by the nature of their work are unable to record their attendance through the use of the bundy clock are authorized to continue using their DTRs for the actual time of work they have rendered. However, their DTRs should be duly certified correct by their superiors;

12. Household and Communication Personnel, drivers and janitors may be required to follow a work schedule reasonably apportioned by their respective heads of offices. However, when the exigencies of the service demand as determined by the Personnel Department, the office head may change the schedule of working hours;

13. Overtime work must be duly covered by an approved request for overtime authorization, stating among others, the names of the employees who shall perform the work, the nature and purpose of work to be performed, the date on which such shall be performed. Only employees specified in such overtime authorization shall be allowed to perform overtime work;

14. Before any overtime work or work on any legal holiday or rest day is performed, clearance in writing from the office head or any of his authorized representative/s and approval of the Personnel Director is required. This clearance is to be attached to the bundy card/DTR at the end of the pay period;

15. Overtime pay for all employees occupying both “OR” and itemized positions higher than the division chief including those occupying positions of equivalent rank shall not be allowed. (Budget Circular No. 10)

Please be guided accordingly.

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA

May 4, 2000

Source: CDAsia