MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 7

PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVES TO THE GRP PANEL IN THE CONDUCT OF PEACE NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC FRONT (NDF)

This Memorandum Order prescribes the guidelines for the GRP Panel in the conduct of Peace Negotiations with the National Democratic Front (NDF).

1. Peace Negotiations with the NDF shall be conducted under the Rule of Law and in accordance with Constitutional processes.

2. The conduct of Peace Negotiations shall be in line with the principles underlying the comprehensive peace process particularly the principled and peaceful resolution of the internal armed conflicts , with neither blame nor surrender, but with justice and dignity for all concerned.

3. The objectives of the GRP in the conduct of peace negotiations are:

A. An end to armed hostilities and the return of the NDF, the allied Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and the New People’s Army (NPA) into the mainstream of Philippine society and political life;

B. The attainment of a just and lasting peace, and security is erstwhile insurgency affected areas under a meaningful program of reform and rehabilitation, reconstruction , reintegration into the mainstream society and development;

C. The consolidation of all government peace efforts vis-a-vis the CPP/NPA/NDF with the participation of affected and concerned sectors of civil society.

4. The general approaches in the conduct of the peace negotiations are to :

A. Seek a comprehensive solution to the armed conflict taking into consideration:

– The gains that have already been achieved in the peace negotiations, particularly the signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on Respect for Human Rights and International Humanitarian law by the Negotiating Panels.

– The need to accelerate the early completion of the other three substantive agenda of the formal peace negotiations, namely: socio-economic reforms, political and constitutional reforms, and end of hostilities and disposition of forces.

– The need for a program of mutual suspension of hostilities as a primary confidence-building measure to provide the proper climate for the effective implementation of the JASIG and the substantive agreements, and to push the peace negotiations forward.

– The sentiments of all affected communities and sectors.

B. Find a meeting point between the aspirations of the NDF and the political, social and economic objectives of the Philippine Government acting in the interest of the Filipino people.

5. The following issues must be resolved for the resumption of the Formal Talks with the NDF:

A. The need for the Panels to arrive at a common understanding of the process governing the negotiations including the attainment of substantive agreements and the mode of their implementation.

B. In the matter of the President’s approval of the substantive agreements, the need to safeguard the political authority of the President that it be exercised in accordance with Constitutional processes and the Rule of Law.

6. Under the foregoing guidelines, the GRP Peace Panel is hereby directed to complete the four substantive agreements within twelve months and their full implementation within six months thereafter; and to submit its Plans for the execution of this Memorandum Order including the resumption of Formal Talks with the NDF, for the approval of the undersigned in ten days.

7. All matters pertinent hereto shall be fully coordinated with the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process and the Executive Secretary as Head of the Cabinet Advisory Committee for Peace Talks.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office