MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 271

PROVIDING FOR THE RECONSTITUTION OF THE CABINET CLUSTER SYSTEM.

WHEREAS, it is necessary to restructure the membership and functions of the Cabinet Cluster System to enhance inter-agency coordination and expedite the implementation of major inter-agency programs and projects;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Cabinet Cluster System is hereby reconstituted as follows:

A. Cabinet Cluster A. — Agro-Industrial Development Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Agriculture 2. Secretary of Trade and Industry 3. Secretary of Agrarian Reform 4. Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources 5. Secretary of Tourism 6. Secretary of Science and Technology 7. Presidential Adviser on Rural Development

B. Cabinet Cluster B. — Macro-Economy and Finance Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Finance 2. Secretary of Budget and Management 3. Secretary of Socio-Economic Planning 4. Chairman of the Coordinating Council on the Philippine Assistance Program 5. Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines

C. Cabinet Cluster C. — Human Resource Development Support Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Health 2. Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports 3. Secretary of Labor and Employment 4. Secretary of Social Welfare and Development

D. Cabinet Cluster D. — Physical Infrastructure Support Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Public Works and Highways 2. Secretary of Transportation and Communication 3. Presidential Adviser on Housing and Urban Development

E. Cabinet Cluster E. — Security and Political Development Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Foreign Affairs 2. Secretary of National Defense 3. Secretary of Local Government 4. Secretary of Justice 5. Director-General of the National Security Council 6. Presidential Legislative Liaison Officer for the Senate and the House 7. Peace Commissioner

SEC 2. The Executive Secretary, the Cabinet Secretary and the Press Secretary may attend all Cluster meetings as regular members.

SEC 3. The Cabinet Clusters shall serve as advisory committees of the President and the Cabinet. They shall deliberate and recommend measures on policy and operational matters for the consideration of the President and the Cabinet.

SEC 4. The Cabinet Clusters may create sub-committees or adhoc working groups as may be required from time to time.

SEC 5. The Cabinet Clusters shall meet every month, or as often as necessary. The Chairman, in consultation with the member-agencies Cabinet Secretariat, shall set the date of the regular meetings of the Cabinet Cluster.

Notwithstanding the composition of a particular cluster, any Cabinet Secretary may attend any cluster meeting.

While the agenda of the Cabinet Cluster is expected to consist primarily of policy and operational matters, the Cluster shall regularly provide opportunities for reflection and brainstorming on government direction.

SEC 6. The members of the Cabinet Cluster shall elect a Chairman every six (6) months subject to the approval of the President.

SEC 7. The Chairman so elected shall establish and set-up an ad hoc secretariat to directly support the cluster in its meetings and other activities, in close coordination with the Cabinet Secretariat. The Chairman may call on any member agency to extend technical support and assistance to the Cluster as may be required.

SEC 8. To ensure that policy and operational decisions and their implementation are consistent with the overall thrusts of the government, notices of the cluster meetings and agenda items to be discussed shall be given to all Cabinet members by the respective cluster secretariat.

SEC 9. The Cabinet Assistance System (CAS) shall serve as the technical forum of and recommendatory body to the Cabinet and the Cabinet Clusters.

SEC 10. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia