Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 251

In view of the constitution of Public Assistance and Complaints Units in Administrative Agencies/Bodies/Offices/Boards in all Executive Departments, Government Owned and Controlled Corporations and Local Government Units, pursuant to Administrative Order 110, series of 1989, the following guidelines are hereby issued for the operations of the Public Assistance and Complaints Units (PACU) in national agencies, all local government units, and government owned and controlled corporations:

1. ORGANIZATION

The heads of national agencies shall be responsible for the establishment and performance of Public Assistance Units (PACU) in their respective agencies. The designation of personnel to man PACU at the agency’s regional/provincial offices shall be at the discretion of the heads thereof.

In all local government units (LGUs), the local Chief Executive shall be primarily responsible for the establishment and performance of the PACU from either the Office of the Vice-Governor or Provincial Administrator or Provincial Attorney in the case of provinces; and from either the Office of the Vice-Mayor or City Administrator/Planning and Development Coordinator or City/Municipal Attorney in the case of cities and municipalities. Likewise, the local Chief Executive shall designate at least one (1) permanent personnel who shall assist the head of the local PACU.

In all government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), the heads thereof shall be responsible for the establishment and performance of PACU in their respective corporations, and the designation of personnel to man PACU shall be at their discretion.

2. FUNCTIONS

2.1 The PACU shall have the following functions:

2.11 To receive and act on complaints and requests for assistance filed by the public. For this purpose, the PACU shall develop the necessary forms and procedures to be observed by the public in filing the complaints. Such procedures shall be printed in bold letters and posted prominently within the premises of the national agencies, local government units, and government-owned and controlled corporations.

2.12 To refer the complaint/request for assistance to the unit concerned for appropriate action.

2.13 To keep the complainant/requester informed on the status of the complaint/request for assistance.

2.14 To submit periodic reports as may be prescribed by the Office of the President, Presidential Management Staff (PMS).

2.15 To perform such other related functions as may be assigned by the head of the national agency, by the local chief executive, and by the head of the GOCC.

2.2 The PACU shall act on complaints/requests for assistance immediately upon receipt and ensure that the same shall be brought to its closure by the appropriate unit within fifteen (15) working days from receipt of the complaint.

2.3 In case the complaint/request for assistance filed is not within its jurisdiction, the local PACU shall, within two (2) working days, refer the same to:

2.3.1 The appropriate agency, copy furnished the Office of the President, PMS; or,

2.3.2 The Office of the President, PMS, if the local PACU is uncertain as to the appropriate agency to act on the said complaint/request for assistance.

3. MONITORING

The Office of the President, PMS, shall act as the central monitoring agency relative to the establishment and operation of PACUs. It shall prescribe the guidelines in the processing and monitoring of complaints/requests for assistance including the report forms to be prescribed. It shall likewise provide the President a status report of PACUs operations within thirty (30) working days after the end of every semester, copy furnished the Secretary of Local Governments relative to the summary report on LGUs, and the Secretary of Finance relative to the GOCCs.

4. REPORTING

National agencies, LGUs, and GOCCs shall submit their reports to the Office of the President, PMS.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, 31 August 1989

Source: CDAsia