MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 151

CREATING THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CENTER HOUSING COMMITTEE AND PROVIDING GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PROCLAMATION NO. 137 DATED AUGUST 11, 1987

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 137 dated 11 August 1987 has segregated 150 hectares of the National Government Center (NGC) for development and disposition into a housing community for bona fide residents and it is now necessary to issue guidelines for such development and disposition;

WHEREAS, it is desired that the National Government Center housing project serve as a prototype for a new and more expeditious alternative method of developing an Area for Priority Development within the framework of existing Urban Land Reform laws;

WHEREAS, the Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor (PCUP) has accredited and designated the organization of bona fide residents known as the NGC Samahang Maralita Para sa Makataong Paninirahan (SAMA-SAMA) as the authorized representative of all prospective beneficiaries of the aforesaid housing community;

WHEREAS, it is desirable that NGC SAMA-SAMA be given maximum participation in the planning and development of their housing community in order to demonstrate a new and effective alternative method of implementing a social housing project within an ADP;

WHEREAS, there is a need to institutionalize inter-agency cooperation in developing APD areas, particularly the complementary roles of the PCUP, the local government unit and the housing and infrastructure agencies, in order to expedite implementation of urban land reform;

WHEREAS, due to the magnitude of the project in terms of area and in the number of families affected, there is a need for the active participation and support of the heads of the key agencies required to implement the project;

WHEREAS, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) has been mandated by Executive Order 90 dated December 17, 1986 to coordinate the activities of government housing and support agencies to ensure the accomplishment of the National Shelter Program and to design broad strategies for the accomplishment of its objectives through the development of prototypes such as the NGC Housing Project which in this regard shall be treated as a special project for the purpose of replicating new and alternative strategies of project implementation for social housing in APD areas;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the NGC Housing Committee . There is hereby created the NGC Housing Committee which shall take charge of implementing the NGC Housing Project.

a. Composition . The NGC Housing Committee shall be composed of a distinguished citizen and leader from either the government or private sector to be appointed by the President as Chairman, the Chairman of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) as Co-Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer of the Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor (PCUP), the Mayor of Quezon City, the General Manager of the National Housing Authority (NHA), the Secretary of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and the representative of the NGC SAMA-SAMA appointed by the President as members.

b. Powers and Functions . The Committee shall have the following powers and functions:

b.1. Define the project’s concept and strategies of implementation.

b.2 Formulate policies and guidelines on:

b.2.1 land disposition, allocation and distribution of NGC housing site to bona fide residents subject to the provisions of Proclamation No. 137 dated August 11, 1987;

b.2.2 population containment within the defined project area;

b.2.3 qualified beneficiaries for the project;

b.2.4 housing finance for the beneficiaries; and

b.2.5 project administration and other implementation requirements.

b.3. Formulate systems and procedures for project implementation.

b.4. Prepare the project’s work program and budget.

b.5. Identify and mobilize fund resources for project implementation.

b.6. Monitor and evaluate all phases of project implementation.

b.7. Make final decisions on all cases and issues affecting project implementation which cannot be resolved at the operations level.

b.8. Call on any government department or agency for assistance whenever necessary.

c. Voting Rights. The organization of beneficiaries, SAMA-SAMA, shall be given equal voting rights as all the government agencies in policy decisions affecting the project. In case no consensus is reached, the Chairman of the Committee shall have the authority to make the final decision.

SECTION 2. Project Administrator . The NGO Housing Committee is authorized to appoint the Project Administrator who will take charge and be responsible for the completion of the project. The Project Administrator shall have the authority to designate two deputy administrators, one of whom shall be from SAMA-SAMA.

The Project Administrator shall provide financial, technical and administrative support services to the Committee. It shall also allow for the active participation of SAMA-SAMA in the planning, field operations and other phases of project implementation.

SECTION 3. Support Agencies . The following agencies are hereby directed to provide the support needed to ensure the successful implementation of the project:

a. Technical and infrastructure support:

i. Bureau of Lands – shall undertake geodetic surveys for the project;

ii. Development Bank of the Philippines – shall provide interim development financing for the project;

iii. National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation – shall provide long-term buyers’ financing assistance for housing;

iv. Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System – shall install main water distribution lines and supply water to the project area;

v. Department of Health – shall provide health and medical services to project beneficiaries;

vi. Department of Education, Culture and Sports – shall provide educational services to project beneficiaries;

vii. Department of Social Welfare and Development – shall provide welfare, nutrition and community development services to project beneficiaries;

viii. Technology and Livelihood Resource Center – shall assist housing beneficiaries in developing community enterprises for livelihood and income generation.

b. Start-up Funding Support:

i. Department of Public Works and Highways – shall provide expenses for aerial photogrammetry;

ii. National Housing Authority – shall provide expenses for diagnostic activities, including baseline affordability, and skills surveys;

iii. Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council – shall set aside an initial amount of P500,000.00 for secretariat, administrative and support services for the project, out of the approved but unreleased 1987 budget of HUDCC from the Department of Budget and Management.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Manila, January 27, 1988.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

Source: CDAsia