Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 96

RECONSTITUTING THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CABINET ASSISTANCE SYSTEM (CAS), AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

The Cabinet Assistance System shall assist the President and the Cabinet in the development and setting of the Cabinet Agenda and to help facilitate the implementation and monitoring of Presidential decisions.

The Cabinet Assistance System shall be composed of the Cabinet Secretary and the Cabinet Undersecretary, who shall serve at the pleasure of the President, and the duly designated representatives of the Cabinet Members who:

1. should have, preferably, ranks of Undersecretary but not lower than Assistant Secretary or their equivalents, to enable the Cabinet Assistant to coordinate effectively with other senior officers of the Department or Office;

2. should have the full confidence of the Department Secretary/Head of Office;

3. possess good working knowledge of the Department/Office;

4. have access to the resources of the Department/Office; and

5. can attend all the meetings of the Cabinet Assistance System.

In view of recent changes in the composition of the Cabinet, the membership of the Cabinet Assistance System is hereby reconstituted as follows:

In addition, Special Presidential Assistant Flerida Ruth Pineda Romero and the representative of Presidential Counsel Teodoro Locsin, Jr. are hereby authorized to attend the meetings of the Cabinet Assistance System.

The Cabinet Members concerned shall also designate two alternates of the Cabinet Assistant. One alternate shall attend the meetings of the Cabinet Assistance System should the Cabinet Assistant be unable to do so.

The Cabinet Secretary, or his representative, shall continue to preside over the meetings of the Cabinet Assistance System.

To carry out the functions of the Cabinet Assistance System effectively, the Cabinet Secretary is hereby authorized to :

1. form Cabinet Assistance System Committees (CASCs) which will address specific matters and issues concerning the Cabinet; and

2. request that representatives from the Departments and Offices not represented in the Cabinet participate in Cabinet Assistance System discussions when the need arises.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Manila, June 26, 1987

Source: CDAsia