Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 125

RECLUSTERING THE CABINET MEMBERS INTO SMALLER GROUPS AND RECONSTITUTING THE MEMBERSHIP THEREOF

In line with the President’s directive for Cabinet Members who have related responsibilities and concerns particularly in providing frontline services to the people to be regularly meeting on their own, the present Cabinet Clusters, created under Memorandum Order No. 82, are hereby regrouped into smaller clusters as follows:

Cluster A: Rural Development

1. Secretary of Agrarian Reform 2. Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources 3. Secretary of Transportation and Communications 4. Secretary of Public Works and Highways 5. Secretary of Agriculture

Cluster B: Industrial Development

1. Secretary of Labor and Employment 2. Secretary of Trade and Industry 3. Secretary of Tourism 4. Secretary of Science and Technology 5. Chairman of the Presidential Commission on Good Government

Cluster C: Social Development

1. Secretary of Health 2. Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports 3. Secretary of Social Welfare and Development

Cluster D: Economic Development

1. Secretary of Finance 2. Secretary of Budget and Management 3. Secretary of Socio-Economic Planning/Director General, NEDA Secretariat

Cluster E: Security and Political Development

1. Secretary of Justice 2. Secretary of National Defense 3. Secretary of Foreign Affairs 4. Secretary of Local Government 5. Director of the National Security Council

The Executive Secretary, the Cabinet Secretary and the Press Secretary may attend all cluster meetings as regular members.

The Members of the clusters shall elect their respective Chairmen on a rotation basis. The Chairman so elected shall establish and set up an ad-hoc secretariat to directly support the cluster in its meetings and other activities, in close coordination with the Office of the Cabinet Secretariat.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

November 6, 1987

Source: CDAsia