Malacañang Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 369

CREATING A TASK FORCE ON THE REHABILITATION OF AREAS AFFECTED BY THE ERUPTION OF MT. PINATUBO AND ITS EFFECTS

WHEREAS, there is need to rationalize and integrate government’s rehabilitation efforts in view of the extensive damage caused by the recent eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in Zambales;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to go beyond rescue and relief operations and put in place a concrete machinery and program which will guide rehabilitation efforts of government and coordinate these with the private sector, and whenever necessary, the international community;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby create a Task Force on the Rehabilitation of Mt. Pinatubo Eruption-Affected Areas.

SECTION 1. The Task Force shall be headed by the Secretary of Budget and Management, in his capacity as CORD for the most affected region (Region III), as Presidential Coordinating Officer.

SECTION 2. The following committees are hereby created to assist the Presidential Coordinating Officer in the indicated priority areas:

(1) Infrastructure Committee

(2) Resettlement Committee

(3) Livelihood Committee

(4) Social Services Committee

The Chairman in each of the above committees shall be an Undersecretary while the members shall be Assistant Secretaries, or Regional or Bureau Directors to be designated by their respective Departments.

SECTION 3. The Task Force shall be tasked with: (a) coordinating all rehabilitation activities of the national government; (b) prioritizing rehabilitation projects whenever necessary; (c) monitoring the progress of government relief and rehabilitation efforts; (d) communicating within government and to the public the latest updates received; (e) liaising with all parties for necessary assistance/coordination; and (f) submitting regular status reports on relief and rehabilitation projects to the President.

SECTION 4. The Task Force shall coordinate with the concerned local chief executives in the following: (a) identification and prioritization of rehabilitation projects; (b) implementation of projects in coordination with line agencies; and (c) monitoring of projects.

SECTION 5. The National and Economic Development Authority shall serve as the Secretariat of the Task Force, providing technical and administrative support, and shall be represented in all of the committees. The Presidential Management Staff shall provide the necessary linkage with the Office of the President and with the affected local government units.

SECTION 6. The Regional Development Council for Region III shall coordinate with the Task Force and review the development programs, plans and priorities of the region, taking into consideration the effects of the eruption and the rehabilitation program of the Task Force.

SECTION 7. All departments, bureaus, offices and agencies or instrumentalities including government owned or controlled corporations are hereby directed to extend such assistance and cooperation as the Task Force may need in the discharge of its functions.

SECTION 8. The Task Force shall tap the participation of the private sector and non-government organizations in the performance of its functions.

SECTION 9. The NEDA Director-General, the Secretary of Finance, and the Governor of the Central Bank shall be responsible for generating financial and technical assistance from foreign sources.

SECTION 10. The Committee shall complete its work within a period of one year to two years from the effectivity of this Order. At the end of this period, it shall submit to the President a final status report on the rehabilitation program including its recommendations which shall be carried out by the entire government machinery at all levels.

SECTION 11. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-One.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBIS Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia