Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 172

CLARIFYING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 167 PROVIDING FOR THE ABOLITION OF THE IMPLEMENTING OFFICE FOR THE PHILIPPINE-JAPAN PROJECT LOAN ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

In view of the abolition of the Implementing Office for the Philippine-Japan Project Loan Assistance Program under Memorandum Order No. 167 dated April 14, 1988, and in order to facilitate and expedite the approval processes provided under Executive Order No. 164 dated May 5, 1987, the following supplemental guidelines are hereby prescribed:

1. The review and approval of award of contracts involving more than US$1.0 million or its equivalent in other currencies for purely supply of materials and equipment for all government infrastructures and non-infrastructure projects financed by the Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund (OECF) of Japan, shall be undertaken by the Office of the President.

2. All civil works and other construction contracts for OECF-funded projects involving amounts which are beyond the approving authority of Department Heads and Governing Boards of Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations under E.O. 164, shall continue to be reviewed and approved by the President in accordance with said Executive Order.

3. All other functions and activities related to the implementation of OECF-funded projects, such as the conduct of prequalification and the bidding process and the submission to OECF of requests for approval of bidding documents, requests for approval of the results of prequalification, requests for approval of award of contracts, requests for disbursements/reimbursements, and all other matters pertaining to the implementation of the contracts themselves shall remain to be the responsibility of the implementing departments, agencies and government corporations concerned.

In the interest of monitoring and expediting all pending and future projects to be financed with OECF loans, all Heads of Departments and Agencies of the government are hereby directed to coordinate with the Office of the President.

It is understood that all purely consultancy contracts relating to said projects, regardless of the amount involved, shall continue to be approved by the Secretaries concerned, in accordance with the provision of Section 3 of E.O. 164.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia