Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 99

REQUIRING STRICT OBSERVANCE OF PRESCRIBED OFFICE HOURS.

Conformably with the moral tone set by the President in exhorting all public servants to observe “frugality, honesty, efficiency and an avid desire to serve the people,” all officials and employees in this Office are hereby enjoined to strictly observe the prescribed office hours. Any authority previously granted exempting any particular official or group of officials from recording his/her attendance in office is hereby revoked.

Accordingly, all officials and employees, except presidential appointees, shall record their attendance by means of the bundy clock whenever available, otherwise the use of the daily attendance blotter prescribed under Memorandum Order Nos. 639 and 705, series of 1979 and 1980, respectively, copies enclosed, shall be strictly followed. All records pertaining to attendance such as Daily Time Cards or Daily Time Records (CS Form 48) and the daily attendance blotters shall be submitted to the Administrative and General Affairs Office not later than the 2nd working day after the 15th and the end of every month, duly certified by the Head of Office/Unit.

In this connection, attention is invited to Sec. 36 (b) of PD 807 which provides among other things that “Frequent unauthorized absences or tardiness in reporting for duty, loafing or frequent unauthorized absences from duty during regular office hours” is a ground for disciplinary action. For purposes hereof, unauthorized leave of absence or tardiness of more than ten (10) minutes or unauthorized absence from place of work during office hours, all for more than three (3) times a month, shall be considered frequent. For each such violation, the head of Office shall issue a written warning to the employee concerned. Further violations shall constitute sufficient ground for administrative disciplinary action.

Further, with respect to unauthorized leave of absence, the attention of all officials and employees is invited to Item No. 2 of the 5th paragraph of CSC MC No. 2, S. 1985, quoted hereunder:

“2. An application for leave shall be properly cleared with the immediate supervisor and the Director/Department Heads concerned, who shall determine the contingency of the officer’s and employee’s service. An employee who is absent without approved leave shall not be entitled to receive his salary corresponding to the period of his unauthorized leave of absence but this absence shall not be deducted from his accredited leave credits, if there are any. “

The Administrative and General Affairs, Accounting and Finance Offices, shall see to it that the above quoted provision is strictly enforced.

For the information and guidance of everyone, a copy of the aforecited CSC Circular No. 2, S. 1985 is enclosed.

Directors and Assistant Directors and all others holding positions of equivalent rank, while they are not required to keep a daily record of their attendance, but only to report their absences are urged to set the example for their employees to emulate by using on their own volition the daily attendance blotter.

Each head of unit shall be held responsible for the strict observance of this Order.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, July 22, 1987

Source: CDAsia