Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 199

PROVIDING GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LUNTIANG KAMAYNILAAN PROGRAM

In line with the provisions of Memorandum Order No. 198 dated November 9, 1988, requiring the coordinated and synchronized efforts of the different agencies of the government to ensure effective and efficient implementation of the aforementioned Program, the following guidelines on the functions and responsibilities of the departments and offices concerned are hereby issued:

Department of Environment and Natural Resources

1. Provide the required technical expertise in the planning and implementation of tree planting and other related greening projects; and

2. Undertake the Metro-wide tree inventory.

Department of Public Works and Highways

1. Provide the necessary expertise in the delineation of boundaries of the public right-of-way of major thoroughfares, and natural drainageways and assist in the removal of obstructions in these areas to allow for their greening; and

2. Assist in the maintenance of the planted areas.

Department of Education, Culture and Sports

1. Mobilize student participation and involvement in the Program; and

2. Coordinate related educational programs at the elementary and high school levels.

Department of Transportation and Communications

1. Assist in the enforcement of related anti-pollution rules and regulations; and

2. Facilitate tree planting and other greening activities in transport terminals.

Metropolitan Police Force

1. Enforce laws against illegal encroachment in public right-of-way and easements of major thoroughfares and streets, rivers, esteros, and natural drainageways; and

2. Enforce related anti-pollution laws.

Metro Manila Commission

1. Provide over-all secretariat support in the planning and implementation of the Program;

2. Provide technical assistance in the review of existing legislation on the setting aside of land for parks and open spaces; and

3. Study the possibility of incorporating tree planting as an additional requirement in the building code, zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations.

Department of Tourism

Implement tree planting and related greening activities in national parks, historical sites and other areas under its jurisdiction.

Public Estate Authority

Implement tree planting and related greening activities in reclamation areas and other areas under its jurisdiction.

Office of the Press Secretary

Coordinate the over-all public awareness and information campaign of the Program.

Presidential Management Staff

Provide institutional support in the over-all implementation of the Program.

For compliance.

Manila, November 9, 1988

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia