MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 37

OPENING THE MALACAÑANG PALACE TO PUBLIC TOURS AND AUTHORIZING THE MANAGEMENT THEREOF BY A PRIVATE ORGANIZATION AND THE COLLECTION OF ENTRANCE FEES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the Malacañang Palace has assumed such historical significance and value and world-wide esteem and curiosity that the Filipino people who were denied entry thereto during the twenty (20) years of Marcos regime, as well as the people from all over the world who were amazed by the opulence that characterized the occupancy thereof by the family of depose President Ferdinand E. Marcos, repeatedly demand for the continuous opening thereof to public viewing and tours.

IN VIEW THEREOF, the Malacañang Palace is hereby open to public viewing and tours subject to the following conditions:

1. A reasonable entrance fee therefor shall be charged and collected.

2. The operation and management thereof may be entrusted to a foundation under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon and embodied in a contract that may be entered into by said foundation and the Office of the President;

3. That such contract may be revised, revoked or terminated at any time the President of the Philippines decides, in the interest of the public service and welfare, to close Malacañang Palace or any portion thereof to the public, or may be temporarily suspended for a definite or indefinite period of time reasons of pre-emptive use of the Palace or any portion thereof, repairs, ceremonial functions, and the likes.

4. The foundation shall collect entrance fees and shall turn-over the same to the Finance Officer of the Office of the President;

5. All tour entrance fee collections shall be used exclusively for the operation and management of the Malacañang Palace Tours and the maintenance and preservation of the Palace and/or Office of the President; and

6. The service fee that may be allowed the said foundation may be revised at any time the need therefor arises.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Manila, September 10, 1986

Source: CDAsia