Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 132

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO STUDY AND RESOLVE CERTAIN PROBLEMS IN COMPENSATION IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AS WELL AS DETERMINE THE NECESSITY OF AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 530, SERIES OF 1979.

The attention of this Office has been called to certain problems affecting the salaries of our employees. For instance, inequities have been noted in the salaries of certain officials and employees of this Office, in relation with those of their counterparts in certain departments, principally the Department of Budget and Management, embraced in Executive Order No. 530, series of 1979, otherwise known as the OP Pay Plan, which have caused demoralization in rank in the Office of the President (proper). The problem on what hiring rate should be followed in this Office and some of its attached agencies remains unresolved.

It has also been observed that certain provisions of Executive Order No. 530, dated March 31, 1979, “Establishing Rules and Regulations for the implementation of the Classification and Compensation Plans for the Office of the President (proper), “require certain amendments to keep them abreast with current trends in position classification and compensation schemes.

For this purpose an Inter-Agency Committee is hereby created to be composed of the following:

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To study the problems arising in the compensation of certain officials and employees in this Office and recommend solutions thereto;

2. To review the provisions of Executive Order No. 530 s-1979 and determine which provisions have become obsolete or require updating, and to recommend revocation or revision of, or addition to, such provisions as may be deemed necessary.

The Committee may call upon any official or employee of the government to assist it in its work in any manner that it may deem necessary to successfully discharge its functions.

The Committee shall submit to the Executive Secretary, through the Deputy Executive Secretary, its reports and recommendations on or before December 1, 1987, giving priority to the first function.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, November 18, 1987

Source: CDAsia