Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 146

AUTHORIZING THE REALIGNMENT OF CERTAIN POSITIONS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT WITH THEIR COUNTERPART POSITIONS IN OTHER OFFICES COVERED BY THE OP PAY PLAN.

The realignment of certain positions in the Office of the President (Proper) and the Presidential Management Staff (PMS) with their counterpart positions in other offices covered by the OP Pay Plan as recommended in the report of the Inter-Agency Committee created under Memorandum Order No. 132, dated November 18, 1987, and listed in Annex “A” hereto attached, together with the adoption of common hiring rates, is hereby authorized, effective not earlier than March 1, 1987.

Resulting from the herein authorized realignment are the following adjustments in the salaries of the present incumbents of the position of chiefs (Supvsg. Presidential Staff Officer) and assistant chiefs of divisions (Sr. Presidential Staff Officer) and other related position in this Office:

1. The salaries of Supervising Presidential Staff Officers, Supervising Presidential Staff Legal Officers and Presidential Dental Chief with incumbents appointed effective on or before December 31, 1982, shall be adjusted to P86,990.40 per annum.

2. Supervising Presidential Staff Officers, Supervising Presidential Staff Legal Officers with incumbents appointed effective January 1, 1983, and thereafter shall be adjusted to the hiring rate of P78,756.00 per annum.

3. Senior Presidential Staff Officers, Senior Presidential Staff Legal Officers, Palace Senior Medical Specialist and Assistant Presidential Dental Chief with incumbents appointed effective on or before December 31, 1982, shall be adjusted to P71,152.20 per annum.

4. Senior Presidential Staff Officers, Senior Presidential Staff Legal Officers and Palace Senior Medical Specialists with incumbents appointed effective January 1, 1983, and thereafter shall be adjusted to the hiring rates of P64,416.00 per annum.

5. Incumbents of other positions whose present salaries are lower than the new hiring rates of the revised classification shall be adjusted to the new hiring rates as indicated in the above cited Annex “A”.

The funding requirements for the resulting salary adjustments for the calendar year 1987 shall be charged against savings from personal services in this Office and the PMS during the said year, subject to the availability thereof, and beginning 1988, the Department of Budget and Management shall provide the necessary allotment therefor.

Such Memorandum Orders, Special Orders and Circulars as are inconsistent herewith are hereby amended and/or modified accordingly.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, January 13, 1988

Source: CDAsia