Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 279

Section 8(A) of Republic Act No. 6713, otherwise known as the “Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees” provides:

“All public officials and employees, except those who serve in an honorary capacity, laborers and casual or temporary workers, shall file under oath their Statement of Assets, Liabilities and Net Worth and a Disclosure of Business Interests and Financial Connections and Those of their spouses and unmarried children under eighteen (18) years of age living in their households.”

Section l, Rule VII of the Rules promulgated by the Civil Service Commission governing the implementation thereof likewise states:

“Every official and employee, except those who serve in an official honorary capacity without credit or pay, temporary laborers and casual or temporary and contractual workers, shall file under oath their statement of assets, liabilities and net worth and a disclosure of business interest and financial connections including those of their spouses and unmarried children under eighteen (18)- years of age living  in their households, in the prescribed form, Annex A. “

Conformably with the foregoing, all officials and employees of this Office, who are not otherwise exempt are hereby enjoined to file a sworn statement, using the enclosed form prescribed by the Civil Service Commission. The statement for the period ended December 31, 1989 shall be submitted before April 30, 1990 to the Administrative Office which shall transmit the original copy to the Civil Service Commission, except those submitted by national executive officials which shall be transmitted to the Malacañang Records Office.

Married couples who are both public officials or employees may file the required statement jointly or separately.

In the case of newly appointed employees, or those whose nature of employment is altered from “exempt” to “covered” status under the aforequoted provisions of the law and, the rules, the Administrative Office shall require them to file the Statement within thirty (30) days after the “covered” status becomes effective. Similarly, employees who are separated from the service shall be required to file the statement within thirty (30) days from date of separation.

Section 8(B) of the same law likewise states that every public official or employe shall “identify and disclose, to’ the best of his knowledge and information, his relatives in the government.” The relatives referred to herein, as defined under Section 2 of Rule VII, refer to relatives “up to the fourth civil degree of relationship, either of consanguinity or affinity, including bilas , insos and balaes .”

(Sgd.) MARIANO SARMIENTO II. Acting Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, January 22, 1990

Source: CDAsia