Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 399

DELINEATING THE FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DEPUTY EXECUTIVE SECRETARIES

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Executive Secretary under Executive Order No. 483 dated 30 September 1991, the functions and responsibilities of the Deputy Executive Secretaries are herein delineated and defined as follows:

SECTION 1. General Functions –

The Deputy Executive Secretaries shall:

A. directly assist the Executive Secretary in the performance of his functions as provided for in Section 27, Sub-Chapter B, Chapter 9, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987;

B. perform the duties of the Executive Secretary upon express designation and delegation during his absence or when the Secretary is unable to perform his duties owing to illness and/or other causes;

C. perform such other functions as the Executive Secretary may assign from time to time or as may be provided by law or any appropriate issuance or directive.

SEC. 2. Specific Functions –

A. Deputy Executive Secretary Dionisio C. de la Serna

(1) to provide advice and assistance to the Executive Secretary in the formulation and implementation of policies, plans, programs and projects, rules and regulations as they relate to the general management and administration of the Office of the President;

(2) to exercise administrative supervision, in behalf of the Executive Secretary, over the various units in the Office of the President Proper;

(3) to oversee, in behalf of the Executive Secretary, the operational activities of the offices attached to the Office of the President, and ensure that these offices effectively and efficiently perform their duties and functions in accordance with their respective mandates; and

(4) to assist the Executive Secretary in providing over-all coordination in the Office of the President.

B. Deputy Executive Secretary Mariano Sarmiento III

(1) to provide advice and assistance to the Executive Secretary in the formulation and implementation of policies, plans, programs and projects, rules and regulations as they relate to the general government administration;

(2) to provide legal advice, as may be required, to the Executive Secretary, on decisions requiring Presidential action;

(3) to assist the Executive Secretary in providing staff support to the President on matters concerning general government administration; and

(4) to provide assistance and advice to the Executive Secretary on matters pertaining to legislation.

SEC. 3. The Executive Secretary shall, however, continue to have direct supervision and control over the Private Office, the Executive Office, and the Offices of the Presidential Advisers and Assistants.

SEC. 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Manila, 30 September 1991

Source: CDAsia