Office of the President

of the Philippines

Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 246

CONSTITUTING A SHIPPING AND PORTS ADVISORY COUNCIL

There is hereby constituted a Shipping and Ports Advisory Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, composed of the following:

Department of Transportation and Communications

Chairman

Philippine Ports Authority Maritime Industry Authority Philippine Coast Guard National Telecommunications Commission Two (2) private sector representatives (shipping industry and shippers)

Members

The heads of the aforementioned agencies’ shall designate their representatives to the Council. The private sector representatives shall be designated by the Secretary of Transportation and Communications, upon consultation with the shipping industry and other concerned groups.

The Council shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

1. Provide overall operational guidelines and policies to effect and ensure the necessary lateral linkages and coordination in the complementary development, planning and research activities of the above mentioned agencies in accordance with law;

2. Serve as a venue or forum for the ventilation and resolution of problems and issues related to the maritime sector including the determination of appropriate measures for legislative action; and

3. Formulate and recommend to the President, Department of Transportation and Communications, Philippine Ports Authority, Maritime Industry Authority and Philippine Coast Guard and other appropriate agencies, policies, strategies and measures aimed at improving the maritime industry.

There is no new office created herein and there is no additional budget outlay appropriated on account of the creation of this Council. The heads or their duly, authorized representatives of agencies comprising the Council shall perform their respective duties as part of their normal functions without additional compensation.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, 9 August 1989

Source: CDAsia