Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 45

MODIFYING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 1387, AS AMENDED

The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports was authorized under Memorandum Order No. 3, s. 1986, among others, to re-organize the Mindanao State University (MSU) Board of Regents.

Accordingly, upon recommendation of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, the pertinent portions of Section 4 of Republic Act No. 1387, as amended, are modified as follows:

“The Board of Regents shall consist of fifteen (15) members to be composed of: eleven (11) ex-officio members to wil: The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, the Minister of the Budget, the Director-General of the National Economic and Development Authority, the Chairman of the Lupong Tagapagpaganap, the President of the University, the Chancellors of the MSU Iligan Institute of Technology, the MSU General Santos College and the MSU Tawi-Tawi College, and the elected Presidents of the MSU National Alumni Association, the MSU Faculty Federation and the MSU Student Councils, and four (4) members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines, three (3) of whom shall be chosen from the cultural communities and one (1) who is a nationally prominent educator. Of the three appointed from the cultural communities, the President shall designate one to serve for one year, one to serve for two years, one to serve for three years and the nationally prominent educator shall serve for three years. Thereafter, the successors of such appointive members shall hold office for a term of three years or until their successors are appointed.

The President of the University shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines for a term of six (6) years and his compensation shall be as fixed by law; provided, that in the meantime that no such law exists, the same shall be fixed by the Board of Regents.

The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the Board, but in his absence, the President of the University shall act in his behalf.”

All incumbent members of the Board of Regents holding office by virtue of any appointment or election thereto shall continue in office until the appointment/election and qualification of their successors.

All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Memorandum Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia