Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 93

AUTHORIZING THE SENATE PREPARATORY COMMITTEE TO PROVIDE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR, AND MAKE PREPARATIONS FOR THE CONVENING OF, THE SENATE OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution provides for a bicameral Congress of the Philippines, which will convene on the fourth Monday of July, 1987;

WHEREAS, the present Batasang Pambansa Complex is not adequate both in facilities and office spaces to house both the Senate and the House of Representatives;

WHEREAS, the National Capital Region Building of the Commission on Audit located in the same vicinity of the Batasang Pambansa Complex will be sufficient in the meantime to house the Senate until such time as an adequate building can be provided for it, subject to certain renovations, repairs and improvements thereon, as well as the provision for such equipment, furnitures and other facilities to enable it to work and perform its functions, duties and responsibilities.

WHEREAS, the Senators-elect who have already been proclaimed have constituted themselves into a Senate Preparatory Committee with Senator-elect Jovito R. Salonga as its Chairman; and

WHEREAS, the Senate Preparatory Committee has in turn created a Site Development Sub-Committee headed by Senator-elect Victor S. Ziga to undertake the renovation of the COA-NCR building including the construction of additional structures to house the Senate secretariat and administrative staff and Security;

IN VIEW THEREOF, the Senate Preparatory Committee, through its Site Development Sub-Committee, is hereby authorized to undertake the following:

1. To negotiate and enter into an agreement with the Commission on Audit for the use of the National Capital Region Building of the said Commission located along Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City, by the Senate until such time that a building can be provided for it;

2. To make renovations, repairs and improvements on the said building, including the construction of additional structures, in order to provide sufficient accommodations for the members of the Senate, its committees, their staffs and secretariat;

3. To purchase and acquire such equipment, furniture, air-conditioning units, and other facilities as may be needed by the Senate of the Philippines, and cause the repair of furniture, equipment and facilities of the National Capital Region Building of the Commission on Audit.

4. For these purposes, it is hereby authorized to conduct a simplified bidding or enter into a negotiated contract with qualified contractors for the renovations, repairs and improvements on the National Capital Region Building of the Commission on Audit and its premises, and with qualified manufacturers or suppliers of equipment, furniture and other facilities that may be needed by the Senate of the Philippines. The Committee, through its Chairman, upon the recommendation of the Site Development Sub-Committee, is authorized to approve and sign the necessary contracts relevant to this particular undertaking, subject to the provisions of and the limitations prescribed in Executive Order No. 164 dated May 5, 1987.

The Senate Preparatory Committee through the Site Development Sub-Committee shall submit to the Executive Secretary for approval: proposed budget on the amount actually needed or necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Memorandum Order, and the Secretary of the Budget and Management shall release the necessary funds for the purpose on the basis of the amount authorized by the Executive Secretary.

The provisions of Memorandum Order No. 70 and 70-A, both dated February 17, 1987, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Memorandum Order are hereby modified accordingly.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Manila, June 19, 1987

Source: CDAsia