MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 421

CREATING THE LAKE LANAO WATERSHED PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 414 dated 14 January 1992 constituted the Task Force on the Power Crisis in Mindanao and charged it with the identification of the short-term and long-term solutions to the said power crisis, the formulation of measures for the immediate implementation of the short-term solutions and the recommendation of courses of action to be taken in connection with the long-term solutions;

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order No. 414 focuses on the power crisis in the entire island of Mindanao;

WHEREAS, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources has recommended the immediate implementation of strategies for the rehabilitation and protection of the remaining forested areas in the province of Lanao del Sur, more specifically, the Lake Lanao Watershed Reservation established under Proclamation No. 871 dated 26 February 1992;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 871 prescribes that the usefulness of the Lake Lanao Watershed Reservation as a source of water for the generation of hydro-electric power, agricultural requirements and other purposes should be maintained.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created the Lake Lanao Watershed Protection and Development Council, hereinafter referred to as the Council, to be composed of the following:

SEC. 2. The Council shall be primarily responsible for the formulation of the implementation plan for the protection and management of the Lake Lanao watershed, the procurement and installation of hydraulic monitoring devices, the establishment of a watershed data bank, the conduct of watershed studies and the preparation of policy recommendations for submission to the President.

SEC. 3. The Council shall submit regularly on a monthly basis its report to the President, through the Executive Secretary, on the accomplishment of its tasks.

SEC. 4. The Council is hereby authorized to charge its expenses against the appropriate funds of the National Power Corporation, subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 5. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources shall provide the secretariat support to the Council.

SEC. 6. The Chairman shall immediately convene the Council upon receipt of a copy of this Memorandum Order.

SEC. 7. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia