MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 62

To the People of the Philippines:

In the inscrutable wisdom of Divine Providence, Manuel Roxas, first President of the Republic of the Philippines, has been taken from us. The nation has lost a far-visioned statesman and courageous leader whose whole public life was one consuming passion to see his country free, prosperous and happy.

The architect of the nation’s edifice in the period of reconstruction, he laid the solid foundation for a strong and stable Republic, but did not live long enough to see the full fruition of his arduous patriotic labors.

His faith, courage and wisdom constitute a most precious heritage to his people. Though his voice is stilled, his heroic life will be as a flame of lasting inspiration for generations to come to sustain our people, especially in the hour of stress and peril.

It is meet that the deep grief which fills the heart of the Filipino people should find fitting expression.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby appoint Sunday, April twenty-fifth, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, the day of the funeral service for the dead Leader, and as a day of prayer throughout the Philippines. I enjoin our people who cannot personally attend the burial ceremonies in the City of Manila to assemble in their respective places of worship, there to bow their heads in submission to the will of Almighty God, and to pay their tribute of love, reverence and respect to the memory of our great and good President whose passing we all mourn.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library