MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 261

RESERVING FOR STOCK FARM PURPOSES A CERTAIN PARCEL OF THE PUBLIC DOMAIN SITUATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MANSALAY, PROVINCE OF MINDORO ORIENTAL, ISLAND OF MINDORO.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and pursuant to the provisions of section 85 of Commonwealth Act No. 141, as amended, I hereby withdraw from sale or settlement and reserve for stock farm purposes, under the administration of the Director of Animal Industry, subject to private rights, if any there be, a certain parcel of the public domain situated in the municipality of Mansalay, Mindoro Oriental, Island of Mindoro, and more particularly described as follows, to wit:

A parcel of land, consisting of a portion of unclassified public forest of approximately 708 hectares, located North and West of the boundary line from Corners 61 to 76 of Alienable and Disposable Block I of land Classification Project No. A-A, Bulalacao, Mindoro, and Land Classification Map 622 and a portion of the Alienable area of Project No. A-8 adjoining the eastern side of said area covering approximately 550 hectares, situated in Bulalacao, Mansalay, Mindoro .Oriental, Island of .Mindoro. Bounded on the North, by Tinaga Creek; on the E., by sea and Timber Block “B”; on the S., by Budburan Creek and Public Forests and on the W., by Talibang Creek and public forest. Beginning at a point marked “1” on the attached sketch plan; thence following the shoreline in a southerly direction to point “2”; which is the same corner 155 of Land Classification Project 8-B; thence following line 155 to 156 of said Project 8-A to. point “3”; thence following 156 to 157 to point “4”; thence following 157 to 158 to point “5” which is the mouth of Budburan Creek; thence following upstream in a westerly direction of Budburan Creek to point “6” which is equivalent to corner 65 of Forest Land Classification Project 8-A; thence following lines 65-64, 64-63, 63-62 and 62-61 of said Project 8-A which correspond to lines 6-7, 7-8, 8-9 and 9-10 respectively of this proposed reservation, corner 10 being on the Talimbong Creek and equivalent to Forest corner 61; thence following Talimbong Creek upstream in a northerly direction to its source from which a line due North until it intersect Tinaga Creek to corner 11; .thence following Tinaga Creek downstream in an easterly direction to its mouth which is the point of beginning, which is corner “1”; containing an approximate area of 1,338 hectares, more or less.

It is a condition of this reservation that when the land comprised therein is no longer needed for the purpose for which it has been reserved, the same shall revert to the category of forest land to be administered by the Bureau of Forestry in accordance with the Forest Law and Regulations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library