MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 357

RESERVING FOR AGRICULTURAL SETTLEMENT PURPOSES A CERTAIN PARCEL OF THE PUBLIC DOMAIN SITUATED IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF TANAY AND MONTALBAN, PROVINCE OF RIZAL, ISLAND OF LUZON

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, and pursuant to the provisions of section 83 of Commonwealth Act No. 141, as amended, I hereby withdraw from sale and settlement and reserve for agricultural settlement subject to private rights, if any there be, and to future classification and final survey and to such conditions and restrictions as may be imposed in accordance with the Forest Law and Regulations, the following described parcel of land, excluding Communal Forest Parcels I, II and III and Communal Pasture Parcel II of Tanay; Communal Forest Parcel II of Antipolo; Communal Forest Parcel V of Teresa; Communal Forest Parcel I of Baras; Communal Forest Parcels I and II of Morong and Alienable and Disposable Block II, Project No. 28, Tanay, Rizal, and such portions thereof as shall be segregated and delimited by the Bureau, of Forestry as timber lands under its control and administration, of the public domain situated in the municipalities of Tanay and Montalban, Province of Rizal, Island of Luzon, to wit:

From corner 1, which is the intersection of the provincial boundary of Bulacan, Rizal and Quezon, S. 4° E., 16,700 meters following the provincial boundary of Rizal and Quezon to corner 2; thence S. 31° 00′ E., 23,350 meters following the said provincial boundary to corner 3; thence following the provincial boundary of Rizal Laguna, southwesterly direction about 10,900 meters to corner 4; thence following the boundary of alienable and disposable block I, project No. 28, of .Tanay, Rizal, in a general northwesterly direction about 17,600 meters to corner 5; thence following the said boundary of alienable and disposable block I, project No. 28, Tanay, Rizal, in a general southwest, south and westerly directions, about 13,250 meters to corner 6; thence following the said boundary of alienable and disposable block I, project No. 28 of Tanay, Rizal, in a general southwest, northwest and northeast directions about 5,550 meters, then following the boundary of the Mariquina Watershed Reservation northerly direction, 6,700 meters to corner 7; thence following the boundary of the Mariquina Watershed Reservation in a general northeast, north and northwesterly directions, 14,900 meters to corner 8; thence N. 67° E., 3,450 meters following the said boundary of the Mariquina Watershed Reservation to corner 9; thence N. 27° W., 5,000 meters following the said boundary to corner 10; thence S. 66° E., 3,800 meters following the boundary of the Angat Watershed Reservation to corner 11; thence following said boundary of the Angat Watershed Reservation northwest, northeast and northwest directions, 9,950 meters to corner 12; thence N. 88° E., 2,550 meters following the provincial boundary of Rizal and Bulacan to corner 1, or the point of beginning, comprising approximately 25,475 hectares.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library