MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 27

AUTHORIZING THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITIES TO OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT OUT OF THE TEN MILLION PESOS APPROPRIATED IN COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 723.

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by existing law and to carry out the recommendations of the Committee created under Joint Resolution No. 5 of the Congress of the Philippines approved on July 28, 1945, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, hereby authorize the payment, out of the ten million pesos appropriated in item 3, page 475, of Commonwealth Act No. 723, of gratuities to loyal and deserving officials and employees of the National Government who were in the active service on December 8, 1941, whether recalled to the service or not, and who were paid salaries on the monthly basis.

1. The gratuities herein authorized shall be equivalent to two months’ basic salary at the rates actually received on December 8, 1941.

2. The following are considered not loyal and deserving and they are not, therefore, entitled to the gratuities herein authorized:

(a) Officials and employees who, after December 8, 1941, were convicted by competent authority of treason or other offenses involving moral turpitude or disloyalty to the Government of the United States or the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.

(b) Those who, after December 8, 1941, were dismissed for cause from the service of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines.

(c) Those who were convicted of crimes involving moral turpitude or who were dismissed from the service for cause during the enemy occupation, except those who have been cleared by proper authority or whose cases have been duly reconsidered.

3. The payment of gratuities to officials and employees having cases against them in the People’s Court, or in any other court or office of competent jurisdiction, and to those who are still under the custody of the United States Army; or of the Commonwealth Government shall be withheld pending the final outcome of their respective cases.

4. The payment of gratuities to officials who on. December 8, 1941, were holding the positions of assistant director or assistant chief of bureau or office and other positions of the same or higher rank and to those who were promoted to such positions during the enemy occupation shall be withheld, except those who have been cleared by proper authority or reemployed in the Commonwealth Government.

5. Officials and employees appointed for a limited period of: time shall be paid gratuities up to the date of the expiration of their last appointments or contracts at the rates of their actual basic monthly salaries on December 8, 1941, but in no case to exceed two months.

6. Officials and employees who died before February 26, 1945, shall be paid gratuities up to the date of death at the rates of their actual basic monthly salaries on December 8, 1941, but in no case to exceed two months.

7. The payment of the gratuities authorized in this Order shall be subject, in addition to the conditions herein set forth, to auditing requirements prescribed by the Auditor General.

Done at the City of Manila this 7 th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1W – 44]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.