sR SRTORUNE

 

S. No. 1224
H. No. 5829

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines

» Metro Manila
Highteenth Congress

Mirst Regular Sesstan

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand nineteen.

—— ee

[ RerusticActNo. 11476]

AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING GOOD MANNERS AND
RIGHT CONDUCT AND VALUES EDUCATION IN
THE KTO 12 CURRICULUM, APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “GMRC and Values Education Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policies. — The State recognizes
the vital role of the youth in nation-building and promotes and
protects their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social
well-being. The State also recognizes the fundamental role of
all educational institutions in the inculcation of patriotism
and nationalism, fostering of love of humanity, respect of
human rights, appreciation of the role of modern-day and
national heroes in the historical development of the country,
teaching the rights and duties of citizenship, strengthening
ethical and spiritual values, developing moral character and
personal discipline, encouraging critical and creative thinking,

broadening scientific and technological knowledge, and
promoting vocational efficiency.

Towards these ends, the State shall inculcate in the youth
patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement
in public and civic affairs. The State shall also give priority
to education, science and technology, arts, culture, and sports
to foster patriotism and nationalism, accelerate social progress,
and promote total human liberation and development.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Human Dignity refers to the unique and inherent
value or worth of human persons. It is intrinsic, hence, innate,
inviolable, inalienable, and universal.

(b) Values Education refers to:

(1) The process that provides young people internalization
of values which aims at student’s grasp of underlying
principles, together with the ability to act on those principles,
and the settled disposition to do so;

(2) Different pedagogies, methods or programs that
teachers and/or educators use to create learning experiences
for students when it comes to valuing processes, value
positions, and value judgment; and

(3) Learning about self and wisdom of life in a
self-exploratory, systematic, and scientific way.

(c) Good Manners and Right Conduct (GMRC) refers to
certain and particular universally accepted basic social values
and etiquette and/or proper modes of behavior that convey
respect to those whom one interacts with.

(a) Character Building Activities shall mean actual and
authentic learning activities wherein the character of the
learners is formed, shaped, and/or built-up.

SEC. 4. Institutionalization of Good Manners and Right
Conduct and Values Education in the K to 12 Basic Education
Curriculum. — Good Manners and Right Conduct (GMRC) and
Values Education shall replace the existing Edukasyon sa
Pagpapakaiao curriculum and be institutionalized as follows:

(a) GMRC shall be taught from Grades 1 to 6 as a
separate subject with the same time allotment as the other
core subjects, and shall be integrated in the daily learning
activities in the kindergarten level. The Department of
Education (DepEd) shall introduce GMRC through clear,
distinct, specific, and concrete character building activities,
such as role playing in the classroom, community immersion
activities, teacher-parent collaborative learning activities,
school-initiated values formation activities, simulated activities,
and other forms of experiential learning. GMRC shall inculcate
among the students the concepts of human dignity, respect
for oneself, and giving oneself to others in the spirit of
community, for the effective and holistic development of the
decision-making skills of the child. phe curriculum shall also
focus on the basic tenets of GMRC, ‘such as caring for oneself,
giving concern for others, according proper respect to people,
upholding discipline and order, cultivating sincerity, honesty,
obedience, and above all, love for country.

(b) Values Education shall be taught from Grades 7 to
10 as a separate subject with the same time allotment as the
other core subjects. The subject shall also be delivered using
clear, distinct, specific, and concrete character building
activities as prescribed in the immediately preceding
subparagraph. At these grade levels, GMRC shall remain
integrated in the teaching of Values Education.

(©) Values Education shall be integrated in the teaching
of the subjects in Grades 11 and 12 under the K to 12 Basic
Education Curriculum.

SEC. 5. Coverage of Values Education. — It is hereby
mandated that Values Education shall be an integral and
essential part of the DepEd’s K to 12 Basic Education
Curriculum. Values Education as herein provided shall
encompass universal human, ethical, and moral values, among
others. It shall inculcate among our students the basic tenets
of the observance of respect for oneself, others, and our elders,
intercultural diversity, gender equity, ecology and integrity of
creation, peace and justice, obedience to the law, nationalism
and global citizenship, as well?#as the values of patience,
perseverance, industry, honesty and integrity, and good faith
in dealing with other human“beings along with all other
universal values.

 

SEC. 6. Teaching Qualification and Capacity Building for
Teachers. — Teachers with diploma, certification, and/or
training in the field of Values Education or other allied
disciplines shall be given preference in the teaching of this
core subject.

The DepEd shall carry out the appropriate training for
teachers and educators on GMRC and Values Education, as
well as provide them with adequate and relevant instructional
materials, in order to develop and enhance their capacity to
teach the subject.

SEC. 7. Whole School Approach. — For the effective
institutionalization and teaching of GMRC and Values
Education as a core subject, a whole school approach shall be
adopted. This shall facilitate collaborative action in and by the
school community and other stakeholders to foster parental
involvement and develop home and school partnerships for an
inclusive values education framework.

SEC. 8. Annual Review and Assessment. — The DepEd
shall conduct an annual review of the institutionalization of
GMRC and Values Education in the K to 12 Basic Education
Curriculum to ensure its proper implementation and assess
student learning outcomes for the purpose of determining its
efficacy.

The report shall be submitted to the Committees on Basic
Education of both houses of Congress within thirty (80) days
from the termination of the period of review and assessment.

SEC. 9. Implementing Agency. — The DepEd shall be the
lead agency in implementing the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 10. Appropriations. — The amount necessary for the
initial implementation of this Act shall be sourced from the
current appropriations of the DepEd. Thereafter, the amount
necessary for its continuous implementation shall be included
in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 11. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Act, the DepEd,
in consultation with relevant stakeholders, shall issue the
necessary rules and regulations for its effective implementation.

 

|

SEC. 12. Separability Clause. — If any part | provision
of this Act shall be held invalid or unconstitutional, the other
parts or provisions hereof which are not affected shall remain
in full force and effect.

SEC. 13. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, rules,
executive orders, and other administrative issuances and parts
thereof which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby
repealed, superseded or modified accordingly.

SEC. 14. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

  

ALAN’PETER S. CAYETANO VICENTE/C. SOTTO II
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1224
and House Bill No. 5829 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on March 4,

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

& ww, 5

JOSE LUIS G. MONTALES
Secretary General

House of Representatives

Approved: JUN 25 2020

   

ROD ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippir
:

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 014834