ae

   

 

H. No. 1026
S. No. 1074

Republic af the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress

+ Kirst Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second
day of July, two thousand nineteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11467}

AN ACT AMENDING SECTIONS 109, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147,
152, 263, 263-A, 265, AND 288-A, AND ADDING A
NEW SECTION 290-A TO REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8424,
AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE
NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1997,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 109 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read
as follows:

“SEC. 109. Exempt Transactions. ~ (1)
Subject to the provisions of Subsection 2 hereof, the
following transactions shall be exempt from the
value-added tax:

     

 

“A) xXx

«,

XXX

“@) xxx

“(AA) Sale or importation of prescription drugs
and medicines for:

“@ Diabetes, high cholesterol, and
hypertension beginning January 1, 2020; and

“@i) Cancer, mental illness, tuberculosis, and
kidney diseases beginning January 1, 2023.

“Provided, That the DOH shall issue a list of
approved drugs and fredicines for this purpose within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act; and

“(BB) xxx”

Sc. 2. Title VI, Chapter III, Excise Tax on Alcohol
Products, of the National Internal Revenue Code IRC) of 1997,
as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“CHAPTER II
“ExcISE TAX ON ALCOHOL PRODUCTS

“SO, 141, Distilled Spirits. - On distilled
spirits, subject to the provisions of Section 133
of this Code, an excise tax shall be Jevied, assessed
and collected based on the following schedules:

“(A) Effective January 1, 2020

“) An ad valorem tax equivalent to
twenty-two percent (22%) of the net retail price
(excluding the excise tax and the value-added tax)
per proof; and

 

 

 

 

 

“@) In addition to the ad valorem tax herein
imposed, a specific tax of Forty-two pesos (P42.00)
per proof liter.

“@®) Effective January 1, 2021

“) An ad udlorem tax equivalent to
twenty-two percent (22%) of the net retail price
(excluding the excise tax and the value-added tax)
per proof; and

“Q) In addition to the ad valorem tax herein
imposed, a specific tax of Forty-seven pesos (P47.00)
per proof liter.

“(C) Effective January 1, 2022

“) An ad valorem tax equivalent to
twenty-two percent (22%) of the net retail price
(excluding the excise tax and the value-added tax)
per proof; and

“@) In addition to the ad valorem tax herein.
imposed, a specific tax of Fifty-two pesos (P52.00) per
proof liter.

“@) Effective January 1, 2023

“) An ad valorem tax equivalent to
twenty-two percent (22%) of the net retail price
(excluding the excise tax and the value-added tax)
per proof; and

“(2) In addition to the ad valorem tax herein
imposed, a specific tax of Fifty-nine pesos (P59.00)
per proof liter.

“) Effective January 1, 2024

“Q) An ad valorem tax equivalent to
twenty-two percent (22%) of the net retail price

 

(excluding the excise tax and the value-added tax)
per proof; and

“@) In addition to the ad valorem tax herein
imposed, a specific tax of Sixty-six pesos (P66.00) per
proof liter.

“@) In addition to the ad valorem tax herein
imposed, the specific tax imposed under this Section
shall be increased by six percent (6%) every year
thereafter, effective January 1, 2025, through revenue
regulations to be issued by the Secretary of Finance.

‘Medicinal preparations, flavoring extracts,
and all other preparations, except toilet preparations,
of which, excluding water, distilled spirits form the
chief ingredient, shall be subject to the same tax as
such chief ingredient.

“This tax shall be proportionally increased for
any strength of the spirits taxed over proof spirits,
and the tax shall attach to this substance as soon as
itis in existence as such, whether it be subsequently
separated as pure or impure spirits, or transformed
into any other substance either in the process of
original production or by any subsequent process.

“ ‘Spirits or distilled spirits’ is the substance
lmown as ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine,
including all dilutions, purifications and mixtures
thereof, from whatever source, by whatever process
produced, and shall include whisky, brandy, rum,
gin and vodka, and other similar products or
mixtures.

“ ‘Proof spirits’ is liquor containing one-half
(1/2) of its volume of alcohol of a specific gravity of
seven thousand nine hundred and thirty-nine ten
thousandths (0.7939) at fifteen degrees centigrade
(15°C). A ‘proof liter’ means a liter of proof spirits.

 

 

 

|
{

 

“Net xetail price’ shall mean the price at which
the distilled spirits is sold on retail-in at least five (6)
major supermarkets in Metro Manila, excluding the
amount intended to cover the applicable excise tax
and the value-added tax. For distilled spirits which
are marketed outside Metro Manila, the ‘net retail
price’ shall mean the price at which the distilled
spirits is sold in‘at least five (5) major supermarkets
in the region excluding the amount intended to cover
the applicable excise tax and the value-added tax.
This shall initially be provided by the manufacturer
through a sworn statement and shall be validated by
the Bureau of Internal Revenue through a price
survey.
n
“Major supermarkets, as contemplated under
this Act, shall be those with the highest annual
gross sales in Metro Manila or the region, as the case
may be, as determined by the Bureau of Internal
Revenue, and shall exclude retail outlets or kiosks,
convenience or sari-sari stores, and others ofa similar
nature: Provided, That no two (2) supermarkets in
the list to be surveyed are affiliated and/or branches
of each other: Provided, finally, That in case a
particular distilled spirit‘is not sold in major
supermarkets, the price survey can be conducted in
retail outlets where said distilled spirit is sold in Metro
Manila or the region, as the case may be, upon the
determination of the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue.

“The net retail price shall be determined by
the Bureau of Internal Revenue through a biannual
price survey under oath.

“The methodology and all pertinent documents
used in the conduct of the latest price survey shall be
submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee
on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program
(COCCTRP) created under Republic Act No. 8240.

 

“Understatement of the suggested net retail
price by as much as fifteen percent (15%) of the actual
net retail price shall render the manufacturer or
importer liable for additional excise tax equivalent to
the tax due and difference between the understated
suggested net retail price and the actual net retail
price.

‘Distilled spirits introduced in the domestic
market after the effectivity of this Act shall be initially
taxed according to their suggested net retail prices.

“ Suggested net retail price’ shall mean the

net retail price (excluding the excise tax and the
value-added tax) at which locally manufactured or
imported distilled spirits are intended by the
manufacturer or importer to be sold on retail in major
supermarkets or rétail outlets in Metro Manila for
those marketed nationwide, and in other regions, for
those with regional markets. At the end of three (8)
months from the product launch, the Bureau of
Internal Revenue shall validate the suggested net
retail price of the new brand against the net retail
price as defined herein and initially determine the
correct tax on a newly introduced distilled spirits.
After the end of nine (9) months from such validation,
the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall revalidate the
initially validated net retail price against the net retail
price as of the time of revalidation in order to finally
determine the correct tax on a newly introduced
distilled spirits.

“The methodology and all pertinent documents
used in the conduct of the latest price survey shall be
submitted to the Congressional Oversight Committee
on the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program created
under Republic Act No. 8240.

“Manufacturers and importers of distilled spirits
shall, within thirty (80) days from the effectivity of
this Act, and within the first five (6) days of every

*

third month thereafter, submit to the Commissioner
asworn statement of the volume of sales and removals
for each particular brand of distilled spirits sold at
their establishments for the three-month period
immediately preceding.

, ”

KXX

“Sec. 142. Wines. ~ On wines, there shall
be levied, assessed and collected effective on
January 1, 2020, an excise tax equivalent to Fifty
pesos (P50.00) per liter. The rate of tax imposed under
this Section shall be increased by six percent (6%)
every year thereafter, effective January 1, 2021,
through revenue regulations issued by the Secretary
of Finance.

“Manufacturers and importers of wines
shall, within thirty (80) days from the effectivity of
this Act, and within the first five (5) days of every
month thereafter, submit to the Commissioner a
sworn statement of the volume of sales and removals
for each particular brand of wine sold at their
establishments for the three-month period
immediately preceding.

«. »

XXX.

“SEC. 148. Fermented Liquors. ~ There shall
be levied, assessed and collected an excise tax on beer,
lager beer, ale, porter and other fermented liquors
regardless if manufactured in factories or sold and
brewed at micro-breweries or small establishments
such as pubs and restaurants, except tuba, basi,
tapuy and similar fermented liquors in accordance
with the following schedule:

“Effective on January 1, 2020, the tax shall be
Thirty-five pesos (P35.00) per liter;

; “Effective on January 1, 2021, the tax shall be SEC. 3. Section 144 of the National Internal Revenue
Thirty-seven pesos (P37.00) per liter; Code of 1997, as amended by Republic Act No. 11346, is hereby
amended to read as follows:

 

“Effective on January 1, 2022, the tax shall be
Thirty-nine pesos (P39.00) per liter;

“Effective on January 1, 2023, the tax shall be
Forty-one pesos (P41.00) per liter; and

“Rffective on January 1, 2024, the tax shall be
Forty-three pesos (P43.00) per liter.

“The rates of tax imposed under this Section
shall be increased by six percent (6%) every year
thereafter effective January 1, 2025, through revenue
regulations issued by thé Secretary of Finance.

ae

“Every brewer, manufacturer or importer of
fermented liquor shall, within thirty (30) days from
the effectivity of this Act, and within the first five (6)
days of every month thereafter, submit to the
Commissioner a sworn statement of the volume of
sales and removals for each particular brand of
fermented liquor sold at his establishment for the
three-month period immediately preceding.

“Any brewer, manufacturer or importer who,
in violation of this Section, misdeclares or
misrepresents in his or its sworn statement herein
required any pertinent data or information shall,
upon final findings by the Commissioner that the
violation was committed, be penalized by a summary
cancellation or withdrawal of his or its permit to
engage in business as brewer, manufacturer or
importer of fermented liquor.

“SEC. 144. Tobacco Products, Heated
Tobacco Products, and Vapor Products. —

“(A) Tobacco Products. ~ xxx

“®) Heated Tobacco Products. — There shall
be levied, assessed and collected on heated tobacco
products an excise tax at the rate prescribed below:

“Bffective on January 1, 2020, Twenty-five pesos
(25. 00) per pack of twenty (20) units or packaging
combinations of not more than twenty (20) units;

“Effective on January 1, 2021, Twenty-seven.
pesos and fifty centavos (P27.50) per pack of twenty
(20) units or packaging combinations of not more than
twenty (20) units;

“Effective on January 1, 2022, Thirty pesos
(P 30.00) per pack of twenty (20) units or packaging
combinations of not more than twenty (20) units; and

“Effective on January 1, 2023, Thirty-two pesos
and fifty centavos (P32.50) per pack of twenty (20)
units or packaging combinations of not more than
twenty (20) units.

“The rates of tax imposed under this Subsection
shall be increased by five percent (5%) every year
effective on January 1, 2024 through revenue
regulations issued by the Secretary of Finance.

xxXX

“Manufacturers, distributors, and importers
of heated tobacco products shall, within thirty (80)

 

days from the effectivity of this Act, and within the
first five (5) days of every month thereafter, submit
to the Commissioner a sworn statement of the
volume of sales and removals for each particular
brand of heated tobacco products sold for the
three-month period immediately preceding.

4,

XKX

“If the offender is not a citizen of the
Philippines, he/she shall be deported immediately
after serving the sentence, without further
proceedings for deportation.

“The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
shall periodically determine and regulate, consistent
with evolving medical and scientific studies, the
manufacture, impértation, sale, packaging,
advertising, and distribution of heated tobacco
products, including banning the sale to nonsmokers
or persons below twenty-one (21) years old.

 

“Selling heated tobacco products to persons
below twenty-one (21) years old shall be prohibited,
and shall be punished with a fine of Ten thousand
pesos (P10,000.00) and imprisonment of thirty (30)
days.

«,

XX

“Manufacturers, distributors, importers, and
sellers of heated tobacco products are given a period
of eighteen (18) months from the effectivity of the
implementing rules and regulations (IRR) of this Act
to comply with the requirements under such IRR.

XXX

“The Bureau of Internal Revenue is mandated
to issue a revenue regulation prescribing the floor
price or the minimum price of heated tobacco product

Jk

taking into account the sum of the excise and value-
added taxes as provided herein.

“(C) Vapor Products. ~ There shall be levied,
assessed and collected on vapor products an excise
tax at the rates prescribed below:

“(1) Nicotine Salt or Salt Nicotine. ~ There
shall be levied, assessed and collected on any liquid
substance, regardless of nicotine content, including
nicotine-free liquids or any similar product, further
classified as nicotine salt or salt nicotine, an excise
tax based on the following schedules:

““Béfective on January 1, 2020, Thirty-seven
pesos (P37.00) per milliliter or a fraction thereof;

“Effective on January 1, 2021, Forty-two pesos
(P42.00) per milliliter or a fraction thereof:

“Effective on January 1, 2022, Forty-seven pesos
(P47.00) per milliliter or a fraction thereof; and

“Effective on January 1, 2028, Fifty-two pesos
(P52.00) per milliliter or a fraction thereof.

“Provided, That the rates of tax imposed under
this Subsection shall be increased by five percent (5%)
every year effective on January 1, 2024, through
revenue regulations issued by the Secretary of
Finance.

“@) Conventional ‘Freebase’ or ‘Classic’
Nicotine. — There shall be levied, assessed and
collected on any liquid substance, regardless of
nicotine content, including nicotine-free liquid or any
similar product, further classified as conventional
‘freebase’ or ‘classic’ nicotine an excise tax based on
the following schedules:


“Effective on January 1, 2020, Forty-five pesos
(P45.00) per ten (10) milliliters or a fraction thereof;

“Effective on January 1, 2021, Fifty pesos
(P50.00) per ten (10) milliliters or a fraction thereof:

 

“Effective on January 1, 2022, Fifty-five pesos
(P55.00) per ten (10) milliliters or a fraction thereof;
and

‘Hffective on January 1, 2028, Sixty pesos

(P60.00) per ten (10) milliliters or a fraction thereof. -

“Provided, That the rates of tax imposed under
this Subsection shall be increased by five percent (5%)
every year effective January 1, 2024, through revenue
regulations to be isshed by the Secretary of Finance.

a,

XXX

“Ifthe offender is not a citizen of the Philippines,
he/she shall be deported immediately after serving
the sentence, without further proceedings for
deportation.

“The FDA shall periodically determine and
regulate, consistent with evolving medical and
scientific studies, the manufacture, importation, sale,

the FDA may impose: Provided, however, That this
shall not diminish the regulatory powers of the FDA
over vapor products, regardless of nicotine content.

“Selling vapor products to persons below
twenty-one (21) years old shall be prohibited, and shall
be punished with a fine of Ten thousand pesos
(P10,000.00) and imprisonment of thirty (80) days.

“The manufacture, importation, sale and
distribution of vapor products with flavoring other
than plain tobacco or plain menthol, shall be
prohibited.

he x

“Manufacturers, distributors, importers, and
sellers of vapor products are given a period ofeighteen
(18) months from the effectivity of the IRR of this Act
to comply with the requirements under such IRR.

&,

XXX

“The Bureau of Internal Revenue is mandated
to issue a revenue regulation prescribing the floor
price or the minimum price of vapor products taking
into account the sum of the excise tax and
value-added tax as provided herein.”

packaging, advertising, and distribution of vapor Skc. 4. Section 147 of the National Internal Revenue
products, including banning the sale to nonsmokers \ Code of 1997, ag amended by Republic Act No. 11346 is hereby

or persons below twenty-one (21) years old, and amended to read as follows:
banning of flavorings. .
i “SEC. 147. Definition of Terms. — xxx

a “Provided, That vapor products which exceed ‘

\ sixty-five milligrams of nicotine per milliliter
(65 mg/ml) of liquid or gel, or which does not exceed

XXX

“(f) Vapor products shall mean electronic

 

this limit but seeks to make health claims, shall be
subject to additional requirements as the DOH and

nicotine and non-nicotine delivery systems
(ENDS/ENNDS), which are combinations of (i) a liquid


SEc. 6. Section 263 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as
follows:

solution or gel, that transforms into an aerosol
without combustion through the employment of a

mechanical or electronic heating element, battery or
circuit that can be used to heat such solution or gel,
and includes, but is not limited to (ii) a cartridge,
(iii) a tank, and (iv) the device without a cartridge
or tank. It is commonly known as nicotine
salt/salt nicotine, and conventional ‘freebase’ or
‘classic’nicotine, and other similar products:
Provided, That all vapor products shall be covered
by this Act regardless of its nicotine content.”

“SEC. 268. Unlawful Possession or Removal
of Articles Subject to Excise Tax Without Payment
of the Tax. - Any person who owns and/or is found
in possession of imported articles subject to excise
tax, the tax on which has not been paid in accordance
with law, or any person who owns and/or is found in
possession of imported tax-exempt articles other than
those to whom they are legally issued shall be
punished by: :

SEC. 5. Section 152 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as ““€a) A fine of not less than One hundred
follows: thousand pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than Two

 

“SEC. 152. Extent of Supervision Over
Establishments Producing Taxable Output. — The
Bureau of Internal Revenue has authority to supervise
establishments where articles subject to excise tax
are made or kept. The Secretary of Finance shall
prescribe rules and regulations in which the process
of production shall be conducted insofar as may be
necessary to secure a sanitary output and to safeguard
revenue, such rules and regulations to safeguard
revenue may allow the appointment of third parties
to monitor production and removal processes and
volumes, and the exclusion of exciseable goods from
duty-free barter transactions.

“In the case of tobacco products, any internal
revenue officer may, in the discharge of his official
duties, upon order of the court, enter any house,
building or place, including those located within areas
deemed as separate customs territories where articles
subject to tax under this Title are produced or kept,
or axe believed by him upon reasonable grounds to be
produced or kept, insofar as may be necessary to
examine, discover or seize the same.”

hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00) and
imprisonment of not less than sixty (60) days but not
more than one hundred (100) days if the appraised
value, to be determined in the manner prescribed in
Republic Act No, 10868, otherwise known as the ,
‘Customs Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA)’,
including duties and taxes, of the articles does not
exceed Two hundred fifty thousand pesos
(P250,000.00); ,

“b) xxx

XXX.

SEC. 7. Section 263-A of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 268-A. Selling of Heated Tobacco
Products and Vapor Products at a Price Lower Than
the Combined Excise and Value-Added Taxes. - Any
person who sells heated tobacco products and vapor
products at a price lower than the combined excise
and value-added taxes shall be punished with a fine
of not less than ten (10) times the amount of excise
tax plus value-added tax due but not less than Two

 

hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00) nor more than
Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00), and
imprisonment of not less than four (4) years but not
more than six (6) years.”

SEC. 8. Section 265 of the National Intemal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 265. Offenses Relating to Stamps. —
Any person who commits any of the acts enumerated
hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine of not less than Ten million pesos
(P10,000,000.00) but not more than Five hundred
million pesos (P500,000,000.00) and imprisonment
of not less than five (5) years but not more than eight
(8) years:

“@ xxx
“@) xxx
“© xxx
“@) xxx
“@® Xxx

“Provided, That the cumulative possession of
false/counterfeit/recycled tax stamps in excess of the
amount of Fifty million pesos (P50,000,000.00) shall
be punishable by a fine of Five hundred million pesos
(P500,000,000.00) ox up to ten (10) times the value of
the illegal stamps seized, whichever is higher, and
imprisonment of not less than ten (10) years but not
more than fifteen (15) years.”

SEC. 9. Section 288-A of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 288-A. Disposition of Revenues from
Excise Tax on Sweetened Beverages, Alcohol, Tobacco

Products, Heated Tobacco Products, and Vapor
Products. ~ .

“(A) Revenues from Excise Tax on Sweetened
Beverages from Republic Act No. 10963. — The
provisions of existing laws to the contrary
notwithstanding, fifty percent (50%) of the total
revenues collected'from the excise tax on sweetened
beverages shall be‘allocated and used exclusively in
the following manner:

&,

XXX

““B) Revenues from Excise Tax on Alcohol
Products. ~ The provisions of existing laws to the
contrary notwithstanding, one hundred percent
(100%) of the total revenues collected from the excise
tax on alcohol products shall be allocated and used
exclusively in the following manner:

“() Sixty percent (60%) for the implementation
of Republic Act No. 11223, otherwise known as the
‘Universal Health Care Act’ of 2019;

“(2) Twenty percent (20%) shall be allocated
nationwide, based on political and district
subdivisions, for medical assistance, the Health
Facilities Enhancement Program (HFEP), the annual
requirements of which shall be determined by the
DOH; and

“(8) Twenty percent (20%) shall be allocated for
the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs): Provided, That the specific SDG targets
shall be determined by the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA).

«,

XXX

“@) Revenues from Excise Tax on Heated
Tobacco Products and Vapor Products. ~ The
provisions of existing laws to the contrary


notwithstanding, one hundred percent (100%) of the
total revenues collected from the excise tax on heated
tobacco products and vapor products shall be allocated
and used exclusively in the following manner:

“() Sixty percent (60%) for the implementation
of Republic Act No. 11223, otherwise known as the
‘Universal Health Care Act’ of 2019;

“@2) Twenty percent (20%) shall be allocated
nationwide, based on political and district
subdivisions, for medical assistance and the Health
Facilities Enhancement Program (HFEP), the annual
requirements of which shall be determined by the
DOH; and

“@) Twenty percent (20%) shall be allocated for
the attainmentf the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs): Provided, That the specific SDG targets
shall be determined by the NEDA.

4,

XXX

“Provided, further, That the allocation for
Universal Health Care under Section 288-A shall be
based on the collection of the second fiscal year
preceding the current fiscal year.”

co-chairpersons and six (6) additional members from
each House to be designated respectively by the Senate
President and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives.

“The Oversight Committee on Illicit Trade on
Excisable Products shall, in aid of legislation, perform
the following duties and functions, among others:

“Q) Review and evaluate the programs and
performance of the Bureau of Internal Revenue and
the Bureau of Customs in addressing illicit trade on
excisable products and recommend necessary
remedial legislation;

“@) Require concerned government agencies
to submit reports and all pertinent data and
information which will aid in resolving illicit trade of
excisable products;

“@) Hold public hearings and summon
concemed private individuals, government personnel
and officials as resource persons;

“(4) Deputize the Bureau of Internal Revenue,
Bureau of Customs, Philippine National Police,
National Bureau of Investigation, and other

enforcement agencies of the government as may be
necessary in undertaking its duties and functions;

SEC. 10. A new Section 290-A is hereby added in the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, to read as

 

“SEC. 290-A. Joint Congressional Oversight
Committee on Illicit Trade on Excisable Products.
A Joint Congressional Oversight Committee, herein
referred to as the Oversight Committee on Illicit Trade
on Excisable Products, shall be constituted. The
Oversight Committee on Illicit Trade on Excisable
Products shall be composed of the respective
Chairpersons of the Committees on Ways and Means
of the Senate and the House of Representatives as

follows: and

“(6) Perform such other duties and functions
as may be necessary to perform its mandate.

“The Joint Congressional Oversight Committee
shall be assisted by a Secretariat composed of even
number of monitors from both Houses. It shall be
co-headed by the service directors of the Committees

 

on Ways and Means of the Senate and the House of
Representatives.”

SEC. 11. Annual Report. — Government agencies and
offices involved in the implementation of the Universal Health
Care and the SDGs shall each submit to the Congressional
Oversight Committee created under Republic Act No. 8424, as
amended by Republic Act No. 10351, a detailed report on the
expenditure of the amounts earmarked in this Act on the first
week of August every year. The reports shall be simultaneously
published in the Official Gazette and in the agencies’ websites.

SEC. 12. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Secretary of Finance shall, upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, promulgate the necessary rules
and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

SEc. 13. Sepat bility Clause. — If any provision of this
Act shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the other provisions
not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 14. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are contrary
to or inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, amended
or modified accordingly.

SEC. 15. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect on
January 1, 2020 after its complete publication either in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

  

 

VICENTE C{SOTTO III PETERS. CAYETANO
President ofthe Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 1026
and Senate Bill No. 1074 was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on
December 18, 2019.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA JOSE LUIS G. MONTALES

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved: YAN 2 2 2029

cos Mle i

President of the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 013940

Office of the President {