FROM : Fax NO. = 19 Jul. 2817 12:83AM Pt

$s. No. 1468
H. No. 5663

Republic of the Philippines
Guugress uf the Philippines
AMetea Manila

Seventeenth Gaugress

Hirst Regular Syasion

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand sixteon.

| Rerupiic Acr No. 1 09271

AN AGT DESIGNATING CASINOS AS COVERED
FERSONS UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9160,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “ANTI-MONDY
LAUNDERING ACT OF 2007", AS AMENDED

 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Repre antatines of the

Philippines in Congress assem bled:

 

SEOTION 1. Section (a) of Republic Act No, 9160, a8
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“(a) ‘Covered persons, natural or jwidieal, refer
to:

“(8) casinos, including internet and ship-hased
caging with respect to their casino cash
transactions related tu then: gaming operations.

 

xX XX

P2

SEC. 2. Section 3(b} of Republic Act No. 9160 is hereby
further amended to read as follows: SEC. 4. Secticn 10 of Republic Act No. 9160, ss amended,

“tb) Covered transaction’ is a transaction in is hereby further amended te read as follows:
ib: ¥ 3 © = s

12: @3AM

2017

19 Jul.

FAX NO.

FROM

cash or other equivalent monetary instrument
involving a total amount in excess of Ewe hundred
thousand pesos {P500,000.00) within one (1} banking
dav: for covered persons under Section 3(ai(8), a
single casino cash transaction involving an areount
mm excess of Five milion pesos (P5,000,060.00} or its
equivalent in any other currency.”

 

 

   
  

SEC. 3. Section 3 of Repubbe Ac

   

“<x E

“q) For purposes of covered persons undez
Section 3(aH8), the folowing terms are here
defined as follows:

“(1} ‘Casino’ refers te a basiness authorized by
the appropriate government agency to engage in
gaming operations:

“4 Internet-based casino’ shall refer to casinos
in which pezsons participate by the use of remote
communication facilities such bat not Eonited to.
internet, telephone, television, radio or any other
lind of electronic or other vechnology for facilitating
communication: and

 

 

 

Gi) “Ship-based casino’ shall refer te casinos.
the eperation of which iz undertaken on board a
vessel, ship, boat or any other water-based evadt
wholly or partly intended for gambling:

 

 

‘Casino cash transaction refers to
transections involving the receipt of cash by a casino
paié by or on behalf of a customer: or transactions
javolving the payout of cash by a casinc to @ customer
or to any person in histher behalf; and

 

   

   

Gaming operations’ re the activicies
of the casino offerme games of chance and any
variations thereof approved by the appropriate
govermment authortiy.”

+ No. $166, as amended.
is hereby further amended by inserting a new paragraph i)
wo read as follows:

  

 

“SEC. 10. Preezing of Monetary Insirument or
Property. — Upon a verified ex parte petition by the
AMLC and after determimation that probable cause
exasts that any monetary instrument or property is
in any way related to an unlawful activity as defined
in Section hereof, the Court of Appeals may issue
a freeze order which skail be effective immediateiy.
for a period of twenty (20) days. Within the twenty
(20)-day period, the Court of Appeals shall conduct
a summary hearing. with notice to the parties, to
determine whether or not ta modify or lift the
order, or extend its effectivity. The total period of
the freeze order issued by the Court of Appeais under
this provision shall not exceed six ¢6] months. This
is without prejudice te an asset prezervation order
that the Regional Trial Court having jurisdiction over
the appropriate anti-money laundering case or civil
forfeiture case may issue on the same account
depending upon the circumstances of the case. where
the Court of Appeals will remand the case and its
recor Provided, That if there is no case filed
against a person whose account has been frozen
within the period determined by the Court of
Appeals, not exceeding six (6) months, the freeze

redex shall be deemed ipso facie lifted: Provided,
srther, That this new rule shi not apply tc
pending cases in the courts. In any case. the court
showid act on the petition to freeze within
twenty-four (24) hours from filing of the petitiog. If
the application is filed a day before a nonworking
day, the campuiation of the twenty-four (24)-hour
period shali exciude the nonworking dave.

   

     

 

 
 

   

 

    
 

 

   

  

 

“Phe freeze order or asset preservation crder
issued under this Act shall be Lmited only to the
amount of cash or monetary instrument or value of
property that the court finds there is probable cause
to be considered as proceeds of a predicate offense,
and the freeze order or asset svation order shail
not apply io amcunts in the same account im excess
of the amount cr vaiue of the proceede of the
predicate offense.

 

Sx &."

12:83AM P3

2017

19 Jul.

FAX NO.

FROM :

 

SEC. 5. Secti f Repubhe Act No. 9160 2s hereby
amended by inserting a new paragraph to read as follows:

vA}
Q

   

“SEC. 18. Implementing Rudes ond Regulations. —

 

  

Within ninety (90) days from the effectt
this Act, the AMLC, the Philippine Amuseme
Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR) and ather
government regulatory agencies shall jointly
promulgate the rules and vegulations tc implement
the provisions of this Act as applicable te casinos as
covered institutic: The implementing les
applicable to other covered institutions s
to easinos unless i is expreeshy so provided
he rales and regulations to implement the
his Act.”

  

  

 

      

  

   

SEC. 6. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act ig declared unconstitutional, the same shall no: affect the
validity and effectivity of other provisions hereol.

   

 

 

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders, and
issuances cy portions thereof, which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Aci. are bereby repealed, amended or modified
accordingly

 
 
 

  

   

8. Byfe y, ~ Phig Act shall take effect fifteen
fing its publication in the Official Gazette or

    
 
 

a

   

in

 

ow

Senate Bill Ne. . which wae approved by the Senate
on May 30, 2017, was adopted as an amendment te House
Bill Ne. 5663 by the House of Representa s on

May 30, 2017.

o

CESAR STRAY PAREJA ~ LUTGARDO B. BARBO
Secretary General Secretary of tre Senate

House af Representatives

 

 

  
  

 

Approved: ‘JU

 

RODRI ROA DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

 

PRED 2016 ~ 002974