H, No. 8133

Republic af the Philippines
Gangress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Highteenth Congress
Ohirh Regular Session

——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11726!

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE EDADES AND BERNAL
CULTURAL CENTER AND MUSEUM IN DAGUPAN
CITY, PROVINCE OF PANGASINAN, DEFINING ITS
PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. . Section 15, Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution.
affirms that “Arts and letters shall enjoy the patronage of the
State. The State shall conserve, promote and popularize the
nation’s historical and cultural heritage and resources, as well
as artistic creations.”

To this end, it shall be declared the policy of the State to
preserve the works of our national artists and acknowledge their
significance in the nation’s cultural heritage.

SEC. 2. There is hereby established a cultural center and
museum in Dagupan City, Province of Pangasinan, to be known
as the Edades and Bernal Cultural Center and Museum, in honor
of the city’s distinguished national artists, Victorio Edades and
Salvador Bernal, with the general purpose and objective of
presenting and promoting culture and the arts, as well as creative
industries in the community.

Sec. 3. The Edades and Bernal Cultural Center and
Museum shall be a collaboration between the City Government of
Dagupan and the National Commission for Culture and the Arts
(NCCA) with its concerned affiliated cultural agencies and
pertinent academic and private sector partners, and members of
the community, with its site, structures, governance, organization,
operations and development to be provided for by mutual
agreement between the parties, to be executed and published
within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act.

SEc. 4. The City Government of Dagupan shall provide
the land necessary for the construction or establishment, or
both, of the main venue and ancillary offices and facilities of
the Edades and Bernal Cultural Center and Museum.

Sec. 5. The amount necessary for the implementation of
this Act shall be charged against the current year’s budget of the
NCCA Proper. Thereafter, such amount as may be necessary for
its continued implementation shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEc. 6. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the NCCA, in coordination with the City Government of
Dagupan, other concerned agencies of the government, and private
stakeholders, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations
for the effective implementation of this Act.

SEc. 7. Notwithstanding the non-issuance of the
implementing rules and regulations, this Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in
a newspaper of general circulation.

  
   

 

VICENTE {. SOTTOIII : LORDALL/ YY Q. VELASCO
President oXthe Senate Speake ‘he House
- of Representatives

This Act which origiziated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on January 20, 2021
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 2, 2022.

Whe
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MAR&
Secretary of the Senate

 
 
   

/ of Represe}tatives

Approved: APR 29 2022

   

ROD. UTERTE
President of the Philippines