S.No, 1449
H. No, 5648

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Sonenteenth Cangress
AHfirst Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand sixteen.

—
| Rerustic Act No. 10930 |

AN ACT RATIONALIZING AND STRENGTHENING
THE POLICY REGARDING DRIVER'S LICENSE
BY EXTENDING THE VALIDITY PERIOD OF
DRIVERS’ LICENSES, AND PENALIZING ACTS
IN VIOLATION OF ITS ISSUANCE AND
APPLICATION, AMENDING FOR THOSE PURPOSES
SECTION 23 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 4136, AS
AMENDED BY BATAS PAMBANSA BLG. 398 AND
EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1011, OTHERWISE KNOWN
AS THE LAND TRANSPORTATION AND TRAFFIC
CODE

Be il enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. — It shall be the policy
of the State to establish a system that promotes the ease of
access to government services and efficient transportation
regulation favorable to the people.

SEC. 2. Section 23 of Republic Act No. 4136, otherwise

known as the “Land Transportation and Traffic Code”
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 23. Isswance of Driver’s License, Fees
and Validity. — If, after such examination, the Land
Transportation Office (LTO) Head or his/her deputies
find that the applicant possesses the necessary
qualification and proficiency in the operation of motor
vehicles. is able to read and write any of the official
languages or a major dialect and knows how to read
and interpret various traffic signs, signals and road

, as

such license for ten (10) years, subject to the
restrictions as may be imposed by the LTO.

“The local government units (LGUs), the
Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA)
or other agencies lawfully issuing traffic violation
receipts shall report within a reasonable time. to be
determined in the implementing rules and
regulations (IRR), the details of the traffic violation
to the LTO, which shall serve as the repository of
all traffic violation records.”

: or : : SEC. 3. ; section is hereby : ion 2:
markings, a professional or nonprofessional license . SEC. 3. A new section is hereby added after Section 23
may be issued to such applicant upon payment of of the same Act and numbered as Section 23-A, to read as
the fee prescribed in accordance with law, and which follows:

shall not cost more than the government’s
procurement expense, but prior to the issuance of
said license, the applicant shall present himself/
herself in person and have his/her photograph taken
by the LTO. All drivers’ licenses issued shall be
signed in the presence of the LTO Head or his/her
deputies and shall bear, among others, the full name.
date of birth, height. weight, sex, color of eyes, blood
type. complete current address, biometrics, license
number, and its date of issue and expiration.

“In the issuance of licenses, the LTO shall now
use such process or adopt such measure as will
prevent any alteration or falsification of a license or
will enable the LTO to detect any unauthorized
license. The LTO shall create an online process for
the renewal of professional and nonprofessional
licenses within one (1) year from the effectivity of
this Act.

“Except for student permits, all drivers’ licenses
shall be valid for five (5) years reckoned from the
birthdate of the licensee, unless sooner revoked or
suspended: Provided, however, That subject to
Section 26 hereof, any holder of a professional or
nonprofessional driver's license who has not
committed any violation of Republic Act No. 4136 and
other traffic laws. rules and regulations during the
five (5)-year period shall be entitled to a renewal of

“SEC. 23-A. Establishment of Stricter Rules
Before the Isswance of Driver’s License. ~ The LTO
shall promulgate prerequisites and guidelines before
the grant of drivers’ licenses to ensure that these
are issued only to deserving applicants with sufficient
driving skills and knowledge on road safety and
proper road courtesy.

“Toward this end, the conduct of theoretical
and practical examinations, among others, must
sufficiently measure the competency of drivers and
must be designed to the type of license applied for
and its corresponding restrictions: Provided, That for
professional drivers, the tests must be appropriate to
the vehicle and type of service the applicant intends
to operate.”

SEC. 4. A new section is hereby added after Section 23-A
of the same Act and numbered as 23-B, to read as follows:

“SEC. 23-B. Penalties. - Without prejudice to
the penalties provided under the Revised Penal Code
and other applicable laws, the penalties corresponding
to the following acts shall be imposed by the
appropriate agency or officer:

“(a) Any officer who, in any manner. issues a
driver's license without the necessary examinations.
connives with the applicant for the irregular issuance

of a license, or who, by gross negligence, issues a
driver's license to an unqualified applicant shall
suffer a penalty of removal from the service with all

the accessory penalties attached thereto:

“(b) A fine in the amount of Twenty thousand
pesos (P20,000.00) shall be imposed upon an applicant
for a driver's license found to have committed any
of the following acts:

“() Willful misrepresentation with respect to
material information in one’s application:

“(2) Connivance with the officer in the irregular
conduct of examinations or issuance of license:

“(3) Falsification of documents: or
“(4) Cheating during examinations

“Any or all of the acts abovementioned shall be
punished whether or not a license was granted by
reason of such misrepresentation, connivance.
falsification or cheating.

“In addition to the abovementioned fine, the
driver’s license of an erring applicant, if one is
granted by reason of such misrepresentation,
connivance, falsification or cheating, shall be revoked,
and the applicant shall be prohibited from applying
for a period of two (2) years. The repetition of such
offense shall warrant the perpetual disqualification
from being granted a driver's license in addition to
the fine above-stated: and

“(c) A holder of a driver's license who acts in
violation of the provisions of Republic Act No. 4136
and other existing traffic laws shall suffer
corresponding penalties as may be provided by law
and other issuances.

“In case of death or physical injuries resulting
in the loss of any part of the victim's body or the
use thereof, insanity. imbecility, impotence or
blindness, or incapacity to work for more than ninety
(90) days. the license of the offending driver shall

be revoked for a period of four (4) years, after a
finding by the court that such driver was negligent
or at fault.

“The Department of Transportation (DOTY)
and the LTO shall, in coordination with the Land
Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board
(LTFRB) and other concerned agencies and private
stakeholders, aggressively and regularly conduct a
nationwide information, education and
communication (IEC) campaign on road safety,
including the list of measures implemented
pursuant to and violations punishable under this
Act.”

SEC. 5. Review of Penalties. — The Secretary of the
DOTr, upon the recommendation of the LTO, after due
hearing and publication. shall have the power to increase or
adjust the fine herein imposed once every five (5) years:
Provided, That in no case shall the increase be more than
five percent (5%) of the fine sought to be increased.

SEC. 6. Research and Development. ~ The LTO shall
conduct continuing research and development to ensure the
efficient administration of the drivers’ licensing system.

SEQ, 7; Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of the DOTr, with the assistance of the LTO, the LTFRB,
and the MMDA, shall promulgate the implementing rules and
regulations necessary to ensure the effective implementation
of this Act.

SEC. 8. Separability Clause, — If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional. the remainder of the
law or provisions not otherwise affected shall remain valid and
subsisting.

SEC. 9. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders. letters of instruction. rules and regulations. issuances
or parts thereof inconsistent with this Act are hereby revoked,
repealed, amended or modified accordingly.


SEC. 10. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

   

PANTALEON Dé/ADVAREZ AQUILINO “KOKO” PIMENTEL III
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1449
and House Bill No. 5648 was finally passed by the Senate and
the House of Representatives on May 31, 2017.

CESAR STRAIT PAREJA “ LUTGARDO B. BARBO
Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

 

Approved: AVE 6 2 217

 

fi / ~s
RODRIGO fon DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

oO

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 002981