Nestea nse csaeieenRT Neem iain

H. No. 5152

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Alleteo Manila
Svurenteenth Cougress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ RepUBLIC AcT No. 11180]

AN ACT REQUIRING HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS
TO REPORT PARTICIPATION AND PROGRAM
SUPPORT EXPENDITURES IN ALL COLLEGE
ATHLETIC PROGRAMS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Athletic Programs Report Act”.

Sec. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ It is the policy of
the State to promote physical education and encourage
athletic programs, league competitions and amateur sports,
including training for international competitions, to foster
self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence towards the
development of a healthy and alert citizenry. All educational

institutions are also mandated to undertake regular
sports activities throughout the country in cooperation
with athletic clubs and other sectors. In line with these
objectives, both male and female athletes shall be given
equal opportunities to receive proper training and participate
in sports activities and competitions.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) College Athletic Programs refer to college or
university athletic programs, league competitions, amateur
sports, and other sports activities, including training
for international competitions, organized by the higher
education institution or participated in by a team of students
representing a college or university;

(b) Higher Education Institution (HEI) refers to an
educational institution engaged in educating individuals in
the college level which offers courses or programs leading to
the grant of a degree;

© National Sports Associations refer to various
national sports associations accredited by the Philippine
Olympic Committee (POC); and

(d) Program Support Expenditures refer to operating,
scholarship and other expenditures incurred by the HEI
in organizing an athletic team and participating in an
athletic program.

SEC. 4. Disclosure of Athletic Program Participation
Raie and Financial Support. — Each higher education
institution (HEI) that participates in any athletic program
recognized by the Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), and has an intercollegiate athletic program
shall submit, on an annual basis, a report to the
Chairperson of the CHED containing the following data
on each program:

(@) The total number of participants in the athletic
program and their gender;

(b) The ratio of male participants to female participants
in the entire athletic program;

© The total operating expenses for the athletic
program;

@ The total scholarship expenditures vis-a-vis the
total number of participants;

©) The ratio of male scholarship expenses to female
scholarship expenses in the entire athletic program;

( The total number of contests participated in by the
team;

(g) The gender of the head coach and if working
full-time or part-time:

(h) The number of assistant coaches and their gender
and if working full-time or part-time;

@ The number of graduate assistant coaches and
their gender:

@) The number of volunteer assistant coaches and their
gender;

(k) The ratio of participants to coaches; and

@ The level of participation of National Sports
Associations (NSAs), including the number of athletes
registered with the different NSAs. The HEI shall be
required to make available to the public the information
contained in the report submitted to the CHED through
publication through any of the following public information

outlets: online, via the website of the institution; the local
school paper; bulletin boards in campus premises; and other
schemes to disseminate information.

SEC. 5. Publication Duty of the CHED. — The CHED
shall compile and publish annually in its website or in a
newspaper of general circulation, the reports containing
the information collected from the HEIs, including the
athletic conferences recognized by intercollegiate athletic
associations and participated in by the HEIs.

SEC. 6. Reportorial Requirement. — The CHED shall
submit the reports required under Section 4 of this Act to
Congress on an annual basis.

SEC. 7. Sanctions. — Pursuant to Section 8 of
Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Act of 1994”, the CHED shall impose disciplinary
sanctions against an official or an employee of a HEI
found violating Section 4 of this Act.

SEC. 8. Implementing Rules and Regulations. ~
Within sixty (60) days upon the effectivity of this Act,
the CHED, in coordination with the Philippine Association
of State Universities and Colleges, Coordinating Council
of Private Educational Associations, the Association of Local
Colleges and Universities, and the POC shall issue the
necessary rules and regulations to fully implement the
provisions of this Act.

SEC. 9. Separability Clause. — If any provision
or part hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the same
shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other
provisions.

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause. — All laws, executive orders,
decrees, instructions, rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with any provision of this Act are hereby
amended, repealed or modified accordingly.

on

SEC. 11. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 

VICENTE €. SOTTO IL GLORIA ACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
on May 2, 2017 and October 10, 2018, respectively.

PON

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

   

  

ait
S
Shae aia
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 009071

  

   

 
    

Sp 2-9-2094