H. No. 10124

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metrs Manila
Highteenth Congress
Chird Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

AN ACT GRANTING PRIME BROADCASTING NETWORK,
INC. A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL,
ESTABLISH, OPERATE, AND MAINTAIN RADIO
AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS IN
THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
regulations, there is hereby granted to Prime Broadcasting
Network, Inc., hereunder referred to as the Grantee, its successors
or assignees, a franchise to construct, install, establish, operate,
and maintain for commercial purposes and in the publicinterest,
radio and television broadcasting stations in the Philippines, where
frequencies and channels are still available for radio and television
broadcasting, including digital television system, through

SEc. 4, Responsibility to the Public, — The Grantee
shall Provide, free of, charge, adequate public Service time which

ethics of honest enterprise; promote audience Sensibility and

Public service time referred herein shall be eqtivalent toa
maximum aggregate often percent (10%) of paid commercials or
advertisements which shall be allocated based on heed to the
Executive and Legislative branches, the judiciary, Constitutional

Commissions, and international humanitarian organizations duly

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 8370, otherwise known as
the “Children’s Television Act of 1997”, the Grantee shall allot a
minimum of fifteen Percent (15%) of the daily total air time of
each broadcasting network or station to child-friendly shows
within its regular Programming.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,


SEC. 6. Term of Franchise, — This franchise shall be in
effect for a Period of twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of
this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise
shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the Grantee fails
to operate continuously for two (2) years,

SEc. 7, Self-regulation by and Undertaking of the Grantee.
— The Grantee shall not require any previous censorship of any
Speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast from
its stations, but if any such speech, play, act or Scene, or other
matter should constitute a violation of the law or infringement of
4 private right, the Grantee shall be free from any liability, civi]
or criminal, for such speech; play, act or Scene, or other matter:

SEC. 9. Commitment to Provide and Promote the Creation
of Employment Opportunities. — he Grantee shall create
employment Opportunities and accept on-the-job trainees in
the franchise operations: Provided, That Priority shall be
accorded to the residents of the place where the Principal office of
the Grantee is located: Provided, further, That the Grantee shal]
comply with the applicable labor standards and allowance

SEC. 10. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
signment of Franchise. — The Grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise oy the
rights and Privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, Corporation, or other commercial or legal entity, nor

at least thirty percent (30%) of its outstanding capital stock, or
a higher Percentage that may hereafter be provided by law, in

implemented, Noncompliance therewith shall render the
franchise ipso facto revoked.

on Public Services of the Senate, on or before April 30 of every
year during the term of its franchise,

The annual report shall include an update on the
commencement of activities, development, operation, and
expansion of business; audited financial statements; latest GIS
officially submitted to the SEC, if applicable; certification of the
NTC on the status of its permits and operations; and an update
on the dispersal of ownership undertaking, if applicable.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

SEC. 13. Fine. ~ Failure of the Grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a fine of
Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of noncompliance
to the NTC. The fine shall be collected separately from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC, and it shall be remitted
to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 14. Equality Clause. - Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio‘and
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein Grantee: Provided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions
of broadcasting franchises concerning territorial coverage, the
term, or the type of service authorized by the franchise.

SEC..15. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal
by Congress when the public interest so requires and shall not
be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein
provided for.

SEC. 16. $eparability Clause. ~ If any of the sections
or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the

provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or
modified accordingly.

SEC. 18. Effectivity.~This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or ina newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

   

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on September 20, 2021 a anuary 31, 2022,
respectively.

VA ut Dir

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

   

t of Represxntatives

 
 

Approved:

Lapsed m0 saw on UNO 2 az
without the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article VI,
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO