H. No, 9937
Republic of the Philippines
Gangress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
HRighteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
‘~ day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11777}

AN ACT ESTABLISHING INLAND FRESHWATER FISH
HATCHERIES IN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF
CARMEN AND BRAULIO E. DUJALI, PROVINCE
OF DAVAO DEL NORTE, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the
supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
of the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), inland
freshwater fish hatcheries in the Municipalities of Carmen
and Braulio E. Dujali, Province of Davao del Norte.

Src. 2. Prior to the establishment of the inland
freshwater fish hatcheries, the BFAR-DA shall conduct a
full-scale feasibility study in support of their construction
to comply with the requirements of the Department of Budget
and Management.

Within two (2) years after the construction of the inland
freshwater fish hatcheries, the BFAR-DA, through a
memorandum of agreement, shall transfer their management
to the local governments of the Municipalities of Carmen
and Braulio E. Dujali. It shall implement a training and
phasing-in program for local government personnel on the
management and operation of the hatcheries.

SEc. 3. The BFAR-DA shall conduct continuing research
and experimentation on the breeding and production of inland
freshwater fish species, especially as they apply to local
conditions, to discover new methods and technologies that will
enhance the fishing industry.

Sec. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include
in the Department’s programs the conduct of the feasibility
studies and the consequent establishment of the inland
freshwater fish hatcheries in the Municipalities of Carmen
and Braulio E. Dujali, Province of Davao del Norte, the
funding of which shall be included in the General
Appropriations Act. The local government units concerned shall
set aside funds from any available local revenue in an
amount deemed appropriate for the operationalization of
the hatcheries.

SEc. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the
rules and regulations on the establishment, supervision,
operation, monitoring, and the eventual transfer of the
inland freshwater fish hatcheries to the local government
of the Municipalities of Carmen and Braulio E. Dujali.

Src. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

pproved,

  
  

   

VICENTE (. SOTTO I LOR ay WAY Q. VELASCO
President\of the Senate Speaké
of RepYésentatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on September 14, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MyYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MARK
Secretary of the Senate

  
 

Approved: 2022
PP capeead invo iaw of MAT

without the signature of the Presi

dent, in accordance with Article V]

Section 27. (1), af the Constitution

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
resident of the Philippines ~~~.

oO f

f

V \

phil