ELNo. 7264

Republic of the Whilippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
‘Hig hteenth Congress
Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila; on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[REPUBLIC AcT No.11516]

AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)
YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO NEGROS
BROADCASTING AND PUBLISHING CORPORATION,
UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8161, ENTITLED “AN ACT
GRANTING THE NEGROS BROADCASTING AND
PUBLISHING CORPORATION A FRANCHISE TO
ESTABLISH, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO AND
TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS IN THE
VISAYAS AND MINDANAO”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: ~

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules
and regulations, the franchise granted under Republic Act
No. 8161 to Negros Broadcasting and Publishing Corporation,
hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors or

assignees, to construct, install, operate, and maintain for
commercial purposes and in the public interest, radio and/or
television broadcasting and cable television stations where
frequencies and/or channels are still available for radio
and/or television broadcasting, including digital television
system, through microwave, satellite or whatever means, as
well as the use of any new technology in television and radio
systems, with the corresponding technological auxiliaries and
facilities, special broadcast and other program and
distribution services and relay stations in the Visayas and
Mindanao is hereby renewed for another twenty-five (25) years.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities.
- The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be
constructed and operated in a manner as will, at most,
result only in the minimum interference on the wavelengths
or frequencies of existing stations or other stations which
may be established by law, without in any way diminishing
its own privilege to use its assigned wavelengths or
frequencies and the quality of transmission or reception
thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantee’s
services and/or the availability thereof.

Sec. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications
Commission. - The grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) the appropriate
permits and licenses for the construction and operation of
its stations or facilities and shall not use any frequency in
the radio/television spectrum without authorization from the
NTC. The NTC, however, shall not unreasonably withhold or
delay the grant of any such authority.

Incase of any violation of the provisions of this franchise,
the NTC shall have the authority to revoke or suspend, after
due process, the permits or licenses it issued pursuant to
the franchise. The NTC may recommend to Congress the
revocation of the franchise for any violation of the provisions
of this franchise. :

Sec. 4. Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall
strictly comply with the provisions of the Constitution,
statutes, rules and regulations, including labor laws and

standards. The grantee shall provide, free of charge, adequate
public service time which is reasonable and sufficient to enable
the government, through the broadcasting stations or
facilities of the grantee, to reach the pertinent populations
or portions thereof, on important public issues and relay
important public announcements and warnings concerning
public emergencies and calamities, as necessity, urgency or
law may require; provide at all times sound and balanced
programming; promote public participation; assist in the
functions of public information and education; conform to
the ethics of honest enterprise; promote audience sensibility
and empowerment including closed captioning; and not use
its stations or facilities for the broadcasting of obscene or
indecent language, speech, act or scene, the dissemination of
deliberately false information or willful misrepresentation,
to the detriment of public interest, or to incite, encourage,
or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

Public service time referred to herein shall be equivalent
to a maximum aggregate of ten percent (10%) of paid
commercials or advertisements which shall be allocated based
on need to the Executive and Legislative branches, the
Judiciary, Constitutional Commissions, and international
humanitarian organizations duly recognized by statutes:
Provided, That the NTC shall increase the public service time
in case of extreme emergency or calamity. The NTC shall
issue rules and regulations for this purpose, the effectivity
of which shall commence upon applicability with other similarly
situated broadcast network franchise holders.

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 8370, otherwise known as
the “Children’s Television Act of 1997”, the grantee shall allot a
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the daily total air time
of each broadcasting network or station to child- friendly shows
within its regular programming. ‘

SEC. 5. Right of the Government. — The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony,
and the use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the grantee
by the State that may be withdrawn any time after due
process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of
the Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril,
calamity, emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and
order, to temporarily take over and operate the stations or
facilities of the grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation
of any station or facility in the interest of public safety,
security and public welfare; or to authorize the temporary
use and operation thereof by any agency of the government,
upon due compensation to the grantee, for the use of said
stations or facilities during the period when these shall be so
operated.

SEc. 6. Term of Franchise.— This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity
of this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise
shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the grantee fails
to operate continuously for two (2) years.

Sc. 7. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of Grantee.
— The grantee shall not require any previous censorship of
any speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast
from its stations, but if any such speech, play, act or scene,
or other matter should constitute a violation of the law or
infringement of a private right, the grantee shall be free from
any liability, civil or criminal, for such speech, play, act or
scene, or other matter: Provided, That the grantee, during
any broadcast, shall cut off the airing of speech, play, act or
scene, or other matter being broadcast ifthe tendency thereofis
to propose and/or incite treason, rebellion or sedition; or
the language used therein or the theme thereof is indecent
or immoral.

The grantee shall guarantee that news and events are
reported accurately and truthfully, and that all parties
involved in such news or events are allowed equal time and
opportunity for information-sharing.

The grantee shall ensure that all its programs, talents,
and the languages used by its talents are geared towards the
promotion of positive Filipino values.

The grantee shall likewise ensure that the rate for
election advertisement is reasonable and equitable to allow
all candidates, particularly those seeking national elective
positions, equal opportunity to present programs of
government to the electorate, subject to the implementing
guidelines, rules and regulations issued by the Commission
on Elections.

Willful failure to comply with the self-regulation by and
undertaking of the grantee as provided for in this Section
shall constitute a valid cause for the cancellation of this
franchise.

Sic. 8. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local

,Governments. — The grantee shall hold the national,

provincial, city, and municipal governments of the Philippines
free from all claims, liabilities, demands, or actions arising
out of accidents causing injury to persons or damage to
properties, during the construction or operation of the stations
of the grantee.

SEC. 9. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. — The grantee shall
create employment opportunities as well as accept
on-the-job trainees in its franchise operations: Provided,
That priority shall be accorded to the residents of the
place where the principal office of the grantee is located:
Provided, further, That the grantee shall ensure that at
least sixty percent (60%) of its employees are regular
employees and in no case shall the percentage of contractual
employees, job orders, casuals, talents and independent
contractors combined, exceed forty percent (40%) of its
total workforce: Provided, finally, That the grantee shall
comply with the applicable labor standards and allowance
entitlement under existing labor laws, rules and regulations ,
and similar issuances.

The employment opportunities or jobs created shall be
reflected in the General Information Sheet (GIS) to be
submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
annually. In addition, the grantee shall include in its annual
report to Congress the number of its regularized employees
and secure a compliance and clearance certificate from the

Department of Labor and Employment and its relevant attached
agencies.

Suc. 10. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. —The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or
the rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person,
firm, company, corporation or other commercial or legal
entity, nor merge with any other corporation or entity, nor
the controlling interest of the grantee be transferred,
simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any person, firm,
company, corporation, or entity without the prior ‘approval
of the Congress of the Philippines. Congress shall be informed
of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or assignment
of franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder,
or of the merger or transfer of the controlling interest of the
grantee, within sixty (60) days after the completion of the
said transaction. Failure to report to Congress such change
of ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked.
Any person or entity to which this franchise is sold,
transferred, or assigned shall be subject to the same
conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

 

SEC. 11. Dispersal of Ownership. —In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation
in public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens
at least thirty percent (80%) of its common stocks, or a higher
percentage that may hereafter be provided by law, in any
securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years
from the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That in cases where
public offer of shares is not applicable, other methods of
encouraging public participation by citizens and corporations
operating public utilities must be implemented.
Noncomplance thereof shall render the franchise ipso facto
revoked.

SEC. 12. Reporiorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report on its compliance with the terms
and conditions of the franchise and on its operations to the
Congress of the Philippines, through the Committee on
Legislative Franchises of the House of Representatives and
the Committee on Public Services of the Senate, on or before
April 80 of every year during the term of its franchise.

as

The annual report shall include an update on the
roll-out, development, operation and/or expansion of business;
audited financial statements; latest GIS officially submitted
to the SEC, if applicable; certification of the NTC on the
status of its permits and operations; and an update on the
dispersal of ownership undertaking, if applicable.

The xeportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

Snc. 18. Fine. ~ Failure of the grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a
fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of
noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the NTC from
the delinquent franchise grantee separate from the reportorial
penalties imposed by the NTC and the same shall be remitted
to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 14. Equality Clause. — Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio and/or
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall be
accorded immediately and unconditionally to the herein grantee:
Provided, That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect
the provisions of broadcasting franchises concerning territorial
coverage, the term, or the type of service authorized by the
franchise.

SEC. 15. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —
This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or
repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the public

- interest so requires and shall not be interpreted as an

exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided for.

Suc. 16. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other I
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the I
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or
modified accordingly.

Suc. 18. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

 

Approved,
s
&
VICENTE C. $OTTO HI ALAN PETER S. CAYETANO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on September 2, 2020 and October 5, 2020,
respectively.

HO han Boy he
MYRA MARIED. VILLARICA JOSE LUIS G. MONTALES

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved:

 
  
   

Lapsed mio 1aw Of -
without the signabure af
dent, in adtGGne A
Section 27 Ci) a

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 

 

oO

 

Ment] ON