H. No. 5615
S. No. 1716

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC Act No.1 1214]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A SPORTS COMPLEX KNOWN
AS THE “PHILIPPINE SPORTS TRAINING CENTER”,
AND PROVIDING FUNDS FOR THE ACQUISITION OF
PROPERTY, THE CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES,
AND THE ADMINISTRATION, MAINTENANCE, AND
MANAGEMENT OF THE CENTER

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as the
| . “Philippine Sports Training Center Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to promote and develop sports in the country, to achieve
excellence in international sports competitions, to ensure success
in the country’s quest to achieve competitiveness in the Olympic
Games and to promote international amity among nations.
Pursuant thereto, the establishment and construction of a
national sports training facility shall be a primary strategy to
achieve the foregoing objectives.

Furthermore, under Article XIV, Section 19 of the
Philippine Constitution, the State shall promote physical education
and encourage sports programs, league competitions, and amateur
sports, including training for international competitions to foster
self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development
of a healthy and alert citizenry. To further this policy, the State
shall establish and construct a state-of-the-art and highly
scientific sports complex.

SEC. 3. Establishment of the Philippine Sports Training
Center. — There is hereby established a state-of-the-art and
highly scientific sports complex to be known as the Philippine
Sports Training Center (PSTC).

After a period of planning not exceeding six (6) months
upon the effectivity of this Act, the necessary sports facilities and
amenities, which are at par with international standards,
shall be constructed within a period of eighteen (18) months
in a location suitable and conducive to high-level training of
athletes, coaches and referees.

SEC. 4, Objectives of the Philippine Sports Training Center.
~ The objectives of the PSTC are as follows:

(a) To serve as the official home and primary venue for
the development of athletes in the National Team and
its corresponding training pools included in the list of
sports contemplated therein, through the use of scientific
principles and programs, proven training techniques, and
modern equipment and facilities that are at par with
international standards;

(b) To contribute to sports science and research as the
national sports training institution assisted by the Philippine
Sports Commission (PSC), through the Philippine Sports
Institute (PSI), as mandated by Republic Act No. 6847 5

(c). To serve as venue for the training of coaches and
referees;

(d) To host local and international competitions, if
necessary; and

(e) For any other purpose inherent and incidental for the
purposes for which the PSTC was created.

SEC. 5. Sports Facilities and Amenities. — The PSTC
shall include the following training facilities and amenities:

(a) Administration Building

(b) Athletes and Coaches Dormitory

(c) Baseball Field

(ad) Beach Volleyball Courts

(e) Bowling Center

(f) Conference and Seminar Hall

(g) Covered Swimming and Diving Pool
(h) Football Field

(i) Gymnastics Center

G) Multi-purpose Gynasium

(k) Multi-purpose field including, but not limited to.
Archery Range, BMX Track, Lawnballs and Petanque Field

>

o

@ Rugby Pitch (8) Arnis

(m) Skeet and Trap Range (4) Athletics

(n) Softball Field (6) Badminton

(o) Track and Field Oval (6) Baseball

@

Tennis Courts (7) Basketball

(q) Velodrome (8) Billiard and Snookers
(r) Villas for Guests (9) BMX and Cycling

(s) Sports Science Building (10) Bowling

(t) Mess Hall (11) Boxing

(u) Recreation Hall (AV Room) (12) Chess
(v) Library (18) Dancesport
(w) Weight Training Building (14) Fencing

(x) School Buildings (15) Floorball

(y) Medical Center (16) Football

(z) Worship and Meditation Room (17) Futsal

The PSTC shall include sports facilities and amenities for
the Olympic sports and other non-Olympic sports such as
the following:

(18) Handball

(1) Aquatics (20) Jiu-ditsu
(2) Archery (21) Judo

(22)
(28)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)

(39)

Karatedo
Lawn Tennis
Muay Thai
Pencak Silat
Petanque
Rugby
Sambo
Shooting
Softball

Soft Tennis
Squash
Table Tennis
Taekwando
Triathlon
Volleyball
Weightlifting
Wrestling

Wushu

feese

a

Any other sport, with duly accredited and recognized
national sports association, not listed herein, shall be made part
of the PSTC sports training and development program,
as deemed significant and necessary by the PSC.

SEC. 6. Administration, Management, Operation and
Maintenance of the PSTC. — The PSC is vested with the
authority to administer, manage, operate and maintain the
PSTC including the administration of incidental income,
security of the complex, assignment of personnel and hiring of
managers, specialists, and other administrative staff as
may be needed and as determined by the PSC: Provided,
That the PSC shall employ professional and highly skilled
managers with long and vast experience in sports
administration and management to ensure the proper
maintenance and upkeep of the PSTC and its facilities
and other amenities.

SEC. 7. Ownership of the Philippine Sports Training
Center. — The ownership of the PSTC, including its sports
facilities and amenities, is hereby vested upon the PSC.

The Title of the land over which the PSTC is established
shall be transferred to the PSC in accordance with law either by
grant, donation, or payment of just compensation.

SEC. 8. Report to Congress. — The Chairman of the
PSC shall submit a report to the Chairpersons of the House
Committee on Youth and Sports Development and the Senate
Committee on Sports on a quarterly basis regarding the
status of the construction of the PSTC until the
completion of the same.

SEC. 9. Deputy Executive Director. — There shall be a
Deputy Executive Director who shall be appointed or designated
as such by the PSC Chairperson, and shall direct and
supervise the day-to-day operations of the PSTC. The
Deputy Executive Director must be a citizen of the Republic
of the Philippines, of good moral character, a college graduate
and has at least five (5) years experience in sports administration.

The PSC Chairperson shall likewise appoint or designate
other personnel to assist the Deputy Executive Director in the
operations of the PSTC as deemed necessary.

SEC. 10. Assistance by the Government Entities. — The
PSC may call upon any government agency for assistance in
the acquisition and/or possession, including transfer of Title
over the property where the PSTC will be located, in planning
and site development of the property, in the management of
the facilities that shall ensure its proper maintenance and
safeguard the national athletes, coaches and staff in the
PSTC, as well as, in the implementation of its training and
skills program.

SEc. 11. Funding. — For the establishment and
construction of the PSTC, the amount of Three billion
five hundred million pesos (P3,500,000,000.00) is hereby
appropriated and shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act (GAA). Thereafter, the amount necessary
to carry out the other provisions of this Act, particularly for
the maintenance, operation, and management of the PSTC
shall be included in the budget of the PSC in the GAA.
Likewise, all incidental income that may be derived by the
PSC in its management and operation of the PSTC shall form
part of the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF).

SEC. 12. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
PSC shall, in consultation and in coordination with the
Department of Budget and Management and the Department
of Public Works and Highways, promulgate not later than
thirty (30) days upon the effectivity of this Act, the necessary
rules and regulations for the effective implementation of
this Act: Provided, That the failure to promulgate the rules and
regulations shall not prevent the implementation of this
Act upon its effectivity.

SEC. 13. Separability Clause. — If any provision of
this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder of this
Act or any provision not affected thereby shall remain in
full force and effect.

 

SEC. 14. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended
or modified accordingly.

SEC.15. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

  

Cc e
VICENTH C.SOTTOII GLO) CAPAGAL-ARROYO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill
No. 5615 and Senate Bill No. 1716 was passed by the House
of Representatives and the Senate on December 10, 2018
and December 6, 2018, respectively.

OK fei —

 

Approved: FEB 14 20 jf

RODRI TERTE
President of the Philippines
o
ee 2 4-H

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 ~ 009426