H.No. 7440
S. No. 1931

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Kighteenth Congress.

Second Regular Session

—a——_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11573)

AN ACT IMPROVING THE CONFIRMATION PROCESS
FOR IMPERFECT LAND TITLES, AMENDING FOR
THE PURPOSE COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 141,
AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS “THE
PUBLIC LAND ACT,” AND PRESIDENTIAL DECREE
NO. 1529, AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS
THE “PROPERTY REGISTRATION DECREE” -

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. — It is the declared
policy of the State to simplify, update and harmonize similar
and related provisions of land laws in order to simplify and
remove ambiguity in its interpretation and implementation.
It is also the policy of the State to provide land tenure security
by continuing judicial and administrative titling processes.

SEC. 2. Section 44 of Commonwealth Act No. 141, as “Upon receipt of the recommendation from
amended by Republic Act No. 6940, is hereby further amended the CENRO, or upon the completion of the
to read as follows: / processing of the application within the
reglementary period, the PENRO, DENR Regional
Director, or the Secretary of the DENR, as the
case may be, shall approve or disapprove the

“Sec. 44. Any natural-born citizen of the *
Philippines who is not the owner of more than

twelve (12) hectares of land, and who, for at
least twenty (20) years prior to the filing of
an application for agricultural free patent,
has continuously occupied and cultivated,
either personally or through a predecessor-in-interest,
a tract or tracts of alienable and disposable
agricultural public lands subject to disposition,
and who shall have paid the real estate tax
thereon shall be entitled, under the provisions of
this Chapter, to have a free patent issued for such
tract or tracts of such land not to exceed twelve
(12) hectares.”

application for agricultural free patent within
five (5) days. In case of approval, the agricultural

free patent shall forthwith be issued.

“In case of conflicting claims among different
claimants, the parties may seek the proper

administrative and judicial remedies.”

Sec. 4. Section 47 of Commonwealth Act No
amended by Republic Act No. 9176, is hereby repealed.

SEC. 5. Section 48 of Commonwealth Act No.

. 141, as

. 141, as

amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

SEc. 3. Section 45 of Commonwealth Act No. 141, as

amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: “SEC. 48. The following-described citizens of

“Src. 45. All applications for agricultural
free patents shall be filed before the Community
Environment and Natural Resources Office (CENRO)
of the Department of Environment and Natural
Resources (DENR). For provinces with no CENRO,
the application shall be filed with the Provincial
Environment and Natural Resources Office (PENRO).

“The CENRO or the PENRO, as the case
may be, is mandated to process the application
within one hundred and twenty (120) days from
filing, including compliance with the required
notices and other legal requirements. The CENRO
shall thereafter forward its recommendation
to the PENRO if the area of the land is below
five (5) hectares; to the DENR Regional Director
if the area of the land is at least five (5) up to
ten (10) hectares; and to the Secretary of the
DENR if the area of the land is more than ten (10)
up to twelve (12) hectares.

the Philippines, occupying lands of the public
domain or claiming to own any such lands or an
interest therein, but whose titles have not been
perfected or completed, may file a petition at any
time, whether personally or through their duly
authorized representatives, in the Regional Trial
Court of the province where the land is located,
for confirmation of their claims and the issuance
of a certificate of title to land not exceeding
twelve (12) hectares:

“(a) Those who by themselves or through
their predecessors-in-interest have been in open,
continuous, exclusive, and notorious possession
and occupation of alienable and disposable
agricultural lands of the public domain, under a
bona fide claim of ownership, for at least twenty
(20) years immediately preceding the filing of the
application for confirmation of title except when
prevented by war or force majeure. They shall be

conclusively presumed to have performed all the
conditions essential to a Government grant and
shall be entitled to a certificate of title under the
provisions of this Chapter.

“() Those who have acquired ownership of
private lands or abandoned riverbeds by right of
accession or accretion under the provision of
existing laws; and

“() Those who have acquired ownership of
land in any other manner provided by law.”

SEC. 6. Section 14 of Presidential Decree No. 1529 is
hereby amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 14. Who may apply. The following
persons may file at any time, in the proper Regional
‘Trial Court in the province where the land is
“logated, an application for registration of title
“to [and, not exceeding twelve (12) hectares, whether
personally or through their duly authorized
representatives:

“({) Those who by themselves or through their
predecessors-in-interest have been in open,
continuous, exclusive and notorious possession
and occupation of alienable and disposable-lands
of the public domain not covered by existing
certificates of title or patents under a bona fide
claim of ownership for at least.twenty (20) years
immediately preceding the filing of the application
for confirmation of title except when prevented
by war or force majeure. They shall be conclusively
presumed to have performed all the conditions
essential to a Government grant and shall be
entitled to a certificate of title under this section.

“(2) Those who have acquired ownership of
private lands or abandoned riverbeds by right of
accession or accretion under the provisions of
existing laws.

“(3) Those who have acquired ownership of
land in any other manner provided for by law.

-“Where the land is owned in common, all the
co-owners shall file the application jointly.

“Where the land has been sold under pacto de
retro, the vendor a retro may file an application
for the original registration of the land: Provided,
however, That should the period for redemption
expire during the pendency of the registration
proceedings and ownership to the property
consolidated in the vendee a retro, the latter shall
be substituted for the applicant and may continue
the proceedings.

“A trustee on behalf of the principal may apply
for original registration of any land held in trust by
the trustee, unless prohibited by the instrument
creating the trust.”

SEC. 7. Proof that the Land is Alienable and
Disposable. — For purposes. of judicial confirmation of
imperfect titles filed under Presidential Decree No. 1529,
a duly signed certification by a duly designated DENR geodetic
engineer that the land is part of alienable and disposable
agricultural lands of the public domain is sufficient proof
that the land is alienable. Said certification shall be imprinted
in the approved survey plan submitted by the applicant in the
land registration court. The imprinted certification in the
plan shall contain a sworn statement by the geodetic
engineer that the land is within the alienable and disposable
lands of the public domain and shall state the applicable
Forestry Administrative Order, DENR Administrative Order,
Executive Order, Proclamations and the Land Classification
Project Map Number covering the subject land.

Should there be no available copy of the Forestry
Administrative Order, Executive Order or Proclamation,
it is sufficient that the Land Classification (LC) Map Number,
Project Number, and date of release indicated in the land
classification map be stated in the sworn statement declaring

that said land classification map is existing in the inventory
of LC Map records of the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority (NAMRIA) and is being used by the
DENKR as land classification map.

SEC. 8. Penalties. — In addition to the penalties provided
in the Revised Penal Code and in Republic Act No. 8560,
as amended, otherwise known as the “Philippine Geodetic
Engineering Act of 1998,” a geodetic engineer who shall
prepare, willfully or through gross inexcusable negligence,
a projection map that contains false, fraudulent,
or incomplete data or information, and the DENR official
who shall certify and approve such projection map, shall be
penalized with a fine of not less than One hundred thousand
pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than Five hundred thousand
pesos (P500,000.00), or imprisonment of not less than six (6)
months but not exceeding six (6) years, or both, at the
discretion of the court.

SEC. 9. Removal of Restrictions. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 11231 shall be applicable to Free Patents issued.
under this Act.

SEc. 10. Implementing Rules and Regulations. —
Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
Secretary of the DENR shall promulgate the implementing
rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 11. Separability Clause. — If any provision or
part of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain
in full force and effect. .

SEC. 12. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, executive issuances, letters of instruction, rules and
regulations, or any part thereof which are inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended
or modified accordingly.

SEC. 13. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

~

  

. SOTTO Il LORD ALL Y Q. VELASCO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill
No. 7440 and Senate Bill No. 1931 was passed by the
House of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines
on May 19, 2021 and May 18, 2021, regp

  

MYRA MARIED. VILLARICA AR glryRQ L. MENDOZA
Secretary of the Senate ‘

‘

Approved: JUL 16 2024

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE

President. of the- Philippines. <r
& of the President
Mgt ACANANG RECORDS O'FiCE

CERTIFIED COPY

és

 

  
 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES * ATTY. CORCEPCLON YE, PERRSLITED-ERAD

ra Ldn PE Y )