H. No. 4959

é

Republic of the Philippines
Cangress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—_——.

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11779]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE DULAG SATELLITE CAMPUS
OF THE EASTERN VISAYAS STATE UNIVERSITY
(EVSU) LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DULAG,
PROVINCE OF LEYTE, INTO A REGULAR CAMPUS,
AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 9311, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “Eastern
Visayas State University-Dulag Campus Act”.

Src. 2. The Dulag Satellite Campus of the Eastern Visayas
State University (EVSU) located in the Municipality of Dulag,
Province of Leyte, is hereby converted into a regular campus to
be known as the EVSU-Dulag Campus.

Sec. 3. The EVSU-Dulag Campus shall offer short-term
technical-vocational education and training (TVET) courses,
undergraduate and graduate degree programs, and other related
and relevant fields of study within its competency and areas of
specialization, as the Board of Regents may deem necessary to

carry out its objectives, and respond to meet the human resource
development needs of the Province of Leyte and Region VIII.

The EVSU-Dulag Campus shall also undertake research,
extension services, and production activities in support of the
socioeconomic development of the province and the region, and
provide progressive leadership in these areas.

Sec. 4. The governance of the EVSU-Dulag Campus shall
be vested exclusively in the Board of Regents of the EVSU,
hereinafter referred to as the Board.

‘

SEc. 5. The EVSU-Dulag Campus shall be headed by a
Campus Administrator who shall render full-time service and
who shall be appointed or designated by the Board upon the
recommendation of the search committee and the President,
subject to the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the
Board.

SEc. 6. All assets, real and personal, personnel and records
of the EVSU-Dulag Satellite Campus located in the Municipality
of Dulag, Province of Leyte, as well as its liabilities or obligations,
are hereby transferred to the EVSU. The positions, rights and
security of tenure of faculty members and personnel therein
employed under existing laws prior to the conversion into a regular
campus shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the EVSU-Dulag Satellite Campus are hereby transferred to
the EVSU, and shall be titled under its name: Provided, That
should the campus or the University cease to exist or be abolished
or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed
by the University, the same shall revert to the local government
units concerned.

SEC. 7. The amount necessary to carry out the initial
implementation of this Act shall be charged against the current
year's funding of the EVSU-Dulag Satellite Campus provided by
the Municipality of Dulag, Province of Leyte.

The Municipality of Dulag shall provide the same assistance
until such time that the amount necessary for the continued
operation and maintenance of the EVSU-Dulag Satellite Campus
shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Skc. 8. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and
effect.

Src. 9. Republic Act No. 9311, which establishes the
EVSU, is hereby amended. All other laws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act are hereby tepealed or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 10. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation.

Approved,

    

of. Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on November 4, 2019 and-denmea 7, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

  

Approved’ a

av (1) af the Constitution

RODRIGO ROA DUTER
President t of the. Fpilippines |