H. No. 7784

Republic at the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippines
Ailetra Menils

Seventeenth Cougress
Dhicd Regular Sessinn

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11190}

AN ACT CREATING A HIGH SCHOOL FOR THE ARTS IN
THE PROVINCE OF BATAAN TO BE KNOWN AS THE
BATAAN HIGH SCHOOL FOR THE ARTS, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby the
declared policy of the State to promote the sustained development
of young Filipinos whose aptitude and skill in culture and the
arts shall be encouraged and honed through education and
specialized training programs. Towards this end, the State shall
establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate, and
integrated system of education and training to encourage the
artistic talent and cultural aptitude of the Filipino youth as well
as support and promote the growth of young artists nationwide.

SEC. 2. Creation of the Bataan High School for the Aris.
-— There is hereby created a high school for the arts in the
Province of Bataan to be known as the “Bataan High School
for the Aris”, hereinafter referred to ag the “School”.

The School shall be administered and supervised by the
Department of Education (DepEd), in coordination with the
National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) and the
Cultural Center of the Philippines (CCP).

SEC. 38. Mandate. - The School shall implement a general
secondary curriculum prescribed by Republic Act No. 10533
or the “Enhanced Basic Education Act of 2013”, with special
focus on the arts that shall aid in recognizing early the talent
and exceptional giftedness of young children, thereby ensuring
the nurturance of artists of excellence and the preservation
and promotion of Filipino heritage.

SEC. 4. Advisory Board. — The School shall have an
Advisory Board, composed of the following members:

(a) The Regional Director of the DepEd in Region IIf as
Chairperson:

(b) The School Director as Vice-Chairperson;

(c) Arepresentative of the NCCA;

() Avrepresentative of the CCP;

(e) The Governor of the Province of Bataan:

() The Schools Division Superintendent of the Schools
Division of Bataan;

(g) Anelected representative of the members of the
school faculty; and

(h) Four (4) prominent citizens from the private sector who
have distinguished themselves in their professions or fields of
specialization, specifically music, theater, dance, visual arts,
performance arts and the like, to be appointed by the Chairperson
upon the recommendation of the Advisory Board.

The faculty representative shall serve for.a term of two (2)
years to be chosen in accordance with the rules and qualifications
set by the faculty members of the School.

The four (4) prominent citizens shall serve for a term of
three (3) years to be selected by the Board from a list of atleast
seven (7) qualified nominees from Region III. The private sector
representatives may be reappointed.

A Search Committee to be constituted by the School
Director with the approval of the Chairperson of the Advisory
Board shall be created to select the nominees based on the
normal standards and qualifications for the position.

SEC. 5. Powers and Functions of the Advisory Board.
To accomplish the mandate of the School, the Advisory Board
shall advise the School Director on the following:

 

(a) Formulation of policies, rules and regulations as may
be necessary for the administration and operation of the School:

(b) Preparation of school budget and appropriation of all
sums received as may be specified by law for the support of the
School;

(c) Receiving in trust of legacies, gifts, and donations of
real and personal property of all kinds, and administration of
the same for the benefit of the School, subject to the limitations,
directions and instructions of the donor, if any;

@) Fixing of the site and location of the School, acquire
property on its behalf, and cause the construction or repair of its
buildings, equipment and other facilities when necessary;

(e) Approval! of the curricula, instructional programs and
rules of discipline drawn by the offices of the Deputy Directors
for Administration and Student and Academic Affairs:

@ Establishment of criteria for the selection, admission
and graduation of students which shall include a regional
competitive examination, and approval of the issuance of
certificates or diplomas to successful candidates for graduation:

(g) Development of strategies to increase the enrollment
rate and preparation of purposive campaigns to enhance the
competence of the School and its students;

(b) Approval of the grant of stipend and such other
allowances for deserving students;

G) Formulation of qualification standards for the hiring,
promotion, retention, or renewal of appointment, and the grounds
for removal of faculty members, lecturers and other officials
and employees of the School;

G) Granting the members of the faculty and staff leaves of
absence subject to applicable rules and regulations, and provision
of fellowship grants when available;

(k) Development of consortia and other economic linkages
with local government units (LGUs), institutions and agencies,
both public and private, local and foreign, in the furtherance of
the purposes and objectives of the School;

() Adoption of modern communications technology and
other innovative modes of transmitting knowledge;

(m) Importation of duty-free books and/or publications, upon
certification by the DepEd that such imported books and/or
publications are for economic, technical, vocational, scientific,
philosophical, historical or cultural purposes, in accordance with
the provisions of the Tariff and Customs Code, as amended; and

(n) Delegation of any of the powers and duties of the School
Director to other officials of the School as may be deemed
appropriate, so as to expedite the administration of the affairs of
the School.

SEc. 6. Meetings. - The Advisory Board shall convene at
least once every quarter. However, the Chairperson of the Board
may, upon three (3) days prior written notice, calla maximum of
two (2) meetings in a quarter whenever necessary.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
That the Chairperson of the Board or the School Director shall be
among those present in the meeting.

In the absence of the Chairperson of the Board, a duly
authorized representative may attend with all the rights and
responsibilities of a regular member: Provided, That during
such meeting, the School Director, as Vice-Chairperson, shall be
the presiding officer.

om

The members of the Advisory Board shall not receive any
salary but shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and
necessary expenses incurred, either in their attendance to meetings
ofthe Board or in connection with other official business authorized
by the DepEd Regional Director, in case of the other Board
members, and by the appropriate DepEd official, in case of the
Chairperson of the Board, subject to existing laws and regulations.

SEC. 7. School Director, — There shall be a School Director
who shall serve as the chief academic officer, head of the school
faculty and the chief executive officer of the School. The functions,
powers and duties, in addition to those specifically deseribed in
this Act, shall be those usually pertaining to the office of the
principal of any high school in the Philippine education system
and those which are related or necessary to the School Director's
fanctions.

The School Director shali coordinate the implementation
of policies and guidelines with the Advisory Board, and shall
articulate to the Board all concerns of the School. The School
Director shall serve a term of five (6) years, render full-time work,
and shall be eligible for appointment to another term.

The School Director shall be appointed by the DepEd
Regional Director, subject to the guidelines and qualifications set.
forth in the implementing rules and regulations, woon the
recommendation of a duly constituted Search Committee.

A Search Committee shall be constituted by the DepEd
Regional Director in consultation with the representatives of the
NCOA, the CCP, and the Provincial Governor of Bataan to select
the School Director. It shall be formed immediately upon the
approval of the implementing rules and regulations mandated in
Section 20 of this Act, and shall reconvene again within six (6)
months before the expiration of the term of the School Director.

In case of vacancy in the office of the School Director by
reason of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for
cause or incapacity to perform the functions of the office, the
Depid Regional Director shall designate an officer-in-charge of
the School within three (3) months from the date of vacancy,
pending the selection and appointment of a new School Director.

 

The duly appointed successor shall have a fresh term of
five (5) years and shall be eligible for reappointment.

The salary of the School Director shall be in accordance
with the Revised Compensation and Position Classification
System, and shall be comparable to that being received by the
heads or directors of similar educational institutions.

The School Director shall be assisted by a Deputy Director
for Student and Academic Affairs and a Deputy Director for
Administration, who shall be appointed by the DepEd Regional
Director from a list of nominees to be submitted by the School
Director. The salaries of the Deputy Directors shall likewise be
in accordance with the Revised Compensation and Position
Classification System, and shall also be comparable to that being
received by officers of the same level of similar educational
institutions.

SEC. 8. Director for Student and Academic Affairs. —
There shall be a Deputy Director who shall serve as Director for
Student and Academic Affairs and shall have the power to review
and recommend the curricular offerings and rules of discipline of
the School, subject to the approval of the School Director. The
Director for Student and Academic Affairs shall likewise have
disciplinary power over students of the School, and shall formulate
academic policies and rules and regulations on discipline, subject
to the approval of the School Director.

The Director for Student and Academic Affairs shall work
in consultation with the school department heads and other
ranking faculty members in developing the curricular offerings
and ruies of discipline.

SEC. 9. Director for Administration. — There shall be a
Deputy Director who shall serve as Director for Administration
and shall assist the School Director and the Advisory Board on
policies governing the administration, financial management and
development planning of the School.

SEC. 10. Admissions Council. — There shall be an
Admissions Council consisting of the School Director, the Deputy
Directors for Student and Academic Affairs and for
Administration, the heads of each faculty department, and such
other ranking faculty member or official of the School as may be

determined by the School Director. The Council shall have the
power to screen and select the students to be admitted to the

School, and to select the students who shall be recipients of stipends
and. other allowances.

The Admissions Council shall propose to the Advisory Board
financial assistance schemes and other affirmative programs to

assist underprivileged students who qualify for admission to the
School.

No student shall be denied admission to the School by reason
of sex, religion, cultural or community affiliation, or ethnic origin.

SEC. 11. Position Structure and Staffing Pattern. — The
position structure and staffing pattern of the School shall be
prescribed by the DepEd upon the recommendation of the Schoo!
Director, subject to the approval of the Department of Budget
and Management.

 

SEC. 12. Civil Service Coverage. — Except for visiting
professors and other arts instructors engaged by the School, all
personnel of the School shall be subject to civil service rules and
regulations on wage and position classifications.

Suc. 13. Faculty. — No political belief, gender preference,
cultural or community affiliation, ethnic origin, and religious
opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment
of faculty members of the School: Provided, That the appointment
of faculty shall be subject to the guidelines and qualification
standards set by the School Director upon the recommendation of
the Advisory Board: Provided, further, That no member of the
faculty shall teach for or against any particular church or religious
sect.

SEC. 14. School Fund. — All government appropriations
for and other income generated by the School, as well as all legacies,
gifts, donations, grants, endowments, contributions and other
similar transfers of real and personal properties of all kinds
received by the School, shall constitute the School Fund. The
School Fund skall be expended or used by, or with authority from,
the School Director upon the recommendation of the Advisory
Board.

Tf, for reasons beyond its control, the School shall not be
able te pursue any project for which the funds have been

appropriated and allocated under its approved program of
expenditures, the School Director, upon the recommendation of
the Advisory Board, may authorize the use of said funds for any
reasonable purpose which, in his discretion, may be necessary
and urgent for the attainment of the objectives and goals of the
School.

SEC. 15. Authority to Solicit, Receive Donations, Grants
and the Like. ~ Upon the recommendation of the Advisory Board,
the School Director may solicit, negotiate with. and receive in

rust from any public or private, domestic or foreign sources,
legacies, gifts, donations, grants, endowments, contributions or
other transfers of ownership and/or possession of real or personal
properties of ali kinds in favor and for the benefit of the School:
Provided, That the School Director shall, upon the
recommendation by the Advisory Board and in accordance with
pertinent accounting and auditing laws, rules and regulations,
prescribe the measures necessary for the proper use, maintenance
and safekeeping of said donations, grants, endowments,
contributions or transfers and the compliance of the terms and
conditions thereon, if any.

 

SEC. 16. Appropriations. - The Secretary of Education
shall immediately include in the Department’s programs the
operationalization of the Bataan High School for the Arts, the
funding of which shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

The LGUs concerned may likewise provide financial
assistance to the School.

SEC. 17. Development Plan, Organizational Structure. —
Within the period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the
approval of this Act, and the approval ofits implementing rules
and regulations, the School shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (6)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget to the DepRd, for corresponding
recommendation to the DBM; and

(b) Set up its organizational, administrative, as well as
academic structure, including the appointment of the School
officials, subject to the qualifications set forth in this Act.

al

SEC. 18. Filing of Report. — On or before the fifteenth
(15) day of the second month after the opening of the regular
classes each year, the Schoo! Director shall file with the Office of
the President of the Philippines, through the Secretary of the
DepEd, and with both Houses of Congress, a detailed report on
the progress, conditions and needs of the School.

SEC. 19. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 9155, otherwise known as the “Governance of
Basic Education Act of 2001” shall be made an integral part of
this Act, and shall serve as part of the governing charter of the
School.

SEC. 20. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
one hundred twenty (120) days from the effectivity of this Act,
the DepEd, in coordination with the NCCA and the CCP, shall
issue the rules and regulations implementing the provisions of
this Act.

SEC. 21. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this

Act is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not
so declared shall remain in force and effect.

Suc. 22. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders
and rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 23. Hffectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in any
newspaper of general circulation.

ipo
j j
if a
Lf ue
VICENTE ¢. SOTTO BI GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

President of the Senate ' Speaker of the House
( : :
\ of Represeniatives

 

oe

LO

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
on August 14, 2018 and October 10, 2018, respectively:

  
 

~ ~) oh : >
D> LM

MYRA MARIED. VILLARICA DANTE ROBE)

Secretary of the Senate doting) per ary Genera

Approved: MAN 1 0 2019

    
   

IGO ROA DUTERTE

resident of the Philippines
ra

ic
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 ~ 009415

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERT a COPY

TY, CONCEDCIGRMBRY &. FEMROLING-ENAD
L219 me cose nerune

  
  
   

[7