H. No. 7005
S. No. 1413

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

ia

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 31256]

AN ACT RECOGNIZING THE EVEREST ACADEMY AS AN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF INTERNATIONAL
CHARACTER AND GRANTING THE ACADEMY
CERTAIN PREROGATIVES TO PROMOTE ITS
DEVELOPMENT

 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The Everest Academy, herein referred to as
the “Academy”, registered as Everest International Academy,
is hereby declared and officially recognized as a basic
educational institution of international character authorized to
operate educational programs that primarily and principally
adhere to universally accepted and recognized educational
policies.

Sec. 2. The Academy shall be governed by a board of
trustees, herein referred to as the “Board”, elected in accordance
with its corporate character.

SEC. 3. To enable the Academy to continue carrying out
its educational program, improve its standard of instruction,
and meet the special needs of the foreign diplomatic and
temporary resident community for quality education, it shall:

(a) Accept applicants for admission, regardless of
nationality, in accordance with its own eligibility standards, and
rules for admission and grade placement, the Academy having
been established primarily for foreign diplomatic personnel
and their dependents and for other temporary residents and, as
such, the Academy shall be covered by the exemptions provided
in Section 4(2), Article XIV of the Philippine Constitution;

(b) Be managed and administered by a Head of the
Academy, who shall possess the qualifications prescribed by the
Board;

(c) Upon consultation with the Secretary of Education,
determine its own curriculum, calendar of studies and work
schedule, teach whatever language it may deem appropriate
and determine the reasonable amount of fees which shall be
imposed upon its students to maintain and conform to the
Academy’s standard of education;

(d) Maintain standards of education compatible with
those obtaining in similar schools of generally recognized
international standing;

() Employ its own teaching and management personnel
selected by the Board either locally or abroad, from the
Philippines or other nationalities; such foreign personnel being
exempt from laws that impose nationality restrictions on
employment, and control of administration of educational
institutions, except laws that have been or will be enacted for the
protection of employees: Provided, That such exemption shall
not extend to their liability for income taxes; and

() Enjoy the privileges provided by law to nonstock,
nonprofit educational institutions.

Src. 4. The Academy shall be under the supervision
and regulation of the Department of Education (DepEd) and
shall adhere to basic laws, and rules and regulations of the
DepEd governing international or foreign schools.

SEC. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the approval of this
Act, the Secretary of Education, in consultation with the members
of the Board of the Everest Academy, shall formulate the rules
and regulations implementing the provisions of this Act.

Src. 6. If any provision of this Act is held invalid or
unconstitutional, the other provisions not so declared shall
remain in force and effect.

SEC. 7. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

   
 
 

, LL

TEG.SOTTOML GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President af the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act was passed by the House of Representatives
as House Bill No. 7005 on November 26, 2018 and adopted
by the Senate as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 1413 on
January 23, 2019.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA = DANTE P. MALING
Secretary of the Senate

    
 

House of Representatives

Approved: MAR 29 201

      
      
 

 

  

FIED

wae

er ut
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 010067