H. No. 7808
S. No. 2247

Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress
Chirk Regular, Sesstan

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11711)

AN ACT FURTHER AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 4566,
AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE
CONTRACTORS’ LICENSE LAW

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 23 of Republic Act No. 4566, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 23. Issuance of Licenses. Upon the
payment of the corresponding fee and the filing of
the application, and after examination and
investigation as may be required, the Board shall issue
a license to the applicant permitting him to engage

in business as a contractor under the terms of this

0 be prohibited from obtaining a contractor's license
Act for one (1) year from the date of issuance.”

for a period of one (1) year from the time the licensees
. are found guilty under this provision.

SEC. 2. Section 35 of Republic Act No. 4566, as amended,
is hereby deleted, and replaced with a new Section 35, to read as

follows: : “() It shall be unlawful for any person who is

“Section 35. Prohibited Acts. The following are
prohibited under this Act:

“(a)Any contractor who, for a price,
commission, fee or wage, submits or attempts to
submit a bid to construct, or contracts to or
undertakes to construct, or assumes charge in a
supervisory, capacity of a construction work within
the purview of this Act, without first securing a

» license to engage in the business of contracting in
the Philippines shall be penalized with a fine of not
less than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00)
but not more than Five hundred thousand pesos
(P500,000.00) plus the equivalent of one-tenth of
one percent (0.1%) of the project cost. Furthermore,
the offending party shall be prohibited from obtaining
acontractor’s license for a period of one (1) year from
the time that party is found guilty under this
provision. Ss

“(b) The same fine under the preceding
subsection shall be imposed upon two (2) or more
licensees, each of whom has been issued a license to
engage separately in the capacity of a contractor
but shall jointly submit a bid or otherwise act in
the capacity of a contractor without securing an
additional license for acting in the capacity of sucha
joint venture or combination in accordance with the
provisions of this Act. The licenses of the offending
parties shall be automatically revoked and they shall

= —5— =

a managing partner, officer, or employee of a licensed
partnership, corporation, firm, association or other
organization to individually engage in the
contracting business or individually act in the
capacity of a contractor within this jurisdiction
without having a license in good standing to so engage
or act. Anyone found to be in violation of this provision
shall be penalized with a fine of not less than
One hundred thousand pesos (P 100,000.00) but not
more than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00}
plus the equivalent of one-tenth of one percent (0.1%) ‘
of the project cost. Furthermore, the offending party
shall be prohibited from obtaining a contractor's
license for a period of one (1) year from the time that
party is found guilty under this provision.

“(a) Any person who shall present or file the
license certificate of another, give false evidence of
any kind to the Board, or to any member thereof, in
obtaining a certificate or license, impersonate another,
or use an expired or revoked certificate or license shall
be penalized with a fine of not less than Five hundred
thousand pesos (P500,000.00) but not more than
One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) and the penalty
of imprisonment of not less than one (1) year but
not-more than six (6) years. The penalties provided
in this section are without prejudice to any liability
for the violation of any of the provisions of The
Revised Penal Code, as amended, or other special
laws.”

SEC. 3. Sections 37 and 38 of Republic Act No. 4566, as
amended, are hereby deleted.

SEc. 4. Section 39 of Republic Act No. 4566, as amended,
is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 37. Fee. The amount of fees prescribed
by this Act shall be as follows:

“(a) Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00) for an
original license;

“(b) Six thousand pesos (P6,000.00) for
examination of an applicant;

“© Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00) for
renewal.

“TheBoard is authorized to collect, retain and
_ utilize or apply all fees, fines, and other charges
collected by it under this-Act to augment its
accreditation and licensing operations, the provisions
of any law to the contrary notwithstanding. The
Board, in consultation with its stakeholders, is
authorized to adjust the fees not more than once every
three (3) years, but in no case shall the fees be adjusted
or increased by more than fifteen percent (15%).”

SEc. 5. Section 40 of Republic ‘Act No. 4566, as amended,
is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 38. Renewal. A license issued
pursuant to the provisions of this Act shall be valid
for one (1) year from the date of its issuance. The
renewal fee shall be Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00),
pursuant to Section 37 of this Act.

“In case the contractor has been in operation
in good standing for twenty-five (25) years or more, it
may renew its license every three (3) years. Ifit has
been in operation in good standing for ten (10) years

ro

but not more than twenty-five (25) years, it may renew
its license every two (2) years. If it has been in
operation in good standing for less than ten (10) years,
it shall renew its license every year.

“Applications and all other requirements for
license renewal may be filed with the Board or its
designated agencies, either in person or online, not
earlier than ninety (90) days but not later than thirty
(30) days before the expiration of the license.”

SEC. 6. Section 41 of Republic Act No. 4566, as amended,
and the subsequent sections of the same law, are hereby
renumbered accordingly. ,

SEc. 7. Separability Clause. — Should any provision or
part of this Act be declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other
provisions and parts hereof not affected, and insofar as they are
separable from the invalid ones, shall remain in full force and
effect.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, proclamations, rules and regulations, and issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEc. 9. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least
two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.

Approved,

  
  

OTTO TI LOR

the Senate

 

 

| This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 7808

| and Senate Bill No. 2247 was passed by the House of

| Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on
January 31, 2022 and January 27, 2022 respectively.

 
  
 

 
  
 
 

\
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MARK p . MENDOZA
Secretary of the Senate fcftdry Seneral
Uofise of Representatives

Approved: APR 27 2022

\

 

RODRIG@ROA DUTERTE
| President of the Philippines
|
{
|

1 REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
{ PRRD 2016 - 021884

 

en a EATER APTA nr