H. No. 9520

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila
Highteenth Congress

Chick Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC ACT No. 11695]

AN ACT STRENGTHENING THE TARLAC STATE
UNIVERSITY, PROVIDING FOR THE COMPOSITION
AND POWERS OF ITS GOVERNING BOARD,
PRESCRIBING ITS CURRICULAR OFFERINGS, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Revised Tarlac State University Charter”.

SEC. 2. General Mandate. ~ The Tarlac State University,
hereinafter referred to as the TSU, shall primarily provide
advance instruction and professional training in literature,
philosophy, science and technology, and arts, and other relevant
fields of study. It shall also undertake research and extension
services and provide progressive leadership in its areas of
specialization.

ETE A LTTE

‘

SEC. 3. Curricular Offerings. - The TSU shall offer
undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate courses, within
its competency and areas of specialization in the fields of
science and technology, medicine and allied medical professions,
law, business, arts and humanities, education, sports and
human kinetics, and programs on public administration, public
works, human services, social work, and other relevant fields
of study, as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as
the Board, may deem necessary for the accomplishment of its
objectives, and those which respond to meet the human
resource development needs of the Province of Tarlac and

Region III.

The existing reasonably-sized laboratory school for early
childhood, primary? junior and senior high school, and special
education shall continue to operate under the supervision of
the College of Education of the TSU to serve the in-campus
requirements of its students.

SrEc. 4. The Board of Regents. —- The governing board of
the TSU shall be the Board, which shall be chaired and
co-chaired by the Chairperson of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED) and the President of the TSU, respectively,
and with the following as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical
and Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Commitee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

() Regional Director of the National Economic and
Development Authority;

@) Regional Director of the Department of Science and
Technology;

() President of the federation of faculty associations of
the TSU;

ee wept

Hartel treaty pe

ge GA ARO a ANTS

() President of the federation of student councils of
the TSU;

(g) President of the federation of alumni associations of
the TSU;

(h) Representative of the nonteaching personnel
association of the TSU; and

@) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who
have distinguished themselves in their professions or fields of
specialization.

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens
who shall be selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified
persons from the Province of Tarlac as recommended by a
search committee constituted by the President of the TSU,
in consultation with the Chairperson of the CHED and
other members of the Board, based on the standards and
qualifications for the position set by the Board. They shall
serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment.

The membership of the President of the federation of
faculty associations, the President of the federation of student
councils, the President of the federation of alumni associations,
and the Representative of the nonteaching personnel in the
Board shall be coterminous with their terms of office, as
provided under their respective constitutions and bylaws.

SEc. 5. Powers and Duties of the Board. — In addition
to its general powers of administration and the powers granted
to the board of directors of a corporation under existing laws,
the Board shall have the following specific powers and duties:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with
the declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions
of the Constitution on education, agriculture, science and
technology, and the policies, standards and thrusts of the CHED
under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Act of 1994”;


(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and
rules on student discipline drawn by the Administrative and
Academic Councils as herein provided;

© Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President
of the TSU, the vice presidents, deans, directors, heads of the
campuses, faculty members, and other officials and employees
of the TSU;

) Fix and adjust the salaries of faculty members,
administrative officials and employees, subject to the provisions
of the Revised Compensation and Position Classification
System and other pertinent budget and compensation laws
governing hours of service, and such other duties and conditions
as it may deem proper; grant them, at its discretion, leaves of
absence under such regulations as it may promulgate, any
provision of existifig law to the contrary notwithstanding; and
remove them for cause in accordance with the requirements
of due process of law;

@) Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school
charges, such as matriculation fees, graduation fees and
laboratory fees, as the Board may deem proper to impose, after
due consultation with the concerned sectors. The fees and
charges, including government subsidies and other income
generated by the TSU, shall constitute its special trust
funds, and shall be deposited in any authorized government
depository bank. All interests that shall accrue therefrom
shall form part of the same funds for the use of the TSU.

Any provision of existing law, rule or regulation to the
contrary notwithstanding, any income generated by the TSU
from tuition fees and other charges, as well as from the
operation of auxiliary services and land grants, shall be
retained by the TSU and may be disbursed by the Board for
instruction, research, extension services or other programs
and projects of the TSU: Provided, That all fiduciary fees
shall be disbursed for the specific purposes for which these
are collected: Provided, however, That if, for reasons beyond
its control, the TSU shall not be able to pursue any project
for which the funds have been appropriated and allocated under
its approved program of expenditures, the Board may authorize

NA A a names

Me i RA eas aa seek

the use of said funds for any reasonable purpose which, in its
discretion, may be necessary and urgent for the attainment of
the objectives and goals of the TSU;

@ Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition
and other school fees for greater access of poor but deserving
students in accordance with Republic Act No. 10931, or the
“Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act”;

(g) Establish professorial chairs in the TSU and provide
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students; «

(h) Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided by
law for the support of the TSU, and all other sums in the
manner it may, in its discretion, determine to carry out the
purposes and functions of the TSU:

@ Setthe policies on admission and graduation of students;

G) Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition
of their outstanding contributions in the fields of education,
public service, arts, science and technology, sports and human
kinetics or any field of specialization within the academic
competency of the TSU, and authorize the awarding of
certificates of completion of nondegree and nontraditional
courses;

(x) Establish research and extension centers to promote
the development of the TSU;

@ Develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate institutions and agencies,
whether public, private, local or foreign, and appoint experts or
specialists as consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange
professors, scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

(m) Adopt modern and innovative modes of transmitting
knowledge for the promotion of greater access to education
such as the use of information technology, dual training
system, open distance learning, and community laboratory;

(n) Collaborate with the governing bodies of other state
universities and colleges within the Province of Tarlac and
Region III, under the supervision of the CHED and in
consultation with the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), in restructuring the TSU to make it more efficient,
relevant, productive and competitive;

(©) Absorb nonchartered tertiary institutions within the
Province of Tarlac and Region III as branches, extension or
external centers, in coordination with the CHED and in
consultation with the DBM, and offer therein programs or
courses to carry out the constitutional mandate of providing
equal access to educational opportunities;

(p) Authorize an external management audit of the
TSU, to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and
regulations of the Commission on Audit, and institute
reforms, including academic and structural changes, on the
basis of the audit results and recommendations;

@ Develop consortia and other economic forms of
linkages with local government units as well as public,
private, local or foreign institutions and agencies for the
furtherance of the purposes and objectives of the TSU;

(x) Import economic, technical and cultural books and
publications;

(8) Enter into joint ventures with business and industry
for the profitable development and management of economic assets,
the proceeds of which shall be used for the development and
strengthening of the TSU;

(t) Receive in trust, legacies, gifts and donations of real
and personal properties of all kinds and administer and
dispose of the same, when necessary, for the benefit of the
TSU and subject to the limitations, directions and instructions
of the donor, if any;

(u) Extend the term of the President of the TSU beyond
the age of retirement, but not beyond the age of seventy (70),
based on the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by

the Board: Provided, That the President’s performance has
been rated by the Board as outstanding and a unanimous
recommendation for such extension has been decided upon by
the search committee;

(v) Delegate any of its powers and duties provided to
the President and other officials of the TSU, as it may deem
appropriate, so as to expedite the administration of the affairs
of the TSU;

(w) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for
participative and transparent decision-making within the TSU;

(x) Where most advantageous to the TSU, privatize the
management of nonacademic services such as health, food,
building or grounds or property maintenance, and such other
similar activities;

(y) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies,
materials, and equipment; and

(2) Promulgate rules and regulations, as may be necessary,
to carry out the purposes and functions of the TSU.

SEC. 6. Meetings of the Board. ~ The Board shall
regularly convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson
of the Board may, however, call a special meeting whenever
necessary: Provided, That members are notified in writing at
least three (3) days prior to the conduct of said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of all
its members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
however, That the Chairperson of the Board or the President
of the TSU is among those present in the meeting.

In case the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a
meeting of the Board, a CHED Commissioner duly designated
by Chairperson of the CHED as representative to the meeting,

shall have all the rights and responsibilities of a regular
member: Provided, That during the meeting, the President of
the TSU, as Vice Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer:
Provided, further, That this provision notwithstanding, the
Chairperson of the CHED is hereby authorized to designate a
CHED Commissioner as the regular Chairperson of the
Board, in which case, the said CHED Commissioner shall act
as the presiding officer.

In case the Chairperson of the Senate Committee on
Higher, Technical and Vocational Education and the House
Committee on Higher and Technical Education shall not be
able to attend the Board meeting, they may designate their
respective representatives, who shall have the same rights and
responsibilities as regular members of the Board.

Pa

The members of the Board shall not receive any salary,
but shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and necessary
expenses incurred, either for their attendance to the meetings
of the Board or in connection with other official business
authorized by resolutions of the Board, subject to existing laws
and regulations.

Sec. 7: The University President. - The TSU shall
be headed by a President who shall be appointed by the
Board, subject to its guidelines on qualifications and standards,
and based on the recommendation of a search committee
duly constituted for the purpose of selecting the President.
The TSU President shall render full-time service, serve a term
of four (4) years, and may be reappointed to another term:
Provided, That this provision shall not adversely affect the term
of the incumbent President.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of
office of the incumbent President of the TSU, the Board shall
constitute the Search Committee for the Presidency.

The powers and duties of the President of the TSU, in
addition to those specifically provided for in this Act, shall
include those usually pertaining to the Office of the President of
similar state universities and colleges and those delegated by
the Board.

The salary of the President of the TSU shall be in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11466 or the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”, and such other laws amendatory
thereto, which may hereinafter be enacted, and shall be
comparable to that being received by the presidents of similar
educational institutions.

In case of a vacancy in the Office of the President by
reason of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal
for cause, or incapacity of the President to perform the functions
of the office, the Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge
of the TSU, pending the appointment of a new President:
Provided, That the Officer-in-Charge shall serve only ‘during
the unexpired portion of the term.

The President of the TSU shall be assisted by a
Vice President for Academic Affairs, a Vice President for
Administration, and a Vice President for Research,
Development, and Extension, who shall all be appointed
by the Board upon the recommendation of the President of
the TSU.

SEc. 8. The Secretary of the University. - The Board
shall appoint a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the
Board and the TSU and shall keep all records and proceedings
of the Board. The Secretary of the TSU shall serve upon each
member of the Board the appropriate notice of board meetings.

Sec. 9. The Treasurer of the University. - The Treasurer
of the Philippines shall be the ex officio Treasurer of the TSU.

SEc. 10. The Administrative Council. - There shall be
an Administrative Council consisting of the President of the
TSU as chairperson, and the vice presidents, deans, directors
and other officials of equal rank as members, that shall
review and recommend to the Board the policies that shall
govern the administration, management and development
planning of the TSU.

Sec. 11. The Academic Council. — There shall be an
Academic Council, which shall formulate academic policies. It
shall be composed of the President of the TSU, who shall act as


chairperson, and all academic staff with the rank of at least an
assistant professor, as members.

The Academic Council shall have the power to review and
recommend the curricular offerings and rules on student
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board. It shall fix
the requirements for the admission of students, as well as for
their graduation and conferment of degrees, subject to the
review and approval of the Board through the President of
the TSU.

It shall exercise disciplinary power over the students
of the TSU and shall formulate rules and regulations on
student discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

SEC. 12. The Faculty. — No political belief, gender
preference, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic origin,
nor religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry
in the appointment of faculty members of the TSU: Provided,
That said appointment shall be subject to the guidelines,
qualifications, and standards set by the Board: Provided,
further, That no member of the faculty shall teach for or
against any particular church or religious sect.

SEC. 13. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
~The TSU shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy pursuant to paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV
of the Constitution.

SEC. 14. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
TSU shall provide scholarships and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify
for admission to the TSU.

No student shall be denied admission to the TSU by reason
of gender, religion, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic
origin.

SEC. 15. Authority to Loan or Transfer Apparatus,
Equipment or Supplies and Detail of Personnel. — Upon the
request of the President of the TSU, the heads of the bureaus

it

and offices of the national government may loan or transfer
to the TSU such apparatus, equipment or supplies as may be
needed by it, and detail employees for duty therein when,
in the judgment of the head of bureau or office, the apparatus,
equipment, supplies or service of such employees can be
spared without serious detriment to public service.

The employees so detailed shall perform such duties as
required of them by the President of the TSU and the time so
served shall be counted as part of their regular service.

SEC. 16. Assets, Liabilities and Personnel. — All assets,
both real and personal, personnel and records of the TSU,
as well as its liabilities or obligations, shall remain under
the name of the TSU: Provided, That the positions, rights, and
security of tenure of faculty members and personnel therein
employed under existing laws shall be respected: Provided, further,
That the incumbents occupying the positions shall remain in the
same status until otherwise provided for by the Board: Provided,
finally, That the TSU shall also accordingly upgrade or increase
its human resource component as may be deemed appropriate by
the Board.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the TSU and all its campuses are hereby declared the
property of the TSU, and shall be titled under its name:
Provided, That should the TSU cease to exist or be abolished
or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer
needed by the TSU, the same shall revert to the concerned
local government unit or to the Republic of the Philippines,
as the case may be.

SEC. 17. Duty and Tax Exemptions, — The importation
by the TSU of economic, technical, and cultural books or
publications, which are for economic, technical, vocational,
scientific, philosophical, historical, or cultural purposes shall,
upon certification by the CHED, be exempt from customs
duties in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act
No. 10863, otherwise known as the “Customs Modernization
and Tariff Act (CMTA)”.


All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actually, directly and exclusively
for educational purposes by the TSU, shall be exempt from
donor's tax and the same shall be considered as allowable deduction
from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable income
of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the National
Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 18. Filing of Report. — On or before the fifteenth
(15") day of the second (24) month after the opening of regular
‘classes each year, the Board shall file a detailed report on the
progress, condition, and needs of the TSU with the Office of
the President of the Philippines and both Houses of Congress,
through the Chairperson of the CHED.

Sec. 19. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of
this Act.

SEC. 20. Transitory Provision. —- Upon the effectivity of
this Act, all employees of the TSU shall be retained in their
present positions and no one shall be adversely affected by the
approval of the amendments to the original Charter.

The incumbent President of the TSU shall continue to hold
office until the expiration of one (1) term.

SEC. 21. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to
carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the
annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 22. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall,
in consultation with the CHED, issue the rules and regulations
to fully implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 23. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not
affected are in full force and effect.

SEC. 24. Repealing. Clause. — Republic Act No. 6764,
otherwise known as the “Tarlac State University Charter”, and
all other laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, and rules
and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act are amended, repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 25. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in

a newspaper of general circulation.

proved,

     

AY Q. VELASCO
er df the House
of Representatives

   

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on August 3, 2021,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 2, 2022.

yl Lith AZ

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MAR ? kif i L. MENDOZA
Secretary of the Senate
G

fuse of: Repro sentatives

     
 

 
  
 
  

Lapsed neo uaw on < APR i i 2022
without the signature of ‘the “Presi
dent, fin accordangp, with Article NI,

Approved:

Sectiba 27 (i): of the Constitution? «

Ce

 

RODRIGO i Reade

President of the Coan SS

i

SLED COPY |