.* H.No. 59 oo
; S.No. 1840'S

: “Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Highteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

meet a Eig apa NAR ere nme oa Hm

AN ACT AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8762, OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS THE “RETAIL TRADE LIBERALIZATION
ACT OF 2000”, BY LOWERING THE REQUIRED
PAID-UP CAPITAL FOR FOREIGN RETAIL
ENTERPRISES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 3, paragraph (2) of Republic Act
No. 8762 is hereby deleted, and replaced with a new
paragraph (2), to read as follows:

“SEC. 3. Definition. — As used in this Act:

“xXx

“(2) ‘Minimum investment per store’ shall
include the value of the gross assets, tangible or
intangible, including but not limited to buildings,

leaseholds, furniture, equipment, inventory, and
common use investments and facilities such as
administrative offices, warehouses, preparation or
storage facilities. The investment for common use
and facilities, as reflected in the financial statements
following the accounting standards adopted by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or the
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), whichever
is applicable, shall be pro-rated among the number
of stores being served. The paid-up capital may be
used to purchase assets for purposes of complying
with the investment requirement per store.”

SEc. 2. Section 5 of Republic Act No. 8762 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 5. Foreign Equity Participation. —
Foreign-owned partnerships, associations, and
corporations may, upon registration with the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), or in
case of foreign-owned single proprietorships, upon
registration with the Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI), engage or invest in the retail trade
business, under the following conditions:

“(a) A foreign retailer shall have a minimum
paid-up capital of Twenty-five million pesos
(P25,000,000.00);

-“(b) The foreign retailer's country of origin
does not prohibit the entry of Filipino retailers; and

“(c) In the case of foreign retailers engaged in
retail trade through more than one (1) physical store,
the minimum investment per store must be at least
Ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00): Provided, That
this requirement shall not apply to foreign investors
and foreign retailers who are legitimately engaged
in retail trade and were not required to.comply with
the minimum investment per store at the time of
the effectivity of this Act: Provided, further, That

proof of qualification to engage in retail trade under
Republic Act No. 8762 and its implementing rules
and regulations is submitted to the DTI: «

“The foreign retailer shall be required
to maintain in the Philippines at all times the
paid-up capital of Twenty-five million pesos
(P25,000,000.00), unless the foreign retailer h Ss
notified the SEC or the DTI, whichever is appropriate,
of its intention to repatriate its capital and cease
operations in the Philippines. The-agtual use in
Philippine operations of the minimum paid-up capital
shall be monitored by the SH@/or by the DTI,
whichever is appropriate. :

“Failure to maintain in the Philippines the
paid-up capital required in the preceding paragraph,
prior to notification of the SEC or the DTI, whichever
is appropriate, shall subject the foreign retailer to
penalties or restrictions on any future trading
activities/business in the Philippines.

“For purposes of registration with the SEC or
the DTI, the foreign retailer shall submit a
certification from the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
(BSP) of the inward remittance of its capital
investment, or in lieu thereof, such other proof
certifying that its capital investment is deposited and
maintained in a bank in the Philippines.”

SEC. 3. Section 6 of Republic Act No. 8762 is hereby deleted
and replaced with a new Section 6, to read as follows:

“SEC. 6. Review of the Minimum Paid-up
Capital Requirement. — The DTI, SEC, and the
National Economic and Development Authority
(NEDA) shall review the required minimum paid-up
capital every three (3) years from the effectivity of
this Act. The DTI, SEC, and NEDA shall each report
its recommendation to Congress.”

SEc. 4. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 8762 is hereby deleted
and replaced with a new Section 7, to read as follows:

“SEC. 7. Labor Policy. — In all cases, the
employment of foreign nationals by foreign retailers
shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
Labor Code on the determination of nonavailability
of a competent, able and willing Filipino citizen before
engaging the services of a foreign national, with due
regard to the State policy under the Constitution to
promote the preferential use of Filipino labor.”

SEc. 5. Sections 8 and 9 of Republic Act No. 8762 are hereby
deleted.

SEC. 6. Anew Section 8 is hereby inserted toread as follows:

“SEC. 8. Promotion of Locally Manufactured
Products. — Foreign retailers are encouraged to have
a stock inventory of products which are made in the
Philippines.” -

SEc. 7. Section 10 of Republic Act No. 8762 is hereby
renumbered as Section 9.

SEC. 8. Section 11 of Republic Act No. 8762 is hereby
renumbered as Section 10 and amended to read as follows:
a
“SEC. 10. Implementing Agencies; Rules and
Regulations. - The monitoring and regulation of
foreign retailers allowed to engage in retail trade in
the Philippines shall be the responsibility of the SEC,
with respect to partnerships, associations, and
corporations, or of the DTI, with respect to single
proprietorships. Both agencies shall keep a record of
the entities engaged in retail trade in the Philippines
that are registered with them.

“Within ninety (90) days after the approval of
this Act, the DTI, in coordination with the SEC and
NEDA, shall formulate and issue the implementing
rules and regulations necessary for the
implementation of this Act.”

SEc. 9. Section 12 of Republic Act No..8762 is hereby
renumbered as Section 11 and amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 11. Penalties. — Violation of any of the
provisions of this Act shall be punishable by
imprisonment of not less than four (4) years to six (6)
years and a fine of not less than One million pesos
(P1,000,000.00) but not more than Five million pesos
(P5,000,000.00). In the case of partnerships,
associations, or corporations, the penalty shall be
imposed upon its partners, president, directors,
general manager, and other officers responsible for
the violation. If the offender is nota citizen of the
Philippines, he or she shall be dep6rted immediately
after service of sentence. If the Filipino offender is a
public officer or employee, he or she shall, in addition
to the penalty prescribed herein, suffer dismissal and
permanent disqualification from public office.”

SEc. 10. Sections 13, 14, and 15 of Republic Act No. 8762
are hereby renumbered as Sections 12, 13, and 14, respectively.

Sec. 11. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 12. Repealing Clause. ~ All laws, decrees, executive
orders, proclamations, rules and regulations, and issuances or
parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 13. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least
two (2) newspapers of general circulation in the Philippines.

   

   

VICENTE (. SOTTO HI =LORD ALL:
President wf the Senate Speakenaf the House
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 59
and Senate Bill No. 1840 was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on
_* September 21, 2021 and September 20, 202 ecti

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

  
 
 

 

  

MA

Approved: DEC 1 2024

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

of

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 019408

   

MALACARANG RECORDS OFFICE

| CERYEDA

  

YE, Fe

Ualaade._ 28878 N

CLISO-ERAD
Nadi