ee ce ce

H. No. 6371

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress
Serand Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11503;

AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)
YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION, PRESENTLY
KNOWN AS BAYAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS, INC.,
UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 3259, ENTITLED “AN ACT
GRANTING THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS
CORPORATION A FRANCHISE TO ESTABLISH RADIO
STATIONS FOR DOMESTIC TELECOMMUNICATIONS,
RADIOPHONE, BROADCASTING AND TELECASTING”,
AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT NOS. 4905 AND 7633

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
vegulations, the franchise granted to International
Communications Corporation, presently known as Bayan

Telecommunications, Inc., hereunder referred to as the grantee,
its successors or assignees, under Republic Act No. 3259, as
amended by Republic Act Nos. 4905 and 7633, to construct, install,
establish, operate, and maintain for commercial purposes and in
the public interest, in the Philippines and between the Philippines
and other countries and territories, wire and/or wireless
telecommunications system including landline or local exchange
services, mobile cellular, copper, fiber optics, satellite transmit
and receive systems, switches and their value-added services such
as the transmission of voice, data, facsimile, control signs, audio
and video, information services including services for ships at
sea, airplanes and other conveyances, by means of electricity,
electromagnetic waves, or any other kind of energy, force,
variations or impulses, radiated through space or transmitted
through any other medium, and all other telecommunications
system technologies as are at present available or will be made
available through technological advances or innovations in the
future; or construct, acquire, lease, and operate, or manage
transmitting and receiving stations, lines, cables, or systems as
are convenient or essential to efficiently carry out the purpose of
this franchise, is hereby renewed for another twenty-five (25)
years.

Sec. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or
Facilities. - The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be
constructed and operated in a manner as will, at most, result
only in the minimum interference on the wavelengths or
frequencies of existing stations or other stations which may be
established by law, without in any way diminishing its own right
to use its assigned wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of
transmission or reception thereon as should maximize rendition
of the grantee’s services or the availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Authority of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) a Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity or the appropriate permits and
licenses for the construction, installation and operation of
its telecommunications systems or facilities. In issuing the
certificate, the NTC shall have the power to regulate and
impose such conditions relative to the construction, operation,
maintenance, or service level of the telecommunications systems
or facilities. Such certificate shall state the areas covered and the

date the grantee shall commence the service. The grantee shall
not use any frequency in the radio spectrum without authorization
from the NTC. The NTC, however, shall not unreasonably
withhold or delay the grant of such authority, permit or license.

SEc. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. — For the
purpose of erecting and maintaining poles or other supports
for said wires or other conductors for the purpose of laying
and maintaining underground wires, cables, or other conductors,
it shall be lawful for the grantee, its successors or assignees,
with the prior approval of the Department of Public Works
and Highways (DPWH) or the local government unit (LGU)
concerned, as may be appropriate, to make excavations or lay
conduits in any of the public places, roads, highways, streets,
lanes, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, or bridges of the province, cities,
or municipalities: Provided, however, That a public place, road,
highway, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge disturbed,
altéred, or changed by reason of erection of poles or other supports
or the underground laying of wires, other conductors or conduits,
shall be repaired and replaced in workmanlike manner by said
grantee, its successors or assignees, in accordance with the
standards set by the DPWH or the LGU concerned. Should the
grantee, its successors or assignees, after the ten (10)-day notice
from the said authority, fail, refuse, or neglect to repair or réplace
any part of public place, road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue,
sidewalk, or bridge altered, changed or disturbed by the said
grantee, its successors or assignees, then the DPWH or the LGU
concerned shall have the right to have the same repaired and
placed in good order and condition, and charge the grantee, its
successors or assignees, at double the amount of the costs and
expenses for such repair or replacement.

SEC. 5. Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall
conform to the ethics of honest enterprise and not use its
stations or facilities for obscene or indecent transmission, or
for dissemination of deliberately false information, or willful
misrepresentation, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

The grantee shall operate and maintain all its stations,
lines, cables, systems, and equipment for the transmission
and reception of messages, signals, and pulses in a satisfactory
manner at all times, and as far as economical and practicable,

modify, improve, or change such stations, lines, cables, systems,
and equipment io keep abreast with the advances in science and
technology.

The grantee shall improve and extend its services in
areas not yet served, and in hazard- and typhoon-prone areas
that shall be determined by the National Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Council, or its legal successor,
in coordination with the NTC.

The grantee shali also improve and upgrade its
equipment, facilities and services, in order to ensure effective
compliance with the objectives of Republic Act No. 10639 or
“The Free Mobile Disaster Alerts Act”.

SEC. 6. Raies for Services. — The charges and rates for
telecommunications services of the grantee, except the rates
and charges on those that may hereafter be declared or
considered as nonregulated services, whether flat rates or
measured rates or variation thereof, shall be subject to the
approval of the NTC or its legal successor.

SEC. 7. Right of Government. — The radio spectrum is
a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony and
the use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the grantee by
the State and may be withdrawn any time after due process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril,
calamity, emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and
order: to temporarily take over and operate the stations,
transmitters, facilities, or equipment of the grantee: to
temporarily suspend the operation of any station,
transmitter, facility, or equipment in the interest of public
safety, security, and public welfare: or to authorize the
temporary use and operation thereof by any agency of the
government, upon due compensation to the grantee, for the
use of the stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment
during the period when these shall be so operated.

SEC. 8. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be
renewed and in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years
from the expiration thereof on 9 August 2021, unless sooner

revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto
vevoked in the event the grantee fails to operate continuously for
two (2) years.

Sec. 9. Right of Interconnection. — The grantee is
hereby authorized to connect or demand connection of its
telecommunications systems to other telecommunications
systems installed, operated, and maintained by any other
duly authorized person or entity in the Philippines
for the purpose of providing extended and improved
telecommunications, services to the public, under the terms
and conditions mutually agreed upon by the parties concerned.
This right shall be subject to review and modification by
the NTC.

Sec. 10. Mobile Number Portability. - The grantee
shall provide mobile number portability (MNP) and its
implementing mechanism, and shall interconnect, directly
or indirectly, with the infrastructure, facilities, systems, or
equipment of other telecommunications franchise grantees.
It shall not install network features, functions, or capabilities
that will impede the implementation of a nationwide MNP
system. The NTC shall issue rules and regulations for‘this
purpose, the effectivity of which shall commence upon
applicability with other telecommunications franchise
grantees.

Src. 11. Tax Provision. — The grantee, its successors or
assignees, shall be liable to pay the same taxes on their real estate,
buildings, and personal property, exclusive of this franchise as
other persons or corporations which are now or thereafter may be
required by law to pay, except radio, telecommunications, and
electronic communications equipment, machinery, and spare
parts needed in connection with the business of the grantee which
shall be exempt from customs duties, tariffs, and other taxes, as
well as those declared exempt in this Section.

In addition thereto, the grantee, its successors or assignees,
shall pay a value-added tax on all gross receipts of the business
transacted under this franchise by the grantee, its successors or
assignees, in the Philippines, in lieu of any and all taxes of any
kind, nature or description, levied, established or collected by an
authority whatsoever including, but not limited to, city,
municipal, provincial or national, from which the grantee is

hereby expressly exempted effective from the date of the effectivity
of this Act: Provided, That the grantee, its successors or assignees
shall continue to be liable for income taxes payable under Title II
of the National Internal Revenue Code pursuant to Section 2 of
Executive Order No. 72, unless the latter enactment is amended
or repealed, in which case, amendment or repeal shall be
applicable thereto.

SEC. 12. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. - The grantee shall hold the national,
provincial, city, and municipal governments of the Philippines
free from all claims, liabilities, accounts, demands, or actions
arising out of accidents causing injury to persons or damage
to properties, during the construction or operation of the
stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment of the grantee.

SEC. 13. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. - The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or
the rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person,
firm, company, partnership, corporation, or other commercial
or legal entity, nor merge with any person, firm, company,
partnership or corporation organized for the same purpose
without the prior approval of the Congress of the Philippines.
Congress shall be informed of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of
usufruct, or assignment of franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder, or of the merger or transfer of the controlling
interest of the grantee, within sixty (60) days after the completion
of the transaction. Failure to report to Congress such change of
ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked.

Any corporation to which this franchise may be sold,
transferred or assigned shall be subject to all conditions,
terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 14. Dispersal of Ownership. — Subject to the
requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) and the stock exchange concerned, the herein grantee
shall make public utilities offering to the stock exchanges at
least thirty percent (80%) of its authorized capital stock in
any securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years
from the date of the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That in
cases where public offer of shares is not applicable, the grantee

shall apply other methods of encouraging public participation by
citizens and corporations operating public utilities as allowed by
law. Noncompliance therewith shall render the franchise ipso
facto revoked.

SEC. 15. Contract with Telecommunications Entities. —
The grantee is authorized to contract the installation and
operations of telecommunications systems which is the subject
of this grant with entities with expertise in the field of
telecommunications under such terms and conditions as may
be approved by the NTC.

SEC. 16. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. — The grantee shall
create employment opportunities as well as accept on-the-
job trainees in their franchise operations: Provided, That
priority shall be accorded to the residents of the place where
théir principal office is located: Provided, further, That the
grantee shall follow the applicable labor standards and
allowance entitlement under existing labor laws, rules and
regulations and similar issuances: Provided, finally, That the
employment opportunities or jobs created shall be reflected
in the General Information Sheet (GIS) to be submitted to
the SEC annually.

SEC. 17. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House
of Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of
the Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions
of the franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of
every year during the term ofits franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the roll-out,
development, operation and/or expansion of business; audited
financial statements; latest GIS officially submitted to the SEC,
if applicable; certification of the NTC on the status of its permits
and operations; and an update on the dispersal of ownership
undertaking, if applicable.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

SEC. 18. Fine. - Failure of the grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized with a
fine in the amount of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) per
working day of noncompliance, the effectivity of which shall
commence upon applicability with other telecommunications
franchise grantees: Provided, That in the interim, the grantee
shall be liable to pay the fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00)
per working day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected
by the NTC from the delinquent franchise grantee separate
from the reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC, and the
same shall be remitted to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 19. Equality Clause. - Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
ranchises, or which may hereafter be granted, upon prior
review and approval of Congress, shall become part of this
franchise and shall be accorded immediately and
unconditionally to the herein grantee: Provided, That the
foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions of
elecommunications franchises concerning territorial
coverage, the term, or the type of service authorized by the
franchise.

SEC. 20. Applicability Clause. - The grantee, its
successors or assignees shall be subject to the corporation
aws of the Philippines now existing or hereafter enacted.

 

Sec. 21. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. -
This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or
repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the public
interest so requires and shall not be interpreted as an
exclusive grant of the privilege herein provided for.

SEC. 22. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

 

SEc. 23. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or
modified accordingly.

SEC. 24. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or
in a newspaper of general circulation.

VICENTEC.SOTTOII LORD AL AY Q. VELASCO
President\of the Senate Speakeof the House
: _ _ of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on March 10, 2020,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on October 5, 2020,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives in a special session on October 16, 2020.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA ees C. SIPIN
Secretary of the Senate Secretary General

House of Representatives

DEC 26 2020

LAPSE YNTO LAW OTL wevecececeenmescssonene,
vithout the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article V!.
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution

Approved:

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President ‘of the Philippines-