|
|
i
{

H. No, 6283
S. No. 756

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Sietra Manila
Seuenteenth Cangress
Chirk Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11369]

AN ACT RECOGNIZING THE OBSERVANCE OF NOVEMBER
17 OF EVERY YEAR AS NATIONAL STUDENTS’ DAY

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “National
Students’ Day Act”.

Sec. 2. Pursuant to Article II, Section 11 of the 1987
Philippine Constitution, it is the policy of the State to value the
dignity of every human person and to guarantee full respect for
human rights.

The State recognizes the value of inculcating love of country
and social responsibility among the youth, and supports the
observance of International Students’ Day which was spearheaded
by the International Students’ Council in 1941 to commemorate
the execution of nine (9) Czechoslovakian students who fought

_ against the Nazi occupation.

Sec. 3. In accord with the observance of International
Students’ Day, and in recognition of the invaluable contribution
of student activism to Philippine democracy for initiating efforts

 

 

to foster leadership among Filipino students, November 17 of every
year is hereby declared as National Students’ Day.

 

Suc. 4. An annual program of activities for the observance
of National Students’ Day shall be prepared and implemented
with the National Youth Commission (NYC) serving as the lead
agency. The Department of Education and the Commission on
Higher Education shall support the NYC in all efforts to facilitate
and promote related activities to all public and private schools.

All schools, colleges and universities are encouraged to |

_ extend their full support for exercises and activities launched by

students during the observance of National Students’ Day.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its i
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general i
circulation.

proved,

  

 

o

VICENTE C/SOTTO IIL GLORIA MAGAPAGAL ARROYO

President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

i
This Act was passed by the House of Representatives

as House Bill No. 6283 on September 13, 2017 and adopted by the
Senate of the Philippines as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 756
on May 21, 2019. ‘

Approved: AUG 6 8 2019

 

RODRIGO ROA-DUTERTE
President of the Philippines‘

  
  
  

     
   

ooo
BEBUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES