S. No. 1520
H. No. 6756

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Highteenth Congress
Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

——_5——_

[ Repustic Act No. 11509)

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MEDICAL SCHOLARSHIP AND
RETURN SERVICE PROGRAM FOR DESERVING
STUDENTS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: +

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Doktor Para sa Bayan Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to protect and promote. the right to health
of,the people through the formulation and implementation of
policies and strategies for the appropriate generation,
recruitment, retraining, regulation, retention, and
reassessment of the health workforce making it more attuned
to the needs of the population. It is also the declared policy
of the State to promote social justice by expanding access to
quality education and creating opportunities for underprivileged
individuals.

Towards this end, the State shall establish a medical
scholarship and return service program that will help deserving
medical students pursue medical education and training in the
field of health and medicine who shall eventually render
services in government public health offices or government
hospitals in their hometown or in any municipality in their
home province or in any underserved municipality in any
province, as part of their integration into the public health
and medical service system. This shall ensure the availability
of doctors who will provide quality basic, promotive, preventive
and curative health care services in every municipality in the
country, especially the underserved, remote, economically
underdeveloped, distressed, conflict-afflicted, and geographically
disadvantaged areas.

SEC. 3. Establishment of the Medical Scholarship and
Return Service Program. — There shall be established a
Medical Scholarship and Return Service (MSRS) Program for
deserving students in state universities and colleges (SUCs)
or in partner private higher education institutions (PHEIs) in
regions where there are no SUCs offering a medical course:
Provided, That the Commission on Higher Education (CHED)
may designate more than one (1) partner higher education
institutions (HEIs) in the region, including regions where there
are existing SUCs offering the Doctor of Medicine program as
deemed necessary, upon consultation with the Department of
Health (DOH).

In all cases, qualified applicants from municipalities
without government physicians shall be prioritized in the
allocation of scholarship slots to ensure the assignment of at
least one (1) doctor for every municipality in the country.

SEC. 4. Coverage. - The MSRS Program established
under this Act shall be made available to deserving Filipino
students who want to pursue a degree in Doctor of Medicine.

The student financial assistance for the MSRS Program
shall include the following:

(a) Free tuition and other school fees;

(b) Allowance for prescribed books, supplies and
equipment;

(c) Clothing or uniform allowance;

(d) Allowance for dormitory or boarding house
accommodation;

(e) Transportation allowance;

() Internship fees, including financial assistance during
manaatory internship;

(g) Medical board review fees;
(h) Licensure fees;
(i) Annual medical insurance; and

(j) Other education-related miscellaneous subsistence or
living allowances.

SEC. 5. Qualification Requirements. — An applicant for
the MSRS Program shall possess the following qualifications:

(a) Must be a Filipino citizen residing in the Philippines:

(b) Must be a graduating student or a graduate of an
appropriate undergraduate program identified as a prerequisite
for a Doctor of Medicine degree, from any HEI duly recognized
by the CHED, including a direct entrant to the Integrated
Liberal Arts and Medicine (INTARMED) Program who
satisfactorily completes the first two (2) years of the Program:
Provided, That deserving incoming second year medical
students and those in the higher year levels of the Doctor of
Medicine Program shall also be covered under this Act, as long
as they have complied with the academic requirements and
retenticn policies of the school in the past terms preceding
their scholarship application;

(c} Must have passed the entrance examinations and
complied with other related requirements for admission into
a Doctor of Medicine degree in the SUC cr PHEI where the
schclar intends to enroll, as well as the other requirements
of the CHED and the DOH; and

(d) Must have obtained a National Medical Admission Test
(NMAT) score mandated by the CHED and required by the
SUC or PHEI where the student intends to enroll in.

SEC. 6. Conditions for the Grant of Scholarship. —
Deserving students accepted to the MSRS Program shall be
subject to the following conditionalities:

(a) Must sign an agreement stating the terms and
conditions of the scholarship on a form prescribed by the
CHED and the DOH pursuant to the provisions of this Act;

(b) Must carry the full load of subjects prescribed per
semester by the SUC or PHEI, and shall not, under any
circumstance, drop a course which will result in underloading;

Z (c) Must finish the entire Doctor of Medicine Program
within the prescribed time frame of the SUC or the PHEI
where the scholar is enrolled in, subject to the retention
policies of the SUC or the PHEI: Provided, That the deserving
student accepted to the MSRS Program, before actual
enrollment in the first semester as a scholar, may be allowed
for valid and justifiable reasons, to defer enrollment or to file
a leave of absence: Provided, further, That a scholar who is
already enrolled, may be allowed, for valid and justifiable
reasons, to file a leave of absence;

(ad) Must undertake the mandatory internship in the
SUC’s or PHEI’s base hospital upon graduation from the
Doctor of Medicine Program for scholars under a four (4)-year
Doctor of Medicine Program, or on the last year of the Doctor
of Medicine Program for scholars under a five (5)-year
program: Provided, That in the event that no more slots are
available in such SUC’s or PHEI’s base hospital, the
mandatory internship program must be undertaken in a
DOH-accredited public health facility or hospital or any
accredited government health facility or hospital, subject to
compliance with the requirements of the association which
credits an internship program;

(e) Must take the board examination within a maximum
- period of one (1) year after completion of the mandatory
internship program; and

(f) Must render return of service as provided under
Section 8 of this Act.

The scholar who fails to pass the licensure examination
within one (i) year after graduation and completion of the
mandatory internship and other academic requirements shall
shoulder all the necessary expenses for the succeeding
professional licensure examinations.

SEC. 7. Disqualifications. — The scholarship grant shall
terminate, and the scholar shall repay the full cost of
scholarship and related benefits received, including all the
expenses incurred during -participation in the scholarship
program in case of the following circumstances:

(a) If the scholar accepts another scholarship from other
government or private agency or entity while enjoying the
benefits under this Act;

(b) If the scholar fails to meet the academic requirements
or to complete the course within the prescribed period without
valid cause as may be determined by the SUC or PHETI, or
the CHED or.DOH through appropriate regulations, such as,
but not limited to, absence without notice, willful neglect or
other causes within the control of the scholar;

(c) If the scholar fails to obtain a passing grade in the
Physician Licensure Examination (PLE) within five (5) years
from the time the scholar has completed the mandatory
internship program: Provided, That, instead of repaying the
full cost of the scholarship and related expenses, the scholar
whose scholarship status has been terminated under Section
7(b) or 7(c) of this Act may opt to engage in work within the
public heaith service system, such as engaging in
health-related research work for the government or teaching
health-related subjects in a public educational institution, or
being integrated into the public health service system for a
period prorated to the number of years of mandatory return
service provided under this Act: Provided, jurther, That the
alternative veturu service shall exclude the period cf maridatory
internship and residency training that is undertaken in a
private heaith institution or facility; and

(ad) While being a scholar, the scholar-commits gross
misconduct in a manner that would bring significant damage
to the SUC or PHEI concerned or to the community as a
whole.

SEC. 8. Mandatory Return Service and Integration of the
Scholar into the Public Health and Medical Service System.
— Upon passing the PLE administered by the Professional
Regulation Commission (PRC) and conferment by the PRC of
the license to practice the medical profession, the scholar shall
be integrated into the public health and medical service
system, through the DOH, and shall receive the appropriate
civil. service rank, salary and related benefits. The scholar shall
serve in a government public health office, government hospital,
or any accredited government health facility in the scholar’s
hometown or, in the absence of a need thereat, in any
municipality within the scholar’s home province, or in any
‘underserved municipality closest to the scholar’s hometown
determined by the DOH as a priority area, for at least one
(1) year for every scholarship year availed of: Provided, That
scholars from municipalities with no government physicians
shall render the return service work in the scholar’s hometown:
Provided, further, That the scholar who assumed the slot
intended for a resident of another municipality, no resident of
which qualified to be a scholar under this Act, shall render
the return service work in the same municipality where the
slot was originally intended: Provided, finally, That in all
cases, the scholar shall only be required to serve in such
municipality if no threat to the scholar’s life is present.

 

The scholar shall render the mandatory return service
within six (6) years from the time of passing the PLE for
those who have availed of a four (4)-year program, and seven
(7) years for those who have availed of a five (5)-year program:
Provided, however, That in times of pandemic or public health
emergency, the DOH may require the scholars to serve in any
public health office or a government hospital where their
services may be needed: Provided, further, That the mandatory
return service and integration into the public health and
medical service system under this Act shall be separate and
distinct from the mandatory internship required prior to taking
the licensure examination for physicians: Provided, further,
That the number of years served by the scholar in the public
health and medical service system as part of the return service

é

requirements, if any, of the SUC or PHEI concerned, or health
or medical research within the Philippines in a public
institution or any international organization accredited by the
DOH for work for the underprivileged areas within the
Philippines, or full-time teaching in a public institution shall
be counted in the required number of years of return service
under this Act: Provided, finally, That the physician shall
receive appropriate salaries and other benefits for service
rendered under the mandatory integration into the public
health and medical service.

SEC. 9. Sanctions. — A physician who has availed of the
MSRS Program but fails or refuses to comply with the
mandatory return service and integration provided under this
Act shall be required to pay two (2) times the full cost of
scholarship, including other benefits and expenses incurred by
reason of participation in the MSRS Program.

In case of nonpayment, as provided in the preceding
paragraph, the PRC shall deny the renewal of the physician's
license: Provided, That the abovementioned penalties shall not
apply to physicians who fail to comply with the required return
service on account, or by reason of, severe or serious iliness.

SEC. 10. Harmonization of All Nationally-Funded
Medical Scholarship Programs. — Upon the effectivity of this
Act, all nationally-funded medical scholarship programs shall
be harmonized, rationalized and consolidated under the MSRS
Program. The harmonization, rationalization and consolidation
of scholarship programs under the MSRS Program shall be
in coordination with the UniFAST Board created under
Republic Act No. 10687 or the “Unified Student Financial
Assistance System for Tertiary Education (UniFAST) Act”.

SEC. 11 Training While Serving the Mandatory Return
Service. - The CHED and DOH shall develop programs for
the continuous training of scholars while serving the mandatory
return service under this Act.

Suc. 12. Medical Schools and Plantilla Positions. — In
order tv have a holistic solution and address the scarcity of
doctors in the country, the CHED, in coordination with the
DOH, skal] ensure tnat each region shall have at least one

(1) medical school. For this purpose, the CHED shall also


streamline the requirements for the application for authority
to offer Doctor of Medicine Program. The CHED and DOH
shall also issue the appropriate guidelines within sixty (60)
days from the effectivity of this Act to facilitate the partnership
between SUCs and DOH hospitals with a view of increasing
the number of medical schools throughout the country with
one (1) region having at least one (1) state-operated medical
school: Provided, That within three (3) years from the
effectivity of this Act, there shall be a state-operated medical
school in at least half of the regions with no existing
state-operated medical school: Provided, finally, That within
five (5) years from the effectivity of this Act, there shall be
at least one (1) state-operated medical school in each region
in the country.

In addition, the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), DOH, and local government units (LGUs) where
applicable, shall ensure that all scholars required to render
return service under this Act shall be appointed to appropriate
plantilla positions commensurate to their merit and fitness.

SEC. 13. Role of the CHED. — The CHED shall perform
the following functions in the implementation of the MSRS
Program:

(a) Conduct regular information dissemination of, and
recruitment to, the MSRS Program in SUCs and PHEIs to
ensure that there will be an adequate number of medical
doctors in all the municipalities and provinces;

(b) Review, modify and enhance the medical education
curriculum standards to prepare graduates to work in
community-based health programs and to ensure that Doctor
of Medicine programs remain up-to-date and are of comparable
quality to medical education in other countries;

(c) Together with the DOH, develop programs for the
continuous training of scholars while serving the mandatory
return service under this Act;

(@ Coordinate with the DOH, SUCs and PHEIs, for the
integration of the medical scholar into the public health and
medical service system;

(e) Formulate, promulgate, disseminate and implement
the necessary policies, standards, guidelines, and rules and
regulations for the effective implementation of the MSRS
Program under this Act;

(f) Develop strategies to improve the quality of the Doctor
of Medicine Program and implement a system of quality
control for the offering of Doctor of Medicine Program in SUCs
and PHEIs;

(g) Require SUCs and PHEIs to implement and submit
a tracking, monitoring, evaluation and assistance system in
order to deterthine the whereabouts of the medical scholars
after graduation from SUCs or PHEIs;

(h) Ensure the timely and adequate release to
partner-SUCs and PHElIs of the funds necessary for the
implementation of the MSRS Program, and monitor the timely
and adequate release of the same by the partner-SUCs and
PHEIs to the scholar-beneficiaries under the MSRS Program;
and

(i) Recommend, in coordination with partner-SUCs and
PHEIs, to the DBM the amount necessary for the effective
implementation of this Act.

SEC. 14. Role of the SUCs and PHEIs. — The SUCs and
PHEIs shall perform the following functions in the
implementation of the MSRS Program:

*~ (a) Monitor-the progress of all scholars in their respective
educational institutions, identify those who have low or failing
grades, and counsel them to improve their academic
performance;

(b) Coordinate with the CHED to ensure the timely
release and accurate distribution of allowances and other fees
to the scholars;

(c) Make an annual report to the CHED on the
performance of medical scholars and other necessary or vital
information regarding the MSRS Program;


(d) Assist the CHED in the conduct of regular
information dissemination on, and recruitment to, the MSRS
Program;

(e) Review, modify and enhance the medical education
curriculum to prepare the scholars to work in community-
based health programs to ensure that medical education
programs remain up to date with recent medical developments;

(i) Recommend strategies to CRED and DOH to improve
the implementation of the MSRS Program;

(g) Conduct a tracer study on the whereabouts of their
respective medical scholars after graduation from their
institution and submit the results thereof to the CHED;

(h) Recommend to the CHED and the DBM the budget

" necessary to implement the MSRS Program in their respective

institutions, based on their projected capacity and evaluation
of the adequacy of the funding under the Program; and

(i) Perform such other functions as may be deemed
necessary for the success of the MSRS Program.

SEC. 15. Role of the DOH. — The DOH shall perform
the following functions in the implementation of the MSRS
Program: :

(a) In coordination with the CHED, SUCs and PHEIs,
determine the initial number and distribution of physicians
needed for each municipaiity or province, which determination
shall be made every five (5) years from the effectivity of this
Act;

(b) Ensure that all regions in the country have at least
one (1) Level III DOH hospital to ensure the availability of

a possible partner or base hospital of medical schools;

(c) Ensure the integration of scholars into the public
nealth and medical service system, and monitor their
performance during the mandatory return service period;

(ad) Assist the CHED in the conduct of the regular
information dissemination on the MSRS Program and in the
recruitment of scholar-applicants:

(e) Craft a career pathway for physicians who are
beneficiaries of the MSRS Program in the public health and
medical service system to incentivize scholar-physicians to
continue serving therein;

(f) Coordinate with the LGUs for the mandatory
integration of scholar-physicians into the public health and
medical service system; and

(g) Recommend to the DBM the creation of plantilla
positions for scholar-physicians with salary grades
commensurate to their educational achievement, training, and
other qualifications. ¥

SEC. 16. Role of LGUs. — LGUs are mandated to support
the integration of the scholar into the public health and
medical service system by performing the following functions:

(a) Create a mechanism or system to provide the

~ necessary support, including support to ensure their safety and

protection, for the integration of physicians who will be
assigned to the LGU;

(b) Coordinate with the DOH and the physicians to
determine the specific health needs or requirements of the
community and provide the necessary assistance, including
involvement in the research component of the medical service
system;

(c) As far as practicable and subject to availability of
funds, maintain a regular counterpart fund to be used for
providing the balance of the scholarship budget for scholars
enrolled in SUCs or PHEIs;

(d) Provide other forms of financial assistance, subject to
availability of funds, to support the integration program of
doctors in the LGUs;

(e) Recommend to the CHED any strategies to improve
the implementation of the MSRS Program;

(£) In coordination with the CHED, SUC or PHEI
concerned, conduct an information dissemination campaign on


the MSRS Program within the municipality or province, with
the objective of attracting qualified applicants to the said
Program;

: (g) Execute and enforce laws, ordinances and regulations
which may, directly or indirectly, have a positive impact on
the MSRS Program; and

(h) Perform all other acts to assist the scholar to ensure
that the scholar finishes the Doctor of Medicine Program
within the timeframe provided by the medical school or the
CHED.

SEC. 17. Funding. — The amount necessary to carry out
the implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
current year's appropriation of the participating SUC, DOH
and CHED.

Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continuous
implementation of the medical scholarship provided under this
Act shall be included in the scholarship program of SUCs and
CHED in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 18. Transitory Provisions. — Upon the effectivity of
this Act, current scholars under the existing medical
scholarship programs of the DOH and CHED shall
automatically be eligible to avail the benefits under this Act.

SEC. 19. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on
MSRS Program. — There is hereby created a Joint
Congressional Oversight Committee to oversee, monitor and
evaluate the implementation of this Act.

The Oversight Gommittee shall be composed of five (5)
members each from the Senate and from the House of
Representatives, and shall include the following: Chairperson
of the Senate Committee on Higher, Technical and Vocational
Education; Chairperson of the House Committee on Higher and
Technical Education; Chairperson of the Senate Committee on
Health and Demography: Chairperson of the House Committee
on Health; and three (3) members each to be chosen from the
membership cf the Senate Commiites on Higher. Technical
and Vocational Education, and the House Committee on Higher
and Technical Education by the Senate President and the

House Speaker, respectively: Provided, That at least one (1)
member from the respective nominees of the House of
Representatives and the Senate shall be chosen from the
Minority party/bloc.

SEC. 20. Determination of Number and Allocation of
Scholars to be Admitted. — Every five (5) years from the
effectivity of this Act, the DOH and CHED shall, upon
assessing the shortage of health human resource workforce in
the country against the ideal standards and the National
Health Human Resource Master Plan created under Section
23 of Republic Act No. 11223 or the “Universal Health Care
Act”, and upon consultation with participating SUCs and
PHEIs, the DBM, and the PRC, determine the number and
geographical allocation of scholars .to be admitted every school
year allocating at least one (1) scholarship slot in
municipalities without government physicians: Provided, That
in determining the allocation quota of the scholars to be
admitted to the Program, utmost priority is giver’ ‘to regions
with the low doctor-to-population ratios: Provided, finally, That
in order to ensure an adequate number of competent human
resource for health for the entire country, the DOH shall
submit to Congress the National Health Human Resource
Master Plan, and any updates thereto, in accordance with the
Universal Health Care Law.

SEC. 21. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
one hundred twenty (120) days from the effectivity of this Act,
the CHED and the DOH shall, in coordination with the
Philippine Association of State Universities and Colleges,
Coordinating Council of Private Educational Associations,
League of Municipalities, Association of Municipal Health
Officers, Non-Government Community-Based Health Programs,
PRC, DBM, SUCs, PHEIs, associations of medical schools and
medical students and other relevant stakeholders, formulate
and issue the rules and regulations to fully implement the
provisions of this Act: Provided, That the absence of the
implementing rules and regulations shall not affect the
effectivity of this Act and the grant of benefits provided herein.

SEC. 22. Separability Clause. — If any part or provision
of this Act shall be held invalid or unconstitutional, the other

aoeancrernnotteatet eben Y

 

l4

parts or provisions hereof that are not affected shal! remain
in full force and effect.

SEC. 23. Repealing Clause. ~ All laws, decrees, or rules
inconsistent with this Act are hereny repealed or modified
accordingly.

%

SEC. 24. Effectivity. - This Act shali take effect fifteen
(15) days after 1ts publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

    

  
  
 

 
  
 

| SOTTO III
the Senate

LORD7“ALLA Y Q. VELASCO VICENTE G
SpeakeNof the House Presideni o
of Representatives ~,

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1520
and Hvuuse Bill No. 6756 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines on October 15, 2020 and the House of
Representatives in a special session on October 16, 2029.

VB yoo Go BOL

JOCELIA BIGHANI C. SIPIN MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary General Secretary of the Senate

House 0, Representatives

Approved: DEC 2 2 2020

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE

President of the Phitippines

Q

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 016225