H.No. 7019

Republic of the Philippines
Congress af the Philippines
Metro Manila
Kighteentl Congress
Secont Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twénty.

(REPUBLIC AcT No. 11586].

AN ACT CONVERTING THE AGUSAN DEL SUR STATE
COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNOLOGY
(ASSCAT) IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BUNAWAN,

_ PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR INTO A STATE

} UNIVERSITY, INTEGRATING THEREWITH THE
SATELLITE CAMPUS IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF
TRENTO, PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR, TO BE
KNOWN AS THE AGUSAN DEL SUR STATE
UNIVERSITY (ADSSU), AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and-House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Conversion. — The Agusan del Sur State
College of Agriculture and Technology (ASSCAT) in the
Municipality of Bunawan, Province of Agusan del Sur,

including its existing satellite campus in the Municipality
of Trento, Province of Agusan del Sur, is hereby converted
into a state university to be known as the Agusan del Sur
State University (ADSSU), and hereinafter referred to as
the University. Its main campus shall be in the Municipality
of Bunawani.

SEC. 2. General Mandate. — The University shall
primarily provide advance education, higher technological,
professional and advance instruction in the fields of agriculture,
agribusiness management, science and technology, education,
forestry, engineering, arts and sciences, nontraditional courses,
and other relevant fields of study. It shall also undertake research,
extension services, and production activities in support of the
development of the Province of Agusan del Sur and provide
progressive leadership in its areas of specialization. -

SEC. 3. Curricular Offerings. - The University shall
offer short-term technical-vocational courses, undergraduate
and graduate programs within its areas of competency and
specialization in the fields of agriculture, agribusiness
management, science and technology, education, forestry,
engineering,.arts and sciences, and other courses, as the Board
of Regents may deem necessary to carry out its objectives, and
those which respond to the human resource development needs
of the Provinée of Agusan del Sur and the CARAGA Region.

The University may operate a reasonably sized laboratory
school if it has a College of Education.

SEc. 4: Administration. — The University shall have
the general powers of a corporation set forth in Batas Pambansa
Blg. 68, as amended, otherwise known as “The Corporation
Code of the Philippines.” The administration of the University
and the exercise of its corporate powers shall be vested
exclusively in the Board of Regents atid the President of the
University. :

SEC. 5. The Governing Board. — The governing board of
the University shall be the Board of Regents, hereinafter
referred to as the Board, which shall be chaired and cochaired

by the Chairperson of the Commission on Higher Education
(CHED) and the President of the University, respectively, with
the following as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and
Technical and Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and
Technical Education of the House of Represéntatives;

(© Regional Director of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA);

@ Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture (DA);

© Regional Director of the Department of Science and
Technology (DOST);

3) President of the federation of faculty associations of
the University;

(g) President of the federation of student councils of the
University;

(h) President of the federation of alumni associations of
the University; and

G@) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector
who have distinguished themselves in their professions or
fields of specialization.

The Board shall appoint the two (2) prominent citizens
who shall be selected from a list of at least five (6) qualified
persons in the Province of Agusan del Sur where the
University and its campuses are located, as recommended
by the search committee constituted by the University
President, in consultation with the CHED Chairperson and
the other members of the Board, based on the standards and
qualifications for the position set by the Board. They shall
serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment.

Membership of the President of the federation of faculty
associations, the President of the federation of alumni associations,
and the President of the federation of student councils in the
governing board shall be coterminous with their terms of office,
as provided under their respective constitutions and bylaws.

SkEc. 6. Powers and Duties of the Board. — In addition to
its general powers of administration and the powers granted to
the Board of Directors of a corporation under existing laws, the
Board shall have the following specific powers and duties:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance
with the declared State policies and the provisions of the
Constitution on education, agriculture, science and technology,
as well as the policies, standards and thrusts of the CHED
under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Act of 1994”; :

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and
rules of discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic
Councils herein provided;

(© Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President
of the University, the vice presidents, deans, directors, heads of
the campuses, faculty members and other officials and
employees of the University;

@ Fix and adjust the salaries of faculty members,
administrative officials and employees, subject to the provisions
of the Revised Compensation and Position Classification
System and other pertinent budget and compensation laws,
including those governipg the hours of service, and such other
duties and conditions as it may deem proper; grant them, at its
discretion, leaves of absence under such regulations as it
may promulgate, any provision of existing law to the
contrary notwithstanding; and remove them for cause in
accordance with the requirements of due process of law;

© Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school
charges, such as matriculation fees, graduation fees, and
laboratory fees, as the Board may deem proper to impose, after

due consultation with the concerned sectors. The fees and
charges, including government subsidies and other income
generated by the University, shall constitute its special trust
funds and shall be deposited in any authorized government
depository bank. All interests that shall accrue therefrom
shall form part of the same funds for the use of the University.

Any provision of existing laws, rules or regulations to
the contrary notwithstanding, any incoifie generated by the
University from tuition fees and other charges, as well as
from the operation of auxiliary services and land grants,
shall be retained by the University, and may be disbursed by
the Board for instruction; research, extension services or
other programs and projects of the University: Provided, That
all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed for the specific purposes
for which these are collected: Provided, however, That if, for
reasons beyond its control, the University shall not be able to
pursue any project for which the funds have been appropriated.
and allocated under its approved program of expenditures,
the Board may authorize the use of the funds for any
reasonable purpose which, in its discretion, may be necessary
and urgent for the attainment of the objectives and goals
of the University;

@ Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition
and other school fees for greater access of poor but deserving
students in accordance with Republic Act No. 10931 or the
“Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act”;

(g) Establish professorial chairs in the University and
provide fellowships for qualified faculty members, and
scholarships to deserving students;

(h) Receive and appropriate all sums as may be provided
for the support of the University in the manner it may
determine, in its discretion, in order to carry out the purposes
and functions of the University;

@ Set the policies on admission and graduation of
students;

@) Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition
of their outstanding contribution in the fields of education,
public service, arts, science and technology, agriculture or any
field of specialization within the academic competence of the
University, and authorize the awarding of certificates of completion
of nondegreé and nontraditional courses;

. & Establish research and extension centers to promote
the development of the University;

‘@ Develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate partners whether public,
private, local or foreign institutions and agencies, and appoint
experts/specialists as consultants, part-time/visiting/exchange
professors, scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

(m) Adopt modern and innovative modes of transmitting
knowledge for the promotion of greater access to education
such as the use of information technology, dual training
system, open distance learning, and community laboratory;

(a) Collaborate with the governing boards of state
universities and colleges (SUCs) within the Province of
Agusan del Sur and CARAGA Region, under the supervision
of the CHED and in consultation with the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM), in restructuring the
University to make it more efficient, relevant, productive and
competitive;

© Absorb non-chartered tertiary institutions within the
Province of Agusan del Sur and CARAGA Region, as branches
and extension/external, centers, in coordination with the
CHED, and in consultation with the DBM, and offer therein
programs or courses to promote and carry out equal access to
educational opportunities, as mandated by the Constitution;

(p) Authorize an external management audit of the
University, to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules
and regulations of the Commission on Audit and institute
reforms, including academic and structural changes, on the
basis of the audit results and recommendations;

@ Develop consortia and other economic forms of
linkages with local government units (LGUs), public, private,
local and foreign institutions and agencies, in the furtherance
of the purposes and objectives of the University;

(r) Import economic, technical and cultural books and
publications;

() Enter into joint ventures with biisiness and industry
for the profitable development and management of the
economic assets of the University, the proceeds from which
shall be used for the development and strengthening of the
University;

(t) Receive, in trust, legacies, gifts and donations of real
and personal properties of all kinds and administer and
dispose of the same, when necessary, for the benefit of the
University, and subject to the limitations, directions and
instructiong of the donor, if any;

(a) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment and other facilities, and the purchase
and acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies,
materials and equipment;

(v) Extend the term of the President of the University
beyond the age of retirement, but not beyond the age of
seventy (70), based on the guidelines, qualifications and
standards set by the Board: Provided, That the President's
performance has been rated by the Board as outstanding
and a unanimous recommendation has been decided by the search
committee;

(w) Delegate any of its powers and duties provided to the
President and other officials of the University, as it may
deem appropriate, so as to expedite the administration of the
affairs of the University;

(x) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for
participative decision-making and transparency within the
University;

(y) Where most advantageous to the University, privatize
the management of nonacademic services such as health,
food, building or grounds or property maintenance, and such
other similar activities; and

_@ Promulgate rules and regulations, as may be
necessary, to carry out the purposes and functions of the
University.

SEC. 7. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall
regularly convene once every quarter. The Chairperson of the
Board may, however, upon three (3) days’ prior written notice,
call a maximum of two (2) special meetings whenever
necessary within the year.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
however, That the Chairperson of the Board or the President
of the University is among those present in the meeting.

In the absence of the CHED Chairperson, a Commissioner
of the CHED, duly designated by the CHED Chairperson as
representative in the meeting, shall have all the rights and
responsibilities of a regular member: Provided, That during
this meeting, the President of the University, as Vice
Chairperson, shall be the Presiding Officer: Provided, further,
That this proviso, notwithstanding, the Chairperson of the
CHED is hereby authorized to designate a CHED Commissioner
as the regular Chairperson of the Board, in which case, said
CHED Commissioner, shall act as the Presiding Officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on
Higher and Technical and Vocational Education and the
House Committee on Higher and Technical Education will
not be able to attend the Board meeting, they may designate
their respective representatives to attend the meeting, who
shall have the same rights and responsibilities as the regular
members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall not receive any salary,
but shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and
necessary expenses incurred, either for their attendance to the
meetings of the Board or in connection with other official
business authorized by resolutions of the Board, subject to
existing laws and regulations.

Sec. 8. The University President. - The University
shall be headed by a President, who shall render full-time
service and be appointed by the Board, upon the recommendation
of a duly constituted search committee. The President shall
have a term of four (4) years and shall be eligible for
reappointment to another term: Provided, That in order to
effect the smooth transition of the ASSCAT to a state
university, the incumbent President of the ASSCAT,
if qualified, shall serve as the first President of the University.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term
of office of the incumbent President of the University,
the Board shall constitute the Search Committee for the
Presidency.

The Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge. of the
University in case of vacancy in the Office of the President
by reason of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal
for cause, or incapacity of the President to perform the
functions of the office, pending the appointment of a new
President: Provided, That the Officer-in-Charge shall serve
only during the unexpired portion of the term.

The powers and duties of the President of the University,
in addition to those provided in this Act, shall be those usually
pertaining to the Office of the President of similar universities,
and those delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the University shall be
in accordance with Republic Act No. 11466 or the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”, and by such other laws
amendatory thereto, which may hereinafter be enacted, and
shall be comparable to that being received by the Presidents
of similar educational institutions.


The President of the University shall be assisted by a
Vice President for Academic Affairs, a Vice President for
Finance and Administration, and a Vice President for
Research, Extension and Training, who shall all be appointed
by the Board upon recommendation of the President of the
University. :

SEC. 9. The Secretary of the University. — The Board
shall appoint a Secretary who shall serve as such for both
the Board and the. University and shall keep all records
and proceedings of the Board in addition to other duties and
responsibilities. The Secretary of the University shall serve
upon each member of the Board the appropriate notice of
Board meetings.

SEC. 10. The Treasurer of the University. - The Treasurer
of the Philippines shall be the ex officio treasurer, of the
University. °

SEC. 11. Administrative Council. — There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the
University, as Chairperson, and the vice presidents, deans,
directors and other officials of equal rank, as members, whose
duty is to review and recommend to the Board such policies
governing the administration, management, and development
planning of the University.

SEC. 12. The Academic Council. — There shall be an
Academic Council to be composed of the President of the
University, who shall act as its Chairperson, and all
academic staff with the rank of at least an assistant professor,
as members, which shall formulate academic policies.

The Academic Council shall also have the power to
review and recommend the curricular offerings and rules of
discipline of the University, subject to the approval of the
Board. It shall fix the requirements for the admission of
students, as well as for their graduation and conferment of
degrees, subject to the review and approval of the Board through
the President of the University.

It shall have disciplinary power over the students of the
University and shall issue rules and regulations on student
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

SEC. 13. Heads of University Campuses. - The Campus
Directors shall serve as heads or administrators of the
University campuses and shall render full-time service.

They shall be appointed or designated by the Board,
upon the recommendation of the Search Committee and the
President, subject to the guidelines, qualifications and
standards set by the Board: Provided, That, upon the effectivity
of this Act, the incumbent Campus Directors of the existing
campuses of ASSCAT shall continue to serve as such.

SEC. 14. The Faculty. — No political belief, gender
preference, cultural or community affiliation, ethnic origin,
nor religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry
in the appointment of faculty members of the University:
Provided, That the appointment shall be subject to the
guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the Board:
Provided, further, That a member of the faculty shall not
criticize, vouch for, recruit members in behalf of, or preach
about any particular church or religious sect.

SEC. 15. Academic Freedom and Institutional
Autonomy. — The University shall enjoy academic freedom
and institutional autonomy, pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5
of Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution.

SEC. 16. Scholarship Program/Admission. — The
University shall provide scholarship and other affirmative
action programs to assist poor but deserving students who
qualify for admission to the University.

No student shall be denied admission to the University by
reason of sex, religion, political, cultural or community affiliation,
and ethnic origin.


SEC. 17. Authority to Loan or Transfer Apparatus/
Equipment /Supplies and Detail of Personnel. — The heads of
the bureaus and offices of the national government are hereby
authorized to loan or transfer, upon the request of the
President of the University, such apparatus, equipment or
supplies as may be needed by the University, and detail
employees for duty therein when, in the judgment of the head
of bureau or office, such apparatus, equipment, supplies or
services of such employees can be spared without serious
detriment to public service. The employees so detailed shall
perform ‘such duties as required of them by the President of
the University and the time so employed shall be counted as
part of their regular service. :

SEC. 18. Assets, Liabilities and Personnel. — All assets,
real and personal, personnel and records of the ASSCAT,
as well as its liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred
to the University: Provided, That the positions, rights and
security of tenure of the faculty members and personnel
therein employed under existing laws prior to the conversion
into a University shall be respected: Provided, further, That
the incumbents of the positions shall remain in the same
status until otherwise provided for by the Board: Provided,
finally, That the University shall also include an upgrade or
increase in its human resource component as may be deemed
appropriate by the Governing Board.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the ASSCAT are hereby declared to be property of the
University, and shall be titled under its name: Provided, That
should the University cease to exist or be abolished or should
such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by
the University, the same shall revert to the concerned LGU
or to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 19. Tax Exemption. — The importation of economic,
technical and cultural books and publications, which are
for economic, technical-vocational, scientific, philosophical,
historical or cultural purposes made by the University, upon
certification by the CHED, shall be exempt from customs
duties in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10863,
otherwise known as the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act.”

wae a 0

Rape

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations and
contributions made to the University and used actually, directly,
and exclusively by it, shall be exempt from the donor’s tax and
the same shall be considered as allowable deduction from the
gross income in the computation of the income tax of the
donor, in accordance with the provisions of the National
Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 20. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the conversion of the
institution into a state university shall become effective only
upon the determination and declaration by the CHED based
on the recommendation of a panel of experts it shall constitute
for the purpose, that the institution has complied with the
requirements for a university status based on CHED
Memorandum Order No. 46, series of 2012 Policy-Standard
to Enhance Quality Assurance (QA) in Philippine Higher
Education through an Outcomes-Based and Typology-Based
Quality Asgurance: Provided, That the panel may issue such
recommendation when the institution has substantially
complied with the requirements for the grant of university status.

The following requirements for a university, as established
by the CHED, shall be complied with:

(a) Faculty members must possess relevant degrees in
their areas of specialization, ds required by the CHED, and
shall have participated in research and development activities
in their respective disciplines, as evidenced by refereed
publications and other scholarly outputs;

(b) The University must offer a comprehensive range of
degree programs in all levels, from basic post-secondary to
doctoral programs;

(©) The University shall have conducted viable research
programs in specific disciplinal and multidisciplinary areas
of study, produce new knowledge, as evidenced by refereed
publications, citations, inventions, and patents, among others;


() The University shall possess comprehensive learning
resources and support structures (such as libraries, practicum
laboratories, relevant educational resources, and linkages
with the relevant disciplinal and professional sectors) so as to
allow students to explore basic, advance, and even cutting edge
knowledge in a wide range of disciplines or professions;

(e) The University must maintain linkages with other
research institutions in various parts of the world to ensure
that the research activities of the University are functioning at
current global standards; and

@® The University must conduct outreach activities to
allow the students, faculty, and research staff to apply the
new knowledge they generate to address specific social development
problems. :

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly
provide technical assistance to the institution and monitor its
compliance with the requirements of the Commission.

The institution shall retain its status prior to the effectivity
of this Act until it is able to comply with the requirements provided
herein,

SEC. 21. Development Plan, Management Audit,
Organization /Administrative/ Academic Structure. — Within
a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval
of this Act, the University shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including
its program budget to the CHED for corresponding
recommendation to the DBM;

(b) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the
CHED; and

© Set up its organizational, administrative, and
academic structure, including the appointment of key officials
of the University.

 

eee henner peeve peer

SEC. 22. Filing of Report. — On or before the fifteenth
(15") day of the second (24) month after opening of the regular
classes each year, the Board shall file with the Office of the
President of the Philippines and both Houses of Congress, through
the CHED Chairperson, a detailed report on the progress,
condition, and needs of the University.

SEC. 23. Supplementary Application. ~ The provisions
of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Modernization Act of 1997”, shall be an integral
part of this Act and shall serve as part of the governing charter
of the University.

Sec. 24. Parity Clause. — All other powers, functions
and privileges, responsibilities and limitations to state
universities and their officials under existing laws shall be
deemed granted to or imposed upon the University or its officials,
whenever appropriate.

SEC. 25. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to
carry out the initial implementation of this Act shall be
charged against the current year’s appropriations of the
ASSCAT. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the
continued operation and maintenance of the University shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act. The
Municipality of Trento shall continue to provide the same
funding to the ASSCAT satellite campus corresponding to the
funding given before the same is integrated into the ADSSU
until such time that the full funding requirement of the
University is included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 26. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days after the effectivity of this Act, the Board,
in consultation with the CHED, shall formulate the rules
and regulations to fully implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 27. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the remaining parts or provisions not
affected shall remain in full force and effect.


SEC. 28. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary
to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are repealed
or modified accordingly.

SEC?29. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in
a newspaper of general circulation.

olf

VICENTE C. SOTTO I LORD ALL IAY Q. VELASCO
President of the Senate Spe the House
of Representatives

Approved,

  
   

’

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on September 1, 2020 and May 24, 2021,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved: JUL 3 0 2021

  
 

f... nee or mee

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE:: Provide |
President of the'PhilippinesG ®£CORDS OFS.CE ;

QERTIFE

REPUBLIC OF THE PRILIPPINES 3 [Hstthagps< et :
PRRD 2016 - 018112 permite tenet meet

ID COPY