ei crassa ORC ENT

S. No. 1971
H. No. 6938

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Seventeenth Congress

Chirk Regular Sessian

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

| RepusticAcr No. 11229]

AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE SPECIAL PROTECTION
OF CHILD PASSENGERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “Child Safety in Motor Vehicles Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to ensure the safety of children while being transported
in any form of motor vehicle. The State recognizes the right
of children to assistance, including proper: care, and special
protection from all forms of neglect, abuse and other conditions
prejudicial to their development, including exposure to safety
yisks while aboard motor vehicles.

In order to guarantee the safety and welfare of infants
and children and prevent traffic-related deaths and injuries,
there is a need to adequately, consistently and objectively
require, regulate, promote, and inform the public on the use
of child restraint systems in motor vehicles and provide access
to safe, appropriate, quality and affordable child restraint
systems, in accordance with international standards accepted
by the United Nations.

Furthermore, there is also a need to study and determine
appropriate safety measures for children being transported in
public utility vehicles.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — For purposes of this Act,
the term:

(a) Adult refers to any person eighteen (18) years old
and above;

(vb) Child refers to any person twelve (12) years old and
below;

(ec) Covered vehicle refers to any private motor vehicle
or public motor vehicle upon the determination of the
Department of Transportation (DOTr) in accordance with
Section 12 of this Act;

(a) Motor vehicle shall refer to both private and public
motor vehicles. The term shall not include the tricycle and
motorcycle;

(e) Private motor vehicle shall refer to any of the
following:

(1) Any motor vehicle owned by individuals and juridical
persons for private use;

(2) Any motor vehicle owned by the National
Government or any of its agencies, instrumentalities or
political subdivisions, including government-owned or -controlled
corporations or their subsidiaries for official use; and

(3) Any diplomatic vehicle.

) Public motor vehicle shall refer to public utility
vehicle or vehicle for hire;

(g) Driver refers to the individual operating a motor
vehicle; and

th) Child Restraint System refers to a device, approved
in accordance with Section 6 of this Act, capable of
accommodating a child occupant in a sitting or supine position.
It is so designed as to diminish the risk of injury to the
wearer, in the event of a collision or of abrupt deceleration
of the vehicle, by limiting the mobility of the child’s body.

SEC. 4. Mandatory Use of Child Restraint System in
Motor Vehicles. — It shall be unlawful for the driver of a
covered vehicle not to properly secure at all times a child, in
a child restraint system while the engine is running or
transporting such child on any road, street or highway unless
the child is at least one hundred fifty (150) centimeters or
fifty-nine (59) inches in height and is properly secured using
the regular seat belt. The child restraint system shall be
appropriate to the child’s age, height and weight, and approved
in accordance with Section 6 of this Act.

The requirements of this section shall not apply to
circumstances where the child restraint system would put such
child in a greater danger, such as:

(1) During medical emergencies;

(2) When the child transported has a medical or
developmental condition; or

(3) Other analogous circumstances prescribed under the
implementing rules and regulations (IRR).

Notwithstanding the child being secured in a child
restraint system, at no instance shall such child be left
unaccompanied by an adult in a motor vehicle.

SEC. 5. Children in Rear Seats. — No child twelve (12)
years and below of age shall be allowed to sit in a front seat
of a motor vehicle with a running engine or while such child
is being transported on any road, street or highway, unless


the child meets the height requirement set forth in Section
4 of this Act and is properly secured using the regular seat
belt in the front seat.

SEC. 6. Safety Standards for Child Restraint Systems.
— The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) is mandated
to use standards set forth in United Nations Regulation 44
and United Nations Regulation 129 including its evolving
standards and other acceptable international standards in the
approval or disapproval of child restraint systems that will be
manufactured, sold, distributed and used in the Philippines.
Such standards shall be periodically updated based on current
United Nations Regulations concerning Child Restraint
Systems.

All manufacturers, importers, distributors and sellers of
child restraint systems are required to secure from the Bureau
of Product Standards (BPS) a Philippine Standards (PS) mark
license or Import Clearance Certificate (ICC) license prior to
the marketing, sale and distribution of their products. The BPS
shall issue periodically a list of child restraint systems
manufacturers, importers and distributors, and the brands
which pass its standards to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation or in its website.

The use of child restraint system acquired prior to the
effectivity of this Act shall be allowed: Provided, That such
device is not expired.

SEC. 7. Prohibition on Substandard or Expired Child
Restraint System. — It shall be unlawful for any person,
company, partnership, sole proprietorship, manufacturer,
distributor, and/or importer to manufacture, use, import, sell,
distribute, donate, lease, advertise, promote, or otherwise
market the use of substandard or expired child restraint
system.

SEC. 8. Certification Training Program. — The DOTr and
the DTI are hereby mandated to formulate and implement a
certification training program for product inspectors, law
enforcers, manufacturers, distributors, and sellers on the
regulation, installation, use, maintenance and inspection of
child restraint systems, as prescribed by IRR.

SEC. 9. Child Safety in Public Utility Vehicles. — The
DOTr shall conduct a study and recommend to Congress the
use of child restraint systems in public utility vehicles such
as, jeepneys, buses, including school buses, taxis, vans,
coasters, accredited/affiliated service vehicles of transportation
network companies, and all other motor vehicles used for
public transport.

Should the DOTr determine, after study, that child
restraint systems are not applicable in certain public utility
vehicles, it shall recommend to Congress other safety measures
and/or regulations for the safe and secure transportation of
children in such vehicles: Provided, That the study shall be
conducted within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 10. Penalties. — (a) Any driver in violation of
Sections 4 and 5 of this Act shall be fined One thousand pesos
(P1,000.00) for the first offense; Two thousand pesos (P2,000.00)
for the second offense; Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00) and
suspension of the driver’s license for a period of one (1) year
for the third and succeeding offenses.

(b) Any manufacturer, distributor, importer, retailer, and
seller who violates Sections 6 and 7 of this Act shall be
punished with a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos
(P50,000.00) but not more than One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00) for each and every child restraint system product
manufactured, distributed, imported and/or sold, without
prejudice to other penalties imposed under Republic Act
No. 7394 or the “Consumer Act of the Philippines”.

(c) Any driver who allows the use of substandard
and/or expired child restraint system or permits the use of
child restraint system that does not bear the PS mark or the
ICC sticker and certificate, shall be fined One thousand pesos
(P1,000.00) for the first offense; Three thousand pesos
(P3,000.00) for the second offense; and Five thousand pesos
(P5,000.00) and the suspension of the driver's license for a
period of one (1) year for the third and succeeding offenses.

(d) Tampering, alteration, forgery and imitation of the PS
mark or the ICC stickers in the child restraint system shall
be punished with a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos

 


(P50,000.00) but not more than One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00), for each and every child restraint system
product, without prejudice to other penalties imposed in
Republic Act No. 7394 or the “Consumer Act of the
Philippines”: Provided, That the DOTr is hereby empowered,
after publication, to increase or adjust the amounts of the fines
prescribed in this section once every five (5) years in the
amount not exceeding ten per centum (10%) of existing rates.

SEC. 11. Nationwide Public Information Campaign. — (a)
The DOTr, the Philippine Information Agency (PIA), the
Department of Health (DOH), the Department of Education
(DepEd), and private agencies and organizations, shall
undertake regular nationwide Information, Education and
Communication (EC) campaign within six (6) months from
the passage of this Act. The IEC campaign shall include
information on the proper installation, use, and maintenance
of the child restraint system.

(b) The DOTr, may call upon any government agency,
including the Philippine National Police (PNP) and
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to extend their full
support and cooperation for the implementation of this Act.

SEC. 12. Review. — The DOTr shall conduct and submit
to Congress a periodic review on the implementation of this
Act at the end of the third year from the date of its effectivity
and every year thereafter.

SEC. 13. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
DOTy, in consultation with the DTI, DOH, Department of the
Interior and Local Government (DILG), Philippine National
Police-Highway Patrol Group (PNP-HPG), Metro Manila
Development Authority (MMDA), Council for the Welfare of
Children (CWC) and other concerned agencies and stakeholders,
shall promulgate the IRR on child restraint systems within
six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act.

The IRR shall cover among others the following:

(a) Motor vehicles covered under this Act;

is

(b) Standards and kinds of child restraint systems based
on UN Regulations 44 and 129;

(©) Compatibility of child restraint systems to motor
vehicles available in the market;

@ Proper installation and positioning of the child
restraint system in the vehicle;

©) Certification training program referred to in Section
8 of this Act for law enforcers, product inspectors, employees
and agents of manufacturers, distributors, sellers and
importers;

(f) Regulation of the manufacture, importation, and
distribution of child restraint systems;

(g) Authorities responsible for the monitoring and
evaluation of the implementation and compliance to the
provisions of this Act; and

(h) Phases of implementation.

SEC. 14. Appropriations. — The initial amount necessary
for the implementation of this Act shall be charged against
the current appropriation of the DOTr: Provided, That fines
and fees collected from the implementation of the Seat Belt
Law may be used to augment the initial funding requirement
of this Act: Provided, further, That the fines and fees that
may be collected in the enforcement of this Act shall be used
exclusively for its implementation: Provided, finally, That such
sums as may be necessary for the continued implementation
of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEC. 15. Transitory Clause. - Mandatory compliance of
this Act shall be enforced only one (1) year after the effectivity
of the IRR of this Act.

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If any provision, or part
hereof, is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of
the law or provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid
and subsisting.

ee

   


SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — Section 5 on the age of
children prohibited to sit in front seat of Republic Act No. 8750
and Section 11 thereof on the use of special car seats are
hereby amended. All other laws, decrees, executive orders, rules
and regulations, issuances or parts thereof inconsistent with
this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 18. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in two
(2) national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

    

‘APAGAL-ARROYO VICENTE C. SOTTO III
-dker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1971
and House Bill No. 6938 was passed by the Senate and the
House of Representatives on December 11, 2018.

Dh hebo
P. MALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Acting Secretary General Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved: FEB 2 2 2019

 

RODRI ROA DUTERTE
resident of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 009784

 
  
  

r

 

 

ident

JROS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

DIRECTOR IV

 

[2 ¢ Lenpa/,
TTY. COMCEPCZOA ZENY E, FERROLING-ERAD