H. No. 5559

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila

Seventeenth Congress
Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ RepuBLic Acr No. 11204]

AN ACT EXTENDING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)
YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO ERMITA
ELECTRONICS INCORPORATED, PRESENTLY
KNOWN AS G. TELECOMS, INC., AMENDING FOR
THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8196, ENTITLED
“AN ACT GRANTING THE ERMITA ELECTRONICS,
INCORPORATED, A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, ESTABLISH, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS IN THE
PHILIPPINES”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 1 of Republic Act No. 8196 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise.
— Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and
applicable laws, rules and regulations on public
telecommunications, the franchise granted to
Ermita Electronics, Incorporated, presently known
as G. Telecoms, Inc., hereunder referred to as
the grantee, its successors or assignees under
Republic Act No. 8196, to construct, establish,
install, maintain, and operate for commercial
purposes and in the public interest, in the
Philippines and between the Philippines and
other countries and territories, wire and/or
wireless telecommunications systems including
international and local exchange carrier (LEC),
international and domestic gateway facility,
international and domestic submarine cable
landing stations, mobile cellular, copper switches,
and their value-added services such as the
transmission of voice, data, facsimile, control
signs, audio and video, information services, and all
other telecommunications systems technologies
as are at present available or will be made available
through technological advances or innovations
in the future; and/or construct, acquire, lease and
operate, or manage transmitting and receiving
stations, lines, cables, or systems as are convenient
or essential to efficiently carry out the purpose
of this franchise is hereby extended for another
twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of this Act.”

sidewalks, or bridges of the province, cities, and/or
municipalities subject to the prior approval of
the Department of Public Works and Highways
(DPWH) and/or the local government unit (LGU)
concerned, as may be appropriate: Provided, however,
That a public place, road, highway, street, lane,
alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge disturbed,
altered or changed by reason of erection of poles
or other supports or the underground laying
of wires, other conductors or conduits shall be
repaired and replaced in workmanlike manner
at the expense of the said grantee, its successors
or assignees, in accordance with the standards
set by the DPWH or the LGU concerned. Should the
grantee, its successors or assignees, after the
ten (10)-day notice from the said authority, fail,
refuse, or neglect to repair or replace any part of
public place, road, highway, street, lane, alley,
avenue, sidewalk, or bridge disturbed, altered or
changed by the said grantee, its successors or
assignees, then the DPWH or the LGU concerned
shall have the right to have the same repaired
and placed in good order and condition, and charge
the grantee, its successors or assignees, at double
the amount of the costs and expenses for such
repair or replacement.”

SEC. 8. All sections are to be renumbered accordingly.

. . SEC. 4. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 8196 is hereby
SEC. 2. A new section is hereby inserted after Section 3 amended to read as follows:
of Republic Act No. 8196 to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works.
~ For the purpose of erecting and maintaining
poles and other supports for wires or other
conductors and for the purpose of laying and
maintaining underground wires, cables, pipes
or other conductors, the grantee, its successors
or assignees, is authorized to make excavations
or lay conduits in any of the public places,
roads, highways, streets, lanes, alleys, avenues,

“SEC. 8. Term of Franchise, — This franchise
shall be for a term of twenty-five (25) years
from the date of effectivity of this Act, unless
sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall
be deemed ipso facto revoked, in the event
the grantee fails to operate continuously for
two (2) years.”

SEc. 5. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 8196 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 9. Acceptance of Franchise. —
Acceptance of the terms of this franchise shall
be given in writing to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representatives and
the Committee on Public Services of the Senate,
within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of
this Act. Upon giving such acceptance, the grantee
shall exercise the privileges granted under this Act.
Nonacceptance shall render the franchise void.”

SEC. 6. Section 10 of Republic Act No. 8196 is hereby
repealed.

SEC. 7. A new section is hereby inserted after Section 8
of Republic Act No. 8196 to read as follows:

“SEC. 11. Right of Interconnection. — The
grantee is hereby authorized to connect or
demand connection of its telecommunications
systems to other telecommunications systems
installed, operated, and maintained by any
other duly authorized person or entity in
the Philippines for the purpose of providing
extended and improved telecommunications
services to the public, under the terms and
conditions mutually agreed upon by the parties
concerned. This right shall be subject to the review
and modification of the NTC.”

SEC. 8. Section 14 of Republic Act No. 8196 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 15. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. — The grantee shall not
sell, lease, transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor

Ss Ne

~~

assign this franchise or the rights and privileges
acquired thereunder to any person, firm, company,
corporation or other commercial or legal entity,
nor merge with any other corporation or entity,
nor shall transfer the controlling interest of
the grantee, whether as a whole or in parts, and
whether simultaneously or contemporaneously,
to any person, firm, company, corporation or
entity without the prior approval of the Congress
of the Philippines: Provided, That Congress shall
be informed of any sale, lease, transfer, grant
of usufruct, or assignment of franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder, or of
the merger, or transfer of controlling interest
of the grantee, within sixty (60) days after the
completion of said transaction: Provided, further,
That failure to report to Congress such change
of ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto
revoked: Provided, finally, That any person or
entity to which this franchise is sold, transferred,
or assigned, shall be subject to the same
conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.”

SEC. 9. Section 16 of Republic Act No. 8196 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 17. Equality Clause. — Except for
taxes and customs duties, any advantage,
favor, privilege, exemption, or immunity granted
under other existing franchises, or which may
hereafter be granted, upon prior review and
approval of Congress, shall become part of this
franchise and shall be accorded immediately
and unconditionally to the herein grantee: Provided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor
affect the provisions of telecommunications
franchises concerning territory, the term, or
the type of service authorized by the franchise.”

SEC. 10. Section 19 of Republic Act No. 8196 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 20. Reportorial Requirement. — The
grantee shall submit an annual report to the
Congress of the Philippines, through the
Committee on Legislative Franchises of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on
Public Services of the Senate, on its compliance
with the terms and conditions of the franchise
and on its operations on or before April 30 of every
year during the term ofits franchise. The reportorial
compliance certificate issued by Congress shall be
required before any application for permit or
certificate is accepted by the NTC.”

SEC. 11. Fine. — Failure of the grantee to submit
the requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized
with a fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day
of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the NTC
from the delinquent franchise grantee separate from the
reportorial penalties it shall impose.

SEC. 12. Adoption of Provisions Not Inconsistent with
this Act. — All other provisions of Republic Act No. 8196,
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 13. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections
or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions
not affected thereby shall remain valid.

Sec. 14. Repealability and Exclusivity Clause. —
This franchise is granted with the understanding and
upon condition that it shall be subject to amendment,
alteration or repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when
the public interest and common good so require and shall
not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privilege
herein provided for.

al

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES <p Ahn

SEC. 15. Repealing Clause. ~ Alllaws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations or parts or provisions thereof
which are not consistent with this Act are hereby repealed,
amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 16. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

   
  

Approved,
’
VII . SOTTO II GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President qf the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
on May 15, 2017 and November 12, 2018, respectively. /

    
  

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA DAN
Secretary of the Senate Acting Secretary General
Hquse of Representatives

   

Approved: FEB 1 4 2019

ROD <A DUTERT
President of the Philippines

 

oO

 

PRRD 2016 ~ 009374