S. No. 192
H. No. 8110

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila

Seventeenth Congress

Ohird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

—_—ig

AN ACT MANDATING THE PHILIPPINE OVERSEAS
EMPLOYMENT ADMINISTRATION (POEA) TO
DEVELOP, PUBLISH, DISSEMINATE AND UPDATE
A HANDBOOK ON THE RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES OF MIGRANT WORKERS,
AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 8042, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE
“MIGRANT WORKERS AND OVERSEAS FILIPINOS
ACT OF 1995”, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 10022

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Title. — This Act shall be known as the
“Handbook for OFWs Act of 2018”.

 

 

SEC. 2. Creating a Handbook for Overseas Filipino
Workers. — The handbook for overseas Filipino workers, known
in this Act as “Handbook”, shall be created and issued to
every land-based and sea-based worker free of charge. It shall
serve as a ready reference for migrant workers when they need
to assert their rights and responsibilities. It shall also deal
with key issues that they need to know in order to maintain
decent employment conditions overseas.

The contents of the Handbook shall be written in English
with translations in local languages as may be necessary.

SEC. 3. Objectives of the Handbook. — The objectives of
creating a Handbook are as follows:

(a) To empower évery overseas Filipino worker (OFW) by
making them fully aware of their rights and responsibilities;

(b) To complement the worker education program of
various agencies;

(c) To provide a basic information on the labor and living
conditions in the country of their destination;

(d) To make the workers well aware of the benefits and
drawbacks of working overseas; and

(e) To provide necessary information for their reintegration
into the Philippine society.

SEC. 4. Amendment. — Subparagraph (b.1) of paragraph
(b) of Section 23 of Republic Act No. 8042, as amended, is
hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 23. Role of Government Agencies. — The
following government agencies shall perform the
following to promote the welfare and protect the
rights of migrant workers and, as far as applicable,

» all overseas Filipinos:

“(a) Department of Foreign Affairs — x x x

“(b) Department of Labor and Employment —
The Department of Labor and Employment shall see
to it that labor and social welfare laws in the foreign
countries are fairly applied to migrant workers and
whenever applicable, to other overseas Filipinos
including the grant of legal assistance and the
referral to proper medical centers or hospitals;

“(b.1) Philippine Overseas Employment
Administration - x x x

“In addition to its powers and functions, the
Administration shall inform migrant workers not
only of their rights as workers but also of their
rights as human beings, instruct and guide the
workers how to assert their rights and provide the
available mechanism to redress violation of their
rights.

“The Administration is hereby mandated to
develop, publish, disseminate and update periodically
a Handbook on the rights and responsibilities of
migrant workers as provided by Philippine laws and
the existing labor and social laws of the countries
of destination that will protect and guarantee the
rights of migrant workers. The Handbook shall be
written in simple words that can be easily
understood with translation in local language as may
be necessary.

“It shall also be responsible for the
implementation, in partnership with other law
enforcement agencies, of an intensified program
against illegal recruitment activities. For this
purpose, the POEA shall provide comprehensive
gender-sensitive Pre-employment Orientation
Seminars (PEOS) that will discuss topics not only
on the prevention of illegal recruitment but also on

 

 

the content of the Handbook on the rights and
responsibilities of migrant workers.

SEC. 5. Implementing Agencies. — The Philippine
Overseas Employment Administration (POEA), in coordination
with the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) and
the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA),
Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Inter-Agency Council
Against Trafficking (IACAT), Commission on Filipinos
Overseas (CFO) and Maritime Industry Authority (MARINA),
is mandated to implement this Act.

SEC. 6. Appropriations. - The amount necessary for the
continuous publication, distribution and update of the
Handbook shall be taken from the appropriations of the POEA.
Thereafter, the amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be provided for in the General Appropriations
Act of the year following its enactment into law and thereafter.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. — All laws, rules or regulations
that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 8. Separability Clawse. — If any provision of this
Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not
affect other provisions not affected thereby.

SEC. 9. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette and in
at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO VICENTE C. SOTTO III
Speaker of the House President of|the Senate
of Representatives

)

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 192
and House Bill No. 8110 was passed by the Senate and the
House of Representatives on December 11, 2018 and
December 12, 2018, respectively.

\
“YO MA =
DANTE F . MALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
General Secretary of the Senate

  
 

Approved: FEB 22 2019

von hdlnt 6

ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

O

REPUBLIC oF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 — 009564

Se 2-29-2104 : i