ptt teeta heath mn enttinrnneninniesnsstinninasieetinpsenaiiemtine = eratashlilmaRPSitiecit ngif nininy:\tihentnoniepeettemmnntinane tartan

S. No: 2233
H. No. 7679

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo SBhuila

Highteenth Congress

whe

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ RepusuicActNo. 11787]

AN ACT PROMOTING THE RIGHTS OF AND
PROVIDING GREATER PROTECTIONS TO
DESERTED OR ABANDONED CHILDREN
WITH UNKNOWN PARENTS, AMENDING
FOR THIS PURPOSE ARTICLES 276 AND 277
OF THE REVISED PENAL CODE AND
SPECIAL LAWS, RECOGNIZING THEIR
STATUS AS NATURAL-BORN CITIZENS OF
THE PHILIPPINES, PROVIDING PENALTIES
AGAINST ACTS INIMICAL *TO THEIR
WELFARE, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be entitled as
the “Foundling Recognition and Protection Act”.

As such, the State shall protect the rights and ensure access
to assistance, including Proper care, nutrition and special
protection from all forms of neglect, abuse, cruelty, exploitation
, and other conditions prejudicial to the development of every
child.
The State shall uphold the best interests of the child,
including and especially the child with distinct vulnerabilities,
such as the neglected, stateless, and abandoned or deserted,

measures to ensure that support services are provided to
foundlings and acts inimical to their welfare are penalized.

SEC. 3. Definition of Foundling. — For purposes of this
Act, a foundling shall be a deserted or abandoned child or

SEC. 4. Finder. — The finder shall be a Person of legal
age who discovered the desérted or abandoned child: Provided,
That if the actual finder is a minor, his or her parent or legal
guardian shall assist in making the repo. The finder shall
report within forty-eight (48) hours upon discovery of the child

nent canara thadeatiteiinie tenets Monee, Bye

ak

see ntrttettmememcaasnastanaits =

to inform the Local Social Welfare and Development Office
(LSWDO), closest to him/her, or any safe haven provider,
which shall in turn coordinate with the NACC through the
Regional Alternative Child Care Office (RACCO), for the
provision of appropriate care and services in line with the
foundling’s needs and best interest.

In case the finder/s apply to become foster parent/s of
the foundling, the NACC shall prioritize the assessment if they
meet the qualifications under Republic Act No. 10165, or the
“Foster Care Act of 2012”.

ARTICLE I
STATUS AND LEGITIMACY

SEC. 5. Citizenship Status of a Foundling Found in the
Philippines and/or in Philippine Embassies, Consulates and
Territories Abroad. — A foundling fotind in the Philippines
and/or in Philippine embassies, consulates ‘and territories
abroad is presumed a natural-born Filipino citizen regardless
of the status or circumstances of birth. As a natural-born
citizen of the Philippines, a foundling is accorded with rights
and protections at the moment of birth equivalent to those
belonging to such class of citizens whose citizenship does not
need perfection or any further act.

The presumption of natural-born status of a foundling may
not be impugned in any proceeding unless substantial proof
of foreign Parentage is shown. The natural-born status of a
foundling shall not also be affected by the fact that the birth
certificate was simulated, or that there was absence of a legal
adoption process, or that there was inaction or delay in
reporting, documenting, or registering a foundling.

SEC. 6. Administrative Adoption and Status of
Legitimacy. — In the event that the biological parents cannot
be identified and located, the foundling shall be dectaxed legally
available for adoption subject to existing laws, rules, and
regulations and taking into consideration the best interest of

-~ the child.

oe

The relevant provisions of Republic Act No. 11642,
otherwise known as the “Domestic Administrative Adoption
and Alternative Child Care Act”, shall apply in the adoption
of foundlings.

Consistent with Section 41 of Republic Act No. 11642,
once the adoption of the foundling is finalized, the adopted
foundling shall be considered the legitimate child of the adopter
for all intents and purposes and, as such, is entitled to all
the rights and obligations provided by law to legitimate
children borri to them without discrimination of any kind. To
this end, the adoptee is entitled to love, guidance, and support
in keeping with the means of the family. The legitimate
filiation that is created between the adopter and adopted
foundling shall be extended to the adopter’s parents, adopter’s
legitimate siblings, and legitimate descendants.

The adopter is also given the right to choose the name
by which the adopted foundling is to be known, consistent with
the best interest of the child.

SEC. 7. Alternative. Child Care Options. — The NACC,
LSWDO, and any accredited child-caring or child-placing
agency shall ensure that foundlings are provided: with
alternative child care options, such as but not limited to
kinship care, foster care, or even residential care, consistent
with existing laws, while the search and inquiry into the facts
of birth and parentage of the foundling is ongoing.

f
SEC. 8. Right to Government Programs and Services. —
A foundling shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to every
available government program or service, including registration,
facilitation of documents for adoption, education, legal and
police protection, proper nourishment and medical care for
survival and development, and admission to safe and secure
child centers. \

The NACC, through the RACCOs, all relevant
government agencies, the concerned local government units
(LGUs), police authority dnd the finder shall, at all times,
consider the child’s best interest in ali actions or support
services provided for a foundling. ‘

ences ner ntsc

ARTICLE IT
REGISTRATION

SEC. 9. Conduct of Search and Inquiry. — Within fifteen
(15) days after commitment, or submission of the affidavit of
the finder or other concerned person, or the information that
there is a probable foundling was brought to the attention of
the NACC, unless more time is needed in view of significant
developments, the NACC, through the RACCOs, shall conduct
a proactive and diligent search and inquiry into the facts of
birth and parentage of the foundling.

The NACC, through the RACCOs, shall ask assistance
from the finder, the LGUs, LSWDOs, the local or rural health
units, the women and child protection desks of the Philippine
National Police (PNP), the Department of Health (DOH), any
public or private hospital, and other ' Concerned individuals in
the conduct of the search and inquiry. The official report of
such inquiry shall thereafter be used for the application for
and issuance of the Certificate of Live Birth.

Television, radio or print media or tri-media and other
social media platforms shall be used to conduct the search or
to locate the whereabouts of the parents of the foundling
without compromising the confidentiality of one’s identity.

SEC. 10. Registration of a Foundling. — The following
documents shall be required before the foundling may be
registered with the local Civil Registrar:

(a) Affidavit of the finder;

(b) Certification of the barangay captain or police
authority on the circumstances surrounding the foundling’s
discovery: Provided, That, in the event that the child is found
in a different barangay from the residence of the finder, both
barangay captains shall be informed; and ‘

(c) Report of the NACC duly signéd by the authorized
officer.

- .

The NACC report must attest to the fact that the birth
and parentage of the foundling are unknown despite the
proactive and diligent search and inquiry conducted. The report
must be exhaustive and must include all the facts that have
been gathered regarding the parents and the birth of the
foundling: Provided, That, for adult foundlings with no
foundling certificate, no exhaustive social case study report by
the RACCO shall be required but the LSWDO shall issue a
report on his or her background and qualifications as a
foundling under this Act.

The NACC shall fill out and submit the application for
registration to the Local Civil Registrar which shall issue the
Certificate of Live Birth of the foundling after receipt of the
foregoing requirements: Provided, That one who has an
existing certificate of foundling or a similar official document
issued before the implementation of this Act may secure a
Certificate of Live Birth before the Local Civil Registrar, which
shall immediately issue one, without cost, on the basis of such
document alone: Provided, further, That a certificate of
foundling or a similar official document shall continue to have
the same legal effect as a Certificate of Live Birth.

The concerned agencies shall streamline the régistration
process for a foundling, regardless of age and circumstances,
in order to expedite the issuance of a Certificate of Live Birth
and without placing any unnecessary burden on the
foundling: Provided, That the foundling has the right to access
all the documentary requirements stibmitted for registration:
Provided, further, That in the Certificate of Live Birth and
succeeding public documents, the foundling shall not be
referred to as such, or in any other discriminatory manner:
Provided, furthermore, That the foundling shall not be
considered stateless between the period of finding or discovery
and the issuance of the order of cqnfirmation of citizenship:
Provided, finally, That the privacyband best interest of the
child shall be protected at all times.

SEC. 11. Revocation ef Issued Certificate of Live Birth. —
The biological parent/s, the NACC or the LSWDO may file
a petition for the revocation of the Certificate of Live Birth
before the Local Civil Registrar based on the following grounds:

ae

(a) Parentage of the foundling has been established; or

(b) Fraud to conceal the material facts of birth or
parentage of the person that would otherwise not render the
person as a foundling.

If the parentage of one foundling is established, and the
foundling cannot acquire the citizenship of the parents which
will result in statelessness, the foundling shall retain Philippine
citizenship until such time that it can be established that the
foundling is able to benefit from the citizenship of either
parent.

SEC. 12. Recovering Legal Custody and Restoring
Parental Authority. — The biological parent/s or legal guardian
of a foundling may petition the NACC to recover the legal
custody and restore parental authority over the child: Provided,
That if the child was voluntarily ACG. fa) Pet x any, of the
following is pending with the N. :.{a) Petition for the
issuance of Certificate Declaring a Child Legally Available for
Adoption (CDCLAA), (b) Supervised trial custody, or (c) Petition
for Adoption, the relevant provisions of Republic Act No. 11642
shall apply. In deciding all cases, the best interest of the child
shall be the paramount consideration of the NACC.

If the child is already adopted, all legal ties between the
biological parents or legal guardian and the child are severed
and the same shall be vested on the adopters.

The NACC or the LSWDO shall provide the necessary
counseling and other necessary programs and services to the
biological parents, and the necessary assistance to authorities
when the biological parents of a foundling are identified and
express the desire to reclaim or exercise parental authority
over them.

ARTICLE [IT
SAFE HAVEN s
SEC. 13. Safe Haven. — Notwithstanding Articles 276 and

277 of the Revised Penal Code and Republic Act No. 7610, any
parent who relinquishes an infant thirty (30) days old and


younger to the following persons or entities shall be exempt
from criminal liability:

(a) A licensed child-caring agency;
(b) A licensed child-placing agency;

(c) A church: Provided, That, for purposes of this Act,
a church shall be defined as a place devoted to religious
worship held with regularity; ’

(d) DOH-accredited health facilities including hospitals,
infirmaries, city health offices, birthing homes, rural health
units and barangay health stations;

(e) A Local Social Welfare and Development Office; and

(f) DSWD-managed residential care facilities and LGU-
managed residential care facilities.

SEC. 14. Duties and Responsibilities of the Safe Haven
Provider. — The safe haven provider shall:

(a) Act appropriately to take care of the infant;
.

(b) Inform the parent that the parent may, but is not
required to answer questions regarding the identity and medical
history of the infant;

(c) Confirm, if practicable, that the parent wishes to
permanently relinquish their parental rights and release the
infant for adoption; and

(d) Within the forty-eight (48) hours from the time of
relinquishment of the child by the birth parent/s to the safe
haven provider or from the report ky a finder that a foundling
was discovered, as applicable, infotm the NACC through the
RACCO that a child has been relinquished in its custody,
including all information surrounding the identity and
circumstances of abandofiment of the child.

SEC. 15. Status of Infants Relingbished under the Safe
Haven Provisions. — Infants relinquished under the safe haven
provisions of this Act shall be considered foundlings.

SEC. 16. Immunity for the Safe Haven Provider. — A
safe haven provider who receives an infant pursuant to this
Act shall not be liable for any civil damages for any act or
omission done in maintaining custody of the infant: Provided,
That the safe haven provider acts in good faith without gross
negligence.

ARTICLE IV
PENALTIES

SEC. 17. Penalties. — The following penalties shall be
imposed:

(a) The penalty of imprisonment of not less than six (6)
months but not more than six (6) years shall be imposed on
any person who falsifies or is involved in the falsification of
the registration of the supposed foundling, including the
documents required therefor: Provided, That a public officer
found to have been involved in such’ act of falsification shall
be punished by the penalty next -higher in degree;

(b) The penalty of imprisonment of not less than six (6)
months but not more than five (5) years shall be imposed on
the finder, the concerned NACC or RACCO employees, staff
of child-caring and child-placing facilities, safe haven providers,
police officers, city, municipal and barangay officers, health
employees, hospital staff and any other concerned person who
refuses, delays, or obstructs the conduct of search and inquiry
into the facts of birth and parentage of the foundling;

(c) A fine ranging from Five hundred thousand pesos
(P500,000.00) to One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) shall be
imposed on a safe haven provider that does not report within
forty-eight (48) hours that an infant was relinquished within
its premises;

(d) Without prejudice to criminal liability under other
laws, a fine ranging from One million pesos (PT{a00,000.00)
to Five million pesos (P5,000,000.00) or imprisonment of not
less than three (3) months but not more than two’ (2) years,
or both, shall be imposed on any person who falsifies or is
involved in the falsification of the registration of the supposed
foundling, including the documents required therefor, to

oo

facilitate the crime of kidnapping or trafficking in
persons: Provided, That a public officer found to have been
involved in such act of falsification shall be punished by the
penalty next higher in degree and shall be perpetually
disqualified from office.

The penalties under this section are without prejudice to

other liabilities arising from existing civil, administrative and

criminal laws for the same act or violation.
ARTICLE V
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 18. Advocacy and In, formation Dissemination. — The
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) and the NACC, together
with the LSWDOs, Local Council for the Protection of Children
(LCPC), Department of the Interior and Local Government
(DILG), and other relevant stakeholders shall conceptualize,
conduct and coordinate information dissemination and advocacy
campaigns on the provisions and implementation of this Act,
and the issues and concerns affecting a foundling.

SEC. 19. Data Collection. — In order to develop and
implement more responsive policies, plans and programs for
foundlings, regular and synchronized data collection shall be
conducted by the LGUs in coordination with the PSA, NACC
and other relevant stakeholders. The collection, preservation
and sharing of data shall be conducted pursuant to Republic
Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy Act of

SEC. 20. Retroactive Application. — This Act shall have
retroactive effect for any foundling insofar as it does not
prejudice or impair vested or acquired rights pursuant to
existing laws. i

SEC. 21. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from,the approval of this Act, the Secretary
of Social Welfare arid Development and the Executive Director
of the Inter-Country Adoption Board,shall, in consultation with
the Secretary of Justice, Secretary of the Interior and Local
Government, PSA, Council for the Welfare of Children (CWC)
and two (2) representatives from child-caring agencies catering
to abandoned children and foundlings, formulate the rules and
regulations to implement this Act.

1]

SEC. 22. Transitory Provision. — All the benefits of this

Act shall also apply to foundlings duly registered as such

during their childhood, but have reached the age of majority

without benefitting from adoption procedures: Provided, That

such foundling shal nnddexgo the procedure and comply with
e requirements outlined in th ithin ti

eee toes, e IRR within ten (10) years

Before the establishment of the NACC as i

: i provided und
Section 56 of Republic Act No. 11642, the functions of the
NACC relating to foundlings shall remain with the DSWD.
The ee of = paces shall, during the three (3)-year
period, be performed by the DSWD fiel i inati
period, be pereae eld offices in coordination

SEC. 23. Repealing Clause. — All other laws, decrees
a orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts
ereof inconsistent with this Act are hereby likewi é
or amended accordingly. =
a

; SEC. 24. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any

section or provisions of this Act is declared unconstitutional

or invalid, the other sections or provisions not affected thereby
shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 25. Suppletory Clause. — Republic Act N
otherwise known as the “Domestic Administrative <doption
and Alternative Child Care Act”, Republic Act No. 11222 or
the “Simulated Birth Rectification Act”, Executive Order
No. 209, s. 1987 or “The Family Code of the Philippines”, and
other existing and applicable laws on adoption and on child

welfare, i a
to this Act. and protection shall have suppletory application

SEC. 26. Effectivity. — This Act shall take r

; . effect afte
fifteen (15) days upon publication in at least two (2)
newspapers of general circulation.

   

Approved,

 

Spe of the House
of Representatives

tn mae it at cn te ete cn ree setae,

 

é

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines
as Senate Bill No. 2233 on January 31, 2022 and adopted
by the House of Representatiyes as an amendment to
House Bill ) sFH.on February 2, 2022.

   

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: MAY 0 6 2022

  

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

 

PRRD 2016 - 021960

pres a pear ene teat SERINE ST NSA ENTE EE TS CE ES NTT ETT ER

f
j