H. No. 8985
y -
, Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meters Manila
Highteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No.11786]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF LEYTE,
PROVINCE OF LEYTE, A CAMPUS OF THE
POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES
(PUP), TO BE KNOWN AS THE PUP-LEYTE CAMPUS,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known.as the “PUP-Leyte
Campus Act”.

SEc. 2. There is hereby established a campus of the
Polytechnic University of the Philippines (PUP) in the
Municipality of Leyte, Province of Leyte, to be known as the
PUP-Leyte Campus.

~

Sec. 3. The PUP-Leyte Campus shall primarily provide
short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate
courses within the areas which, in the determination of the Board
of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the Board, are within its

competency, and are aligned with the human resource
development goals of the Province of Leyte and Region VIII.

The PUP-Leyte Campus is also mandated to undertake
research and extension services, and to provide progressive
leadership in these areas, including the offering of graduate
degrees through open distance learning under the PUP Open
University System.

SEc. 4. The PUP-Leyte Campus shall be headed by a
Campus Administrator who shall render full-time service and
shall be appointed by the Board, subject to its guidelines on
qualifications and standards, and based on the recommendation
of a search committee duly constituted for the purpose of selecting
the Campus Administrator.

SEc. 5. The establishment of the PUP-Leyte Campus shall
comply with the minimum requirements for its operation and
program offerings, as duly prescribed by the Commission on
Higher Education (CHED).

Sec. 6. All parcels of land belonging to the government to
be occupied by the PUP-Leyte Campus shall be declared property
of the PUP and shall be titled under its name: Provided, That
should the PUP cease to exist or be abolished or should such
aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the PUP,
the same shall revert to the concerned local government unit or
to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEc. 7. Within sixty (60) days from the approval of this
Act, the CHED shall, in coordination with the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM), determine the organizational
structure and staffing pattern for the PUP-Leyte Campus. The
said organizational structure and staffing pattern shall be
submitted by the Chairperson of the CHED to the Secretary of
the DBM for approval.

SEC. 8. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997”, shall
form part of this Act, and together, shall serve as the governing
charter of the PUP.

SEc. 9. All other powers, functions, privileges,
responsibilities, and limitations under existing laws shall be
deemed granted to or imposed upon the PUP and its officials,
whenever appropriate.

SEc. 10. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act’shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEc. 11. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts

or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEc. 12. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or —— accordingly.

SEc. 13. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on March 25, 2021 g atrtra

  
     

respectively.

SQubn

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate
ose’ of Reprejentatives

Approved:
PP LepSOd wed saw Ou MAY 29 2 9 2022

ithout the signature of the Presi
t, in accordance with Article Vi,
ion 27 (1): of Ghia Constiiution.
RODRIGO ROA D TE
President of the Philip,