H. No. 7841

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress
Chicd Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11856]

t

AN ACT CONVERTING THE ILIGAN CITY NATIONAL
SCHOOL OF FISHERIES (ICNSF) IN BARANGAY
BURU-UN, ILIGAN CITY, PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL
NORTE, INTO A POLYTECHNIC STATE COLLEGE, TO
BE KNOWN AS THE ILIGAN CITY POLYTECHNIC
STATE COLLEGE (ICPSC), AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Conversion of the Iligan City National School
of Fisheries into a Polytechnic State College. — The Iligan City
National School of Fisheries (ICNSF) located in Barangay
Buru-un, Iligan City, Province of Lanao del Norte, is hereby
converted into a polytechnic state college, to be known as the
Tligan City Polytechnic State College (CPSC). Its main campus
shall be in Lligan City.

SEc. 2. General Mandate. — The ICPSC, hereinafter
referred to as the College, shall primarily provide advance
instruction and professional training in education, engineering,
science and technology, arts and humanities, information and
communications technology, agriculture, forestry, and other
relevant fields of study. It shall also undertake research and
extension services and production activities in support of the
socioeconomic development of the Province of Lanao del Norte
and Region X.

SEC. 3. Curricular Offerings. — The College shall offer
short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate
courses, within its competency and areas of specialization in the
fields of education, engineering, science and technology, arts and
humanities, information and communications technology,
agriculture, forestry, fishery education, marine transportation,
and tourism. It shall also offer vocational and technology courses
in welding technology, vocational technology, hotel and restaurant
services, hotel and household services, baking technology,
electronic services and repair, and other relevant fields of study,
as the Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
may deem necessary for the accomplishment of the objectives of
the College, and those which respond to the human resource
development needs of the Province of Lanao del Norte and
Region X.

The existing and any other future technical-vocational
courses or programs under the supervision of the Technical
Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) shall
continue to be offered in the College.

The existing reasonably-sized laboratory junior and senior
high school and elementary school shall continue to operate under
the supervision of the College of Education to serve the in-campus
requirements of its students.

SEC. 4. Administration. — The College shall have the
general powers of a corporation set forth in Batas Pambansa Blg.
68, otherwise known as “The Corporation Code of the Philippines”,
as amended. The exercise of its corporate powers shall be vested.
exclusively in the Board and the President of the College.

 

Src. 5. The Governing Board. — The governing body of
the College shall be the Board, which shall be chaired and
co-chaired by the Chairperson of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED) and the President of the College, respectively,
and with the following as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical
and Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

(© Regional Director of the National Economic and
Development Authority;

@) Regional Director of the Department of Science and
Technology;

© Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture;
@) Regional Director of the TESDA;

(g) President of the federation of faculty associations of
the College;

(th) President of the federation of student councils of
the College;

@ President of the federation of alumni associations of
the College; and

G) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who
have distinguished themselves in their professions or fields of
specialization.

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens who
shall be.selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified persons
from the Province of Lanao del Norte, as recommended by a search
committee. The search committee is constituted by the President
of the College, in consultation with the Chairperson of the CHED
and other members of the Board, based on the standards and

qualifications for the position set by the Board. They shall serve
for a term of two (2) years from the date of appointment.

The membership of the President of the federation of faculty
associations, the President of the federation of student councils,
and the President of the federation of alumni associations in the
Board shall be coterminous with their terms of office, as provided
under their respective constitutions and bylaws. .

SEC. 6. Powers and Duties of the Board of Trustees. — In
addition to its general powers of administration and the powers
granted to the board of directors of a corporation under existing
laws, the Board shall have the following specific powers and duties:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with
the declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions
of the Constitution on education, agriculture, science and
technology, and the policies, standards and thrusts of the CHED
under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Act of 1994”, and also in accordance with the policies,
standards and programs of the TESDA, under Republic Act
No. 7796, otherwise known as the “TESDA Act of 1994”;

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and
rules on student discipline drawn by the Administrative and
Academic Councils as herein provided;

(© Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President of
the College, the vice presidents, deans, directors,’ heads of the
campuses, faculty members, and other officials and employees of
the College;

@ Fix and adjust the salaries of faculty members,
administrative officials and employees, subject to the provisions
of the Revised Compensation and Position Classification System
and other pertinent budget and compensation laws governing hours
of service, and such other duties and conditions as it may deem
proper; grant them, at its discretion, leaves of absence under
such regulations as it may promulgate, any provision of existing
law to the contrary notwithstanding; and remove them for cause
in accordance with the requirements of due process of law;

——-

© Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges,
such as matriculation fees, graduation fees and laboratory fees,
as the Board may deem proper to impose, after due consultation
with the concerned sectors. The fees and charges, including
government subsidies and other income generated by the College,
shall constitute its special trust funds and shall be deposited in
any authorized government depository bank. All interests that
shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same funds for the
use of the College.

Any provision of existing laws, rules or regulations tothe
contrary notwithstanding, any income generated by ‘the College
from tuition fees and other charges, as well as from the operation
of auxiliary services and land grants, shall be retained by the
College and may be disbursed by the Board for instruction,
research, extension services or other programs and projects of
the College: Provided, That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed.
for the specific purposes for which these are collected: Provided,
however, That if, for reasons beyond its control, the College shall
not be able to pursue any project for which the funds have been
appropriated and allocated under its approved program of
expenditures, the Board may authorize the use of said funds for
any reasonable purpose which, in its discretion, may be necessary
and urgent for the attainment of the objectives and goals of
the College;

() Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition and
other school fees for greater access of poor but deserving students
in accordance with Republic Act No. 10931 or the “Universal
Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act”;

(g) Establish professorial chairs in the College and provide
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students;

(h) Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided by
law for the support of the College, and all other sums in the manner
it may, in its discretion, determine to carry out the purposes and
functions of the College;

(i) Set the policies on admission and graduation of students;

§) Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of
their outstanding contributions in the fields of education, public
service, arts, science and technology, agriculture or any field of
specialization within the academic competency of the College, and
authorize the awarding of certificates of completion of nondegree
and nontraditional courses;

(&) Establish research and extension centers to promote
the development of the College;

@ Develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate institutions and agencies,
whether public, private, local or foreign, and appoint experts or
specialists as consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange
professors, scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

(m) Adopt modern and innovative modes of transmitting
knowledge for the promotion of greater access to education such
as the use of information technology, dual training system, open
distance learning, and community laboratory;

({n) Collaborate with the governing bodies of other colleges
within the Province of Lanao del Norte and Region X, under the
supervision of the CHED and in consultation with the Department
of Budget and Management (DBM), in restructuring the College
to make it more efficient, relevant, productive and competitive;

©) Absorb nonchartered tertiary institutions within the
province of Lanao del Norte and Region X as branches and
extension/external centers, in coordination with the CHED and
in consultation with the DBM, and offer therein programs or
courses to carry out the constitutional mandate of providing equal
access to educational opportunities;

() Authorize an external management audit of the College,
to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and regulations
of the Commission on Audit, and institute reforms, including
academic and structural changes, on the basis of the audit results
and recommendations; ‘

@)_ Develop consortia and other economic forms of linkages
with local government units (LGUs), as well as public, private,

local or foreign institutions and agencies, in the furtherance of
the purposes and objectives of the College;

(x) Import economic, technical and cultural books and
publications;

(®) Enter into joint ventures with business and industry
for the profitable development and management of economic assets,
the proceeds of which shall be used for the development and
strengthening of the College; ,

() Receive, in trust, legacies, gifts and donations of real
and personal properties of all kinds and administer and dispose of
the same, when necessary, for the benefit of the College and subject
to the limitations, directions and instructions of the donor, if any;

(u) Extend the term of the President of the College beyond
the age of retirement, but not beyond the age of seventy (70),
based on the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the
Board: Provided, That the President's performance has been
rated by the Board as outstanding and a unanimous
recommendation for such extension has been decided upon by the
search committee;

(v) Delegate any of its powers and duties provided to the
President and other officials of the College, as it may deem
appropriate, so as to expedite the administration of the affairs of
the College;

(w) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for
participative and transparent decision-making within the College;

(x) Where most advantageous to the College, privatize the
management of nonacademic services such as health, food,
building grounds or property maintenance, and such other
similar activities;

(y) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment, and other facilities, and the purchase and

acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies,
materials, and equipment; and

@ Promulgate rules and regulations, as may be necessary,
to carry out the purposes and functions of the College.

‘SEC. 7. Meetings of the Board. -—The Board shall regularly
convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson of the
Board may, however, call a special meeting whenever necessary:
Provided, That members are notified in writing at least three (8)
days prior to the conduct of the said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of allits
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
however, That the Chairperson of the Board or the President of
the College is among those present in the meeting.

In case the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a
meeting of the Board, a CHED Commissioner duly designated by
the Chairperson of the CHED as representative to the meeting,
shall have all the rights and responsibilities of a regular member:
Provided, That during the meeting, the President of the College,
as Vice Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer: Provided,
further, That this provision notwithstanding, the Chairperson
of the CHED is hereby authorized to designate a CHED
Commissioner as the regular Chairperson of the Board, in
which case, the said CHED Commissioner shall act as the
presiding officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on
Higher, Technical and Vocational Education and the House
Committee on Higher and Technical Education will not be able to
attend the Board meeting, they may designate their respective
representatives to attend the meeting, who shall have the same
rights and responsibilities as regular members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall not receive any salary,
but shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and necessary
expenses incurred, either for their attendance to the meetings of
the Board or in connection with other official business authorized
by resolutions of the Board, subject to existing laws

a

SEC. 8. The College President. — The College shall be
headed by a President who shall be appointed by the Board, subject
to its guidelines on qualifications and standards, and based on
the recommendation of a search committee duly constituted for
the purpose of selecting the President.

The President shall render full-time service and shall have
aterm of four (4) years, but may be reappointed to another term:
Provided, That in order to effect the smooth transition of the
vocational school to a polytechnic state college, thé incumbent
President of the ICNSF, if qualified, shall serve.as the first
President of the College. .

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of
office of the incumbent President of the College, the Board shall
constitute the search committee for the Presidency.

The powers and duties of the President of the College, in
addition to those specifically provided in this Act, shall be those
usually pertaining to the Office of the President of colleges and
those delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the College shall be in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11466 or the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”, and by such other laws amendatory
thereto, which may hereinafter be enacted, and shall be
comparable to that being received by the presidents of similar
educational institutions.

The Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge of the College
in case of a vacancy in the Office of the President by reason of
death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause, or
incapacity of the President to perform the functions of the office,
pending the appointment of a new President: Provided, That
the Officer-in-Charge shail serve only during the unexpired portion
of the term.

The President of the College shall be assisted by a
Vice President for Academic Affairs, a Vice President for
Administration, and a Vice President for Research, Development
and Extension, who shall all be appointed by the Board upon the
recommendation of the President of the College.


SEC. 9. The Secretary of the College. — The Board shall
appoint a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the Board
and the College and shall keep all records and proceedings of the
Board. The Secretary of the College shall serve upon each member
of the Board the appropriate notice of board meetings.

SEC. 10. The Treasurer of the College. — The Treasurer
of the Philippines shall be the ex officio Treasurer of the College.

SEC. 11. The Administrative Council. -- There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the College
as chairperson, and the vice presidents, deans, directors and other
officials of equal rank as members, that shall review and
recommend to the Board the policies that shall govern the
administration, management and development planning of
the College.

SEC. 12. The Academic Council. — There shall be an
Academic Council that shall formulate academic policies. It shall
be composed of the President of the College, who shall act ag
chairperson, and all academic staff with the rank of at least an
assistant professor, as members.

The Academic Council shall also have the power to review
and recommend the curricular offerings and rules on student
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board. It shall fix the
requirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, subject to the review and
approval of the Board through the President of the College.

It shall exercise disciplinary power over the students of the
College and shall formulate rules and regulations on student
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

Sec. 13. The Faculty. — No political belief, gender
preference, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic origin,
nor religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in
the appointment of faculty members of the College: Provided,
That said appointment shall be subject to the guidelines,
qualifications, and standards set by the Board: Provided, further,
That no member of the faculty shall teach for or against any
particular church or religious sect.

ll

SEC. 14, Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
- The College shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy pursuant to paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV of
the Constitution.

SEC. 15. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
College shall provide scholarship and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify for
admission to the College.

No student shall be denied admission to the College by
reason of gender, religion, cultural or community affiliation,
physical disability or ethnic origin.

SEC. 16. Authority to Loan or Transfer Apparatus,
Equipment, Supplies and Detail of Personnel. — The heads of
the bureaus and offices of the national government are hereby
authorized to loan or transfer, upon the request of the President
of the College, such apparatus, equipment or supplies as may be
needed by the College, and detail employees for duty therein when,
in the judgment of the head of bureau or office, such apparatus,
equipment, supplies or service of such employees can be spared
without serious detriment to public service.

The employees so detailed shall perform such duties as
required of them by the President of the College and the time
thus served shall be counted as part of their regular service.

SEC. 17. Assets, Liabilities and Personnel. — All assets,
real and personal, personnel, and records of the ICNSF as well as
liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred to the College:
Provided, That the positions, rights and security of tenure of
faculty members and personnel therein employed under existing
laws prior to the conversion into a college shall be respected:
Provided, further, That the incumbents of the positions shall
remain in the same status until otherwise provided for by the
Board: Provided, finally, That the College shall also accordingly
upgrade or increase its human resource component as may be
deemed appropriate by the Board.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the ICNSF are hereby declared property of the College and


shall be titled under its name: Provided, That should the College
cease to exist or be abolished or should such aforementioned parcels
of land be no longer needed by the College, the same shall revert
to the concerned LGU or to the Republic of the Philippines, as the
case may be.

SEC. 18. Tax Exemption on Importation and Donations.
— The importation by the College of economic, technical and
cultural books or publications, which are for economic, technical,
vocational, scientific, philosophical, historical or cultural purposes
shall, upon certification by the CHED, be exempt from customs
duties in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10863,
otherwise known as the “Customs Modernization and Tariff Act
(CMTA)’.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations and
contributions made to and used actually, directly and exclusively
by the College, shall be exempt from donor’s tax and the same
shall bé considered as allowable deduction from the gross income
of the donor for purposes of computing the taxable income of the
donor, in accordance with the provisions of the National Internal
Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 19. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the conversion of the
ICNSF to a college shall become effective only upon the
determination and declaration by the CHED, based on the
recommendation of a panel of experts constituted for the purpose,
that the institution has complied with the requirements for college
status under CHED Memorandum Order No. 46, series of 2012
(@olicy-Standard to Enhance Quality Assurance (QA) in Philippine
Higher Education Through an Outcomes-Based and
Typology-Based QA): Provided, That the panel may issue such
recommendation when the institution has substantially complied
with the requirements for the grant of college status.

i

The following operational requirements for a College, as
established by the CHED, shall be complied with:

(a) Employment of full-time, permanent faculty members
who possess relevant degrees, as required by the CHED, and with
experience in the subject areas they handle;

(b) Offering of a comprehensive range of degree programs
characterized by a core curriculum that holistically develops
thinking, problem solving, decision-making, communication,
technical, and social skills in line with the mission of the College;

© Establishment and maintenance of comprehensive
learning resources and support structures that are appropriate
for developing knowledge and skills in the specific natural science,
social science, humanities, and professional disciplines offered by
the College, including laboratories, books and journals;

@ Maintenance of linkage with the community that would
ensure the development of relevant academic and extension
programs and the application of their learning outcomes; and.

@) Conduct of outreach programs involving students in
social development-oriented experiences that allow them to
contextualize their knowledge within actual social and human
experiences.

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly
provide technical assistance to the College and monitor its
compliance with the requirements of the Commission.

The ICNSF shall retain its status prior to the effectivity of
this Act until it is able to comply with the requirements
provided herein.

SEC. 20. Development Plan, Management Audit, and
Organizational/ Administrative /Academic Structure. — Within
a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of
this Act, the College shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
program budget to the CHED for recommendation to the DBM;

(b) Set up its organizational, administrative, and academic
structure, including the appointment of key officials of the
College; and


© Undergo a management audit in coordination with
the CHED.

SEC. 21. Filing of Report. — On or before the fifteenth
(15%) day of the second (2™) month after the opening of regular
classes each year, the Board shall file with the Office of the
President of the Philippines, through the CHED Chairperson,
and with both Houses of Congress, a detailed report on the progress,
condition, and needs of the College.

SEC. 22. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997’, shall form part of this Act and serve
as part of the governing charter of the College.

SEC. 23. Parity Clause. — All other powers, functions,
privileges, responsibilities, and limitations under existing laws
shall be deemed granted to or imposed upon the College and its
officials, whenever appropriate.

SEC. 24. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 25. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Board, in
consultation with the CHED, shall formulate the rules and
regulations to fully implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 26. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in
full force and effect.

SEC. 27. Repealing Clause, — Alllaws, presidential decrees,
executive orders, and rules and regulations contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are repealed or
modified accordingly.

ae

igen

SEC. 28. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

    

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on November 25, 2020 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved:

ae JUN 18 2022
LepSed WO LAW ON oe oecce
without the signature of the Prest-
dent, in accordance with Article VI
Sectien 27 (1) of the Constitutior
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

Oo