eee eS ERE PC

S. No. 2195
H. No. 335

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines

Metro Slanila
Seventeenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

—

[ RepusLic Act No. 11362 ]

AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE COURT TO REQUIRE
COMMUNITY SERVICE IN LIEU OF IMPRISONMENT
FOR THE PENALTIES OF ARRESTO MENOR AND
ARRESTO MAYOR, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
CHAPTER 5, TITLE 3, BOOK 1 OF ACT NO. 3815, AS
AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS “THE REVISED
PENAL CODE”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Community Service Act”.

SEC. 2. Policy. — It is the policy of the State to promote
yestorative justice and decongest jails by authorizing the court
in its discretion to require community service in leu of service
in jail for offenses punishable by arresto menor and arresto
mayor.

SEC. 3. Community Service. — Article 88a of Act
No. 3815 is hereby inserted to read as follows:

“ART. 88a. Community Service. — The court in
its discretion may, in lieu of service in jail, require
that the penalties of arresto menor and arresto
mayor be served by the defendant by rendering
community service in the place where the crime was
committed, under such terms as the court shall
determine, taking into consideration the gravity of
the offense and the circumstances of the case, which
shall be under the supervision of a probation officer:
Provided, That the court will prepare an order
imposing the community service, specifying the
number of hours to be worked and the period within
which to complete the service. The order is then
referred to the assigned probation officer who shall
have responsibility of the defendant.

“The defendant shall likewise be required to
undergo rehabilitative counseling under the social
welfare and development officer of the city or
municipality concerned with the assistance of the
Department of Social Welfare and Development
(DSWD). In requiring community service, the court
shall consider the welfare of the society and the
reasonable probability that the person sentenced shall
not violate the law while rendering the service.

“Community service shall consist of any actual
physical activity which inculcates civic consciousness,
and is intended towards the improvement of a public
work or promotion of a public service.

“If the defendant violates the terms of the
community service, the court shall order his/her
re-arrest and the defendant shall serve the full term
of the penalty, as the case may be, in jail, or in
the house of the defendant as provided under Article
88. However, if the defendant has fully complied with

the terms of the community service, the court shall
order the release of the defendant unless detained for
some other offense.

“The privilege of rendering community service
in lieu of service in jail shall be availed of only
once.”

SEC. 4. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Department of Justice (DOJ) and the DSWD shall issue the
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Act
within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause. - Chapter 5, Title 3, Book I
of the Revised Penal Code is hereby amended and all laws,
decrees, orders, rules and regulations, or other issuances or
parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are
hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. Separability Clause. — If any portion or provision
of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder of this
Act or any provision not affected thereby shall remain in force
and effect.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication
either in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Philippines.

Approved,

LL

GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO  VICENJE C. SOTTO III
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

 

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2195 on June 3, 2019, and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to
House Bill No. 335 on June 3, 2019.

f

    
  

DANTE ALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA

Acting Secretdry Ggneral Secretary of the Senate
resentatives

Approved: AUG 0 8 2019

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 011818

 

sent im