“seo gta at trary itneAnrnae ns oe romney nan Seen Re rn INee anna namertenentncnactntnrene ce

S. No. 2005
H. No. 7309

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Seventeenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ Repusic Act No. 11459]

AN ACT CREATING THE POSITIONS FORJUDGES-AT-LARGE,
AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE BATAS PAMBANSA
BLG,. 129, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS “THE JUDICIARY
REORGANIZATION ACT OF 1980”, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “Judges-at-Large Act of 2019”.

SEC. 2. A new paragraph (n) is inserted in Section 14
of Batas Pambansa Blg. 129, otherwise known as “The
Judiciary Reorganization Act of 1980”, and shall read as follows:

“(n) One hundred (100) positions of Regional
Trial Judges-at-Large ave created. The duly appointed
Regional Trial Judges-at-Large shall have no

permanent salas and may be assigned by the
Supreme Court as acting or assisting judges to any
Regional Trial Court in the Philippines as public
interest may require. The said Judges-at-Large are
entitled to salaries, privileges, allowances,
emoluments, benefits, rank and title of a Regional
Trial Judge. The Supreme Court shall determine
the length of such temporary assignment: Provided,
That the Judicial and Bar Council shall recommend
to the President appointees to the Judges-at-Large
positions, after the period of the temporary
assignment, the Judicial and Bar Council shall
recommend to the President the permanent sala to
which the Judge-at-Large shall be appointed.”

SEC. 3. Section 15 of the same Act is amended to read
as follows:

“SEC. 15. Qualifications. - No person shall be
appointed Regional Trial Judge or Regional Trial
Judge-at-Large unless that person is a natural-born
citizen of the Philippines, at least thirty-five (35)
years of age, and, for at least ten (10) years, has
been engaged in the practice of law in the
Philippines or has held a public office in the

salaries, privileges, allowances, emoluments, benefits,
yank and title of a judge of a Municipal Trial Court
in Cities. The Supreme Court shall determine the
length of such temporary assignment: Provided,
That the Judicial and Bar Council shall recommend
to the President appointees to the Judges-at-Large
positions. After the period of the temporary
assignment, the Judicial and Bar Council shall
yecommend to the President the permanent sala to
which the Judge-at-Large shall be appointed.”

SEC. 5. Section 26 of the same Act is amended to read
as follows:

“SEC. 26. Qualifications. — No person shall be
appointed judge of a Metropolitan Trial Court,
Municipal Trial Court, Municipal Circuit Trial
Court, or a Municipal Trial Judge-at-Large unless
that person is a natural-born citizen of the
Philippines, at least thirty (30) years of age, and,
for at least five (5) years, have been engaged in the
practice of law in the Philippines, or has held a
public office in the Philippines requiring admission
to the practice of law as an indispensable requisite.”

Philippines requiring admission to the practice of law SEC. 6. Section 41 of the same Act is amended to read
as an indispensable requisite.” as follows:

SEC. 4. A new section to be denominated as Section 25-A “Sec. 41. Salaries. — Intermediate Appellate
is hereby inserted after Section 25 of the same Act to read Justices, Regional Trial Judges, Regional Trial
as follows: Judges-at-Large, Metropolitan Trial Judges, Municipal

> Trial Judges, Municipal Circuit Trial Judges, and
Municipal Trial Judges-at-Large shall receive such
compensation and allowances as may be authorized
by the President along the guidelines set forth in
Letter of Implementation No. 93 pursuant to
Presidential Decree No. 985, as amended by
Presidential Decree No. 1597.”

“SEC. 25-A. Creation of Position for Municipal
Trial Judges-at-Large. — Fifty (50) positions of
Municipal Trial Judges-at-Large are created. The ~
duly appointed Municipal Trial Judges-at-Large shall
have no permanent salas and may be assigned by
the Supreme Court as acting or assisting judges to
any first level court in the Philippines as public
interest may require. They shall be entitled to the

SEC. 7. Section 42 of the same Act shall read as follows:

“SEC. 42. Longevity pay. — A monthly longevity
pay equivalent to five percent (5%) of the monthly
basic pay shall be paid to the Justices and Judges
of the courts herein created for each five (5) years
of continuous, efficient, and meritorious service
rendered in the Judiciary: Provided, That in no case
shall the total salary of each Justice or Judge
concerned, after this longevity pay is added, exceed
the salary of the Justice or Judge next in rank.”

SEC. 8. Funding. — The amount necessary for the
implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
available appropriations of the Judiciary under the current
General Appropriations Act. Thereafter, such sums as may be
necessary for its continued implementation shall be included
in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Supreme
Court, in consultation with the Secretary of Budget and
Management, shall promulgate the necessary rules and
regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full
force and effect.

SEC. ll. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in any

newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 

GLORIA MAZAPAGAL ARROYO VICENTE C/ SOTTO III
Speaker of the House President $f-the Senate
of Representatives

uw

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2065 on May 20, 2019 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to
House Bill No. 7309 on June 3, 2019.

P? MALING ju owe D. VILLARICA

etary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

      
 

Approved: AUG 36 2019

  

RODRI OA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

septa °

—_—_—SS Ee
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 012684