Gougress of the Philippines

Metra Manila

Ghird Regular Session

day of July, two thousand eighteen.

eo

AN ACT REORGANIZING AND STRENGTHENING THE
COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY,
REPEALING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 6939, CREATING THE COOPERATIVE
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “Cooperative Development Authority Charter of 2019”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to promote the viability and growth of
cooperatives as instruments of equity, social justice and
economic development and to create an agency, in fulfillment
of the mandate in Section 15, Article XII of the 1987
Constitution.

The State recognizes cooperatives as associations organized
for the economic and social betterment of their members,
operating business enterprises based on mutual aid, and
founded upon internationally accepted cooperative principles
and practices. The State also recognizes the Cooperative
Development Authority as primarily responsible for the
institutional development and regulation of cooperatives through
partnership with the cooperative sectors and the academe.
Accordingly, the State recognizes the right of the cooperatives
to initiate and foster within their own ranks cooperative
promotion, organization, training, information gathering, audit
and support services, with government assistance where
necessary.

In furtherance of this policy, the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA) and the Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI) shall include the promotion of growth and
expansion of cooperatives as major and indispensable
components of national development plans. The Department of
Finance (DOF) and the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) shall provide the mechanism to ensure
availability of resources to implement such plans.

The government and all its branches, subdivisions,
instrumentalities and agencies shall continue to provide
technical guidance, financial assistance and other services to
enable the cooperatives to develop into viable and responsive
economic enterprises towards a strong cooperative movement,
free from condition which infringes upon the objectives and
character of cooperatives. The State shall, except as provided
in this Act, maintain the policy of noninterference in the
management and operations of cooperatives.

SEC. 3. Cooperative Development Authority (CDA). — The
CDA created under Republic Act No. 6939, hereinafter referred
to as the Authority, is hereby strengthened and reorganized
to carry out the provisions of this Act and those of Republic
Act No. 6938, as amended by Republic Act No. 9520, otherwise
known as the “Philippine Cooperative Code of 2008”.

The Authority shall have its head office in the National
Capital Region (NCR), and shall maintain the existing sixteen
(16) extension offices. In the case of the NCR, the same shall
be comprised of field district offices and shall maintain offices
and branches in such other places as the proper conduct of
its business shall require.

The Authority shall be an agency attached to the DTI
for policy and program coordination for cooperatives.

SEC. 4. Powers, Functions and Responsibilities. — The
Authority shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Develop and formulate, in consultation with the
cooperative sector and other concerned institutions, appropriate
regulations, standards, rules, orders, guidelines and/or circulars
to implement this Act and Republic Act No. 9520 to ensure
the effective and sound operation of cooperatives;

(b) Formulate, adopt and implement integrated and
comprehensive plans and programs on cooperative development
consistent with the national policy on cooperatives and establish
an integrated framework on cooperative development for all
government agencies; :

(c) Register all cooperatives including amendments to the
Articles of Cooperation and Bylaws (ACBL), division, merger,
and consolidation;

(a) Authorize the establishment of branches and satellite
offices of cooperatives;

(e-) Issue Certificate of Recognition to organized
Laboratory Cooperatives;

() Exercise supervision and jurisdiction over all types
and categories of cooperatives registered with the Authority;

(g) Require the submission of annual reports, audited
financial statements, and such reports in compliance with
Republic Act No. 9520, in such forms as may be prescribed
by the Authority;

(h) Create an information system from the reports and
other documents submitted by cooperatives;

@) Promulgate and issue guidelines on the specific use
and utilization of statutory funds and obligations that will
achieve the real intent and spirit of establishing such funds
and obligations for the benefit of the cooperatives and
communities they serve;

4) Prescribe and collect reasonable fees, fines or charges
in the performance of its registration and regulatory functions;

(k) Require registered cooperatives to develop business
continuity plans to address all kinds of risks;

(@) Grant awards, recognition and incentives to
cooperatives, cooperative leaders and partners;

(m) Administer all grants and donations exclusively
intended for cooperatives coursed through the Authority for
cooperative development, without prejudice to the right of
cooperatives to directly receive and administer such grants and
donations upon agreement with the grantors and donors
thereof;

(n) Conduct regular inspection or examination of a
cooperative in accordance with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Authority and, when deemed necessary,
conduct examination and investigation to protect the interest
and welfare of the members of cooperatives and the general
public.

For this purpose, cooperative federations, unions, local
government units (LGUs), cooperative development offices
(CDOs), cooperative federations and unions, and the alliance
of cooperatives representing all types and categories of
cooperatives as the consultative and coordinating body of the
Authority, may be requested by the Authority to assist in the
inspection and examination of a cooperative;

(0) Develop and conduct management and training
programs that will provide members of cooperatives with the
entrepreneurial capabilities, managerial expertise, and technical
skills required for efficient operation of their cooperatives and
inculcate in them the true spirit of cooperativism and provide,
when necessary, technical and professional assistance to ensure
the viability and growth of cooperatives with special concern
for agrarian reform, agriculture, fishery and the economically
depressed sectors;

(p) Conduct investigations, file necessary charges,
discipline, suspend and/or remove erring officers and members
of the cooperative for violation of cooperative laws, rules,
regulations, issuances of the Authority, the ACBL, after due
process, and direct the general assembly to replace the
suspended/removed officers, in accordance with the rules and
regulations as may be promulgated by the Authority;

(q) Order the suspension or cancellation of the Certificate
of Registration of cooperatives and/or the revocation of the
Letter of Authority and/or Certificate of Authority to establish
and operate satellite or branch offices, respectively, after due
notice and hearing for noncompliance with lawful orders, rules
and regulations of the Authority, including the ACBL of the
cooperative subject to the conditions as defined in the
implementing rules and regulations (IRR) of this Act;

(r) Order the dissolution and liquidation of cooperatives
as well as the transfer of all or substantially all of their assets
and liabilities;

(s) Compel the cooperative to call a general or
representative assembly, as deemed necessary, under the
supervision of the Authority with the participation of their
respective cooperative federations or unions, subject to the
criteria or conditions to be defined in the IRR issued for this
purpose;

|

(t) Hear and decide inter-cooperative and intra-
cooperative disputes, controversies and/or conflicts, without
prejudice to filing of civil and/or criminal cases by the parties
concerned before the regular courts: Provided, That all
decisions of the Authority are appealable directly to the Court
of Appeals;

(a) Adopt and implement a dispute resolution mechanism
that will settle conflicts between and among members, officers,
and directors of cooperatives, and between and among
cooperatives in accordance with Article 137 of Republic Act No.
9520, which amended Republic Act No. 6938, and Republic Act
No. 9285, otherwise known as the “Alternative Dispute
Resolution Act of 2004”. However, in case of election related
issues, the aggrieved party may elevate the case for
adjudication to the Authority without undergoing through the
alternative dispute resolution;

(v) Issue cease and desist orders to cooperatives and
responsible parties specified under Article 137 of Republic Act
No. 9520, and such other orders and notices to preserve the
assets and documents of the cooperatives subject of the dispute
or litigation;

(w) Issue subpoena ad testificandum and subpoena duces
tecum for the parties to appear and produce documents in any
proceedings of the Authority and in appropriate cases, order
the examination of all documents, papers, files and records of
any cooperative or person under investigation as may be
necessary for the proper disposition of cases before it;

(x) Cite for contempt any person guilty of misconduct
in the presence of the Authority which seriously interrupts any
hearing or inquiry and impose a fine of not more than Five
thousand pesos (P5,000.00) or imprisonment of not more than
ten (10) days, or both. Acts constituting indirect contempt as
defined under Rule 71 of the Rules of Court shall be punished

(y) Implement and enforce its decision and orders with
the assistance of deputized law enforcement agencies or the
LGU concerned as may be necessary;

Zp

(2) Recognize sectoral apex organizations and a
national alliance representing all types and categories of
cooperatives which shall function as the overall consultative
and coordinating body with the Authority, for this purpose,
the pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 9520 are hereby
amended accordingly, and the Authority shall issue the
necessary IRR for this provision;

(aa) Establish a consultative mechanism consistent with
Section 18 of this Act in order to provide the cooperative sector
a system to ensure participation on matters concerning
government plans, programs, and policies affecting
cooperatives;

(bb) Coordinate with the provincial, city, or municipal
cooperative offices the adoption and implementation of national
plans, programs and policies on cooperative development, and
to establish partnership in the promotion, organization, and
development of cooperatives within the jurisdiction of the
LGUs;

(cc) Establish the formation and organization of
cooperative development councils in the national, regional,
provincial, city and municipal levels in order to provide the
cooperative movement a system for policy consultation and
program coordination in accordance with the guidelines to be
prescribed by the Authority;

(dd) Collaborate with concerned agencies that can provide
technical, professional, and marketing assistance including
trainings on transfer of technology to ensure the viability,
growth, competitiveness and innovativeness of cooperatives
giving special concern to agrarian reform, agriculture, fishery
and the economically depressed sectors;

(ee) Provide assistance on cooperative product development
and facilitate their marketing both in the domestic and
international market in coordination with the concerned
agencies;

(ff) Designate a representative in the Regional
Development Council (RDC) and in its sectoral committees, as
a regular voting member thereof;

(gg) Establish linkages with the academe and other
institutions, both local and international, for education, training
and research for cooperatives;

(bh) Formulate, adopt and implement an educational
and technological exchange program both in domestic or
international levels;

(ii) Formulate, adopt and implement, in a manner
consistent with Section 17 of this Act, a standard of training
for cooperative officers or members which shall focus on basic
cooperative principles and values, good governance, business
and entrepreneurial management, human resource
management, risk management, conflict management, and
technical skills required for the efficient and effective operations
of the cooperatives;

Gj) Establish and maintain a continuing educational and
capability building program for the Authority; and

(kk) Exercise such other powers and functions as may
be necessary to implement the provisions of this Act and of
Republic Act No. 9520.

SEC. 5. The Board of Directors. — The Authority shall
have a Board of Directors, which shall be the collegial policy-
making body of the Authority. It shall be composed of the
Chairperson, with the rank and privilege of an Undersecretary,
and six (6) Members of the Board, with the rank and privilege
of an Assistant Secretary, all of whom shall be appointed by
the President of the Philippines and chosen among the
nominees from the cooperative sector. There shall be one (1)
board of director from each of the following cluster of
cooperatives:

(a) Credit and Financial Services, Banking, and
Insurance;

(b) Consumers, Marketing, Producers, and Logistics;

(©) Human Services: Health, Housing, Workers, and
Labor Service;

@) Education and Advocacy;

) Agriculture, Agrarian, Aquaculture, Farmers, Dairy,
and Fisherfolk; and

(f) Public Utilities: Electricity, Water, Communications,
and Transport.

The Secretaries of the DTI and the Department of the
Interior and Local Government (DILG) shall serve as ex officio
Members of the Board and may designate an alternate in a
permanent capacity with a rank of at least an Assistant
Secretary and whose acts shall be considered as that of the
principal.

As far as practicable, there shall be at least one (1)
lawyer Member of the Board, and gender balance shall be
observed in the membership of the Board.

SEC. 6. Powers and Functions of the Board. — The Board
as a collegial body shall be responsible for policy formulation,
strategic planning and direction setting of the agency and shall
exercise the following powers and functions:

(a) Formulate policies, rules and regulations consistent
with the provisions of Republic Act No. 9520 and this Act;

' (b) Adopt IRR for the conduct of the internal operations
of the Authority;

(c) Organize the operating structure and functions of
the Authority;

(@) Approve the work and financial plan of the
Authority;

(e) Approve annual, medium-term and long-term
cooperative development plans of the Authority consistent with
the overall socioeconomic development policy of the national
government;

() Provide overall direction to the Authority, defining
the respective roles of the national government agencies
(NGAs), LGUs, people’s organizations, private sector and
nongovernment organizations (NGOs) in the promotion and
development of the cooperative sector;

(g) Conduct regular policy consultations with the
cooperative sector, government agencies, LGUs, people’s
organizations, private sector, NGOs, and other stakeholders on
the Authority's policies, programs and initiatives;

(h) Decide cases involving cooperatives that are
submitted to the Board for resolution;

(@) Authorize the Chairperson or the Administrator to
enter into contracts or agreements in behalf of the Authority;

G) Approve and submit the annual proposed budget of
the Authority to the President of the Philippines through the
DBM; and

(k) Formulate rules and regulations and exercise such
other powers as may be required to implement the objectives
of this Act.

SEC. 7. Qualifications of the Chairperson and the
Members of the Board. — The Chairperson and the Members
of the Board must possess the following qualifications:

(a) Natural born Filipino citizen;

(b) Holder of any bachelor’s degree;

(c) With five (5) years experience as an officer of a
cooperative in the cluster one represents; and

il

(a) Must be a resident of the Philippines for at least five
(5) years prior to appointment.

Any person appointed as Chairperson or Member of the
Board shall, upon appointment, divest oneself of any direct or
indirect pecuniary interest or dealings with any cooperative.

SEC. 8. Term of Office. - The Chairperson and Members
of the Board shall serve for a term of six (6) years, without
reappointment: Provided, That the Chairperson or a Member
of the Board who has served the unfinished term of the one
he/she succeeded and has served for less than one-half (1/2)
of the full term shall be eligible for reappointment.

SEC. 9. Removal from Office. - The Chairperson and the
Members of the Board may be removed from office for cause.

The person appointed for the unexpired term shall be
eligible for reappointment: Provided, That the unexpired term
is less than one-half of the prescribed term.

SEC. 10. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall meet
at least once a month for the transaction of its regular
business. Under exceptional circumstances, special meetings
may be called by the Chairperson or majority of the Members
to discuss and decide urgent matters. A majority vote by the
entire Board shall be required for a decision.

The meeting shall be presided by the Chairperson.
However, in the absence of the Chairperson, the most senior
Member of the Board in terms of appointment shall serve as
the Acting Presiding Officer, or in his/her absence the Board
shall elect from among themselves an Acting Presiding Officer.

All regular and special meetings of the Board shall be
held at the head office of the Authority or in any other place
as may be determined by the Board.

SEC. 11. Office of the Administrator and the Deputy
Administrators. - The Administrator of the Authority shall
be appointed by the President of the Philippines, as

|
|

recommended by the Board of Directors, who shall have the
rank of an Assistant Secretary, and shall execute and
administer the policies, decisions, orders and resolutions
approved by the Board and shall have the general executive
direction and supervision of the work and operation of the
Authority.

There shall be five (5) Deputy Administrators appointed
by the Board of Directors who shall assist the Administrator,
and who will be charged with the following specific concerns:

(a) General Administration and Support Services;

(b) Institutional Development;

(c) Legal Affairs:

(@) Registration, Supervision and Examination; and

(e) Credit Surety Fund (CSF).

SEC. 12. Qualifications of the Administrator. — The
Administrator must possess the following qualifications:

(a) Natural born Filipino citizen;
(b) Holder of any bachelor’s degree;

(c) Must possess the necessary civil service eligibility;
and

(@) With five (5) years experience as an officer of a
cooperative or official or employee in a government office or
NGO dealing with cooperatives.

Any person appointed as Administrator shall, upon
appointment, divest oneself of any direct or indirect pecuniary
interest or dealings with any cooperative.

SEC. 13. Powers and Functions of the Administrator. —
The Administrator of the Authority shall have the following
powers and functions:

(a) Prepare, consolidate and submit periodic reports for
the consideration of the Board;

(b) Implement a human resource management system
regulations that will promote professionalism and excellence in
accordance with sound principles of management;

(c) Prepare the proposed annual and supplemental
budget of the Authority for the consideration and approval of
the Board;

(a) Submit report to the President of the Philippines and
Congress on the performance and accomplishment of the
Authority on an annual basis;

(e) Appoint personnel lower than the position of Deputy
Administrators;

(@) Represent the Authority in all undertakings and
where its presence is required; and

(g) Perform such other functions as may be required by
law. i

SEC. 14. Registration for Tax Exemption. — The
Authority shall furnish the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR),
LGUs which include provinces, highly-urbanized and
independent cities, and other concerned agencies a certified list
of duly registered cooperatives for purposes of processing tax
exemptions.

Any public official or employee who violates or in any
manner circumvents this provision shall be dealt with in
accordance with Article 140 of Republic Act No. 9520.

SEC. 15. Prohibition. — Except as provided for under
Article 130 of Republic Act No. 9520, the use by any person
or organization of the word “cooperative”, “coop”, “co-op”and
*koop” in their business name, unless duly registered with the
Authority, shall be prohibited and shall be penalized under
Article 140 of Republic Act No. 9520.

SEC. 16. Settlement of Disputes. — As far as practicable,
disputes between and among members, officers, and directors
of cooperatives, and between and among cooperatives shall be
settled in accordance with Article 137 of Republic Act No. 9520,
and Republic Act No. 9285, and Section 4(u) of this Act.

SEC. 17. Training Standards for Cooperative Officers and
Members. — The Authority, in partnership with learning and
training institutions with the cooperative sector, shall
formulate standards of training requirements for cooperative
officers and members to ensure compliance thereof.

The Authority may accredit organizations other than
cooperatives but duly registered under Philippine laws and
engaged in cooperative promotion, organization, research and
education, as nonacademic training institutions.

Upon request of cooperatives, state universities and
colleges (SUCs) shall provide technical assistance and guidance
to cooperatives in the communities where they are located. The
SUCs may engage the support and participation of unions and
federations of cooperatives in the implementation of this
provision.

SEC. 18. Partnership with the Cooperative Sector. — A
strong partnership between the Authority and the cooperative
sector and the academe shall be established in implementing
the developmental functions of the Authority as stated in
Section 4, paragraphs (a), (b), (aa), (bb), (cc), (dd), (ee), @) and
(jj), and Section 17 of this Act to ensure the maximum
participation of the cooperative sector on matters of government
plans, projects and policies affecting cooperatives.

The Authority, the cooperative sector, and the academe
shall formulate guidelines for the implementation of the
partnership that may give rise to the recognition of apex
organizations and a national alliance representing all types and
categories of cooperatives, as provided for under Section 4(z)
of this Act, that shall function as the overall consultative and
coordinating body with the Authority.

The Authority shall recognize cooperative unions and
federations under Articles 24 and 25 of Republic Act No. 9520,
and issue guidelines to promote and develop these secondary
cooperatives.

SEC. 19. Cooperatives in the Education System. — The
history, philosophy, concepts, values, principles and practices
of cooperatives and their role in nation building, shall be part
of the curriculum of both in formal and nonformal education.

Notwithstanding existing laws, memorandum orders and
directives, cooperativism as a tool for self-empowerment and
nation building shall be included in the curricula of senior
students in all the secondary educational institutions and in
the syllabus of any social and civic studies subject in the
K to 12 level.

Cooperatives development and administration may be
offered as a field of study in the baccalaureate, post
baccalaureate and masteral programs in SUCs: Provided,
That SUCs may also offer the courses on a nontraditional
approach under the equivalency program of such SUCs
accrediting the equivalent training that an officer has
undertaken to the relevant subject offering in the curriculum:
Provided, further, That in cases where the SUCs do not offer
a separate academic program in cooperative development and
administration, the SUCs shall include a three (3)-unit subject
in the curricula of accountancy, agribusiness, agriculture,
agricultural economics, business, community development,
economics, education, environmental sciences, social sciences,
political economy and other curricula that can be instrumental
in the development of cooperatives.

SEC. 20. Cooperatives in the Agriculture Sector and
Fishery Sector. — The promotion and development of
agricultural, agrarian and aqua cooperatives: farmers, dairy
and fisherfolk and, in coordination with the Department of
Agriculture (DA) and its attached agencies and government-
owned and -controlled corporations (GOCCs), Department of
Agrarian Reform (DAR), National Commission on Indigenous
Peoples (NCIP) and other government agencies shall be a

priority program of the Authority to ensure food security and
reduce rural poverty.

SEC. 21. Cooperatives in the Banking System. — The
promotion and development of cooperative banks, as part of
the banking system and of financial service cooperatives as
defined in Republic Act No. 9520, shall be a special concern
of the Authority which shall undertake the necessary program
in collaboration with the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)
and the cooperative sector concerned.

SEC. 22. Cooperatives Engaged in Services Covered by
Other Laws. — Registered cooperatives shall secure the
necessary licenses, franchises, certificates of authority and
permits from other appropriate agencies with jurisdiction over
their activities, if required by other existing laws, rules and
regulations.

SEC. 23. Reorganization of the Authority. — The
Authority shall be reorganized within one hundred twenty (120)
days from the effectivity of this Act in accordance with
Republic Act No. 6656, otherwise known as the “Act to Protect
the Security of Tenure of Civil Service Officers and Employees
in the Implementation of Government Reorganization’.

SEC. 24. Transitory Provisions. — Upon the effectivity of
this Act, the personnel of the Authority shall, unless removed
for cause and after due process, continue to perform their
duties and responsibilities without diminution of their rank,
salaries and other emoluments.

The CDA created under Republic Act No. 6939 is hereby
reorganized and its employees are hereby absorbed in the
Authority created under this Act, in accordance with its
staffing pattern, subject to civil service laws, rules and
regulations and DBM rules and regulations: Provided, finally,
That those who opt to retire or separate from office voluntarily
shall be given separation pay computed based on DBM
guidelines and regulations.

The incumbent Chairperson and Administrators of the
CDA shall continue to serve and act as Chairperson and

Members of the Board until the new composition of the Board
shall have been constituted.

The Authority shall collect existing accounts receivables
from the transfer of funds from the DA under Presidential
Decree No. 175, as amended, and such other funds coursed
through the Authority, or enter into compromise agreements
or the condonation of said accounts, subject to rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the Authority and the
Commission on Audit (COA).

All assets and liabilities of the current CDA as well as

the unexpended appropriations shall be transferred to the
Authority.

SEC. 25. Appropriations. ~— The amount necessary to
implement this Act shall be charged against the current year’s
budget of the CDA. Thereafter, the amount necessary for its
continued implementation shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 26. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Board shall, in consultation with the cooperative sector and
other concerned government agencies, formulate the IRR: within
ninety (90) days upon the effectivity of this Act. The IRR shall
take effect within fifteen (15) days after publication in the
Official Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
All subsequent amendments to the IRR shall also be published
before taking effect.

SEC. 27. Information Campaign. — The Authority is
mandated to conduct a massive information campaign on the
provisions of this Act upon its effectivity.

SEC. 28. The Joint Congressional Oversight Committee
on Cooperatives (JCOCC). — The Joint Congressional Oversight
Committee created under Article 138 of Republic Act No. 9520
shall review and monitor the implementation of this Act.

SEC. 29. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No. 6939,
creating the “Cooperative Development Authority”, is hereby
uepealed. All other laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and
regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act are hereby amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 30. Separability Clause. — If for any cause, any part
of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the rest of the
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 31. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

taal her

GLORIA CAPAGAL ARROYO  VICENTE| C. SOTTO III
Speaker of the House President\of the Senate
of Representatives

Approved,

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2063
and House Bill No. 9051 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on June 3, 2019.

DANT! P. MALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Agting Sedvetary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

PHIL

‘PP:
PRRD 2016 _ 011824 mss

| PURSES ESA REW Uda ARR ESS RAST RS a EA DNL SADR NG EE SS

E gees

os