H. No. 7692

. Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Highteenth Congress
Third Regular Sesstan

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one. _

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11753}

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A REGULAR CAMPUS OF THE
NUEVA ECIJA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY (NEUST) IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF
NAMPICUAN, PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, TO BE
KNOWN AS THE NEUST-NAMPICUAN CAMPUS, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “Nueva Ecija
University of Science and Technology-Nampicuan Campus Act”.

SEC. 2. There is‘hereby established a regular campus of
the Nueva Ecija University of Science: and Technology, hereinafter
referred to as the University,in t the Municipality of Nampicuan,
Province of Nueva Etija, to be-known a-the Nueva Ecija
University of Science and Technology (NEUST)- Nampicuan
Campus.

SEc. 3. The NEUST-Nampicuan Campus shall primarily
provide short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate, and
graduate courses within its areas of competency and specialization,
pursuant to its mandate, and according to its capabilities as the
Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the Board, may deem
necessary to respond to meet the human resources development
needs of the Province of Nueva Ecija and the entire Region III.

The NEUST-Nampicuan Campus is also mandated to
undertake research and extension services, and to provide
progressive leadership in these areas.

SEc. 4. The NEUST-Nampicuan Campus shall be headed
by a Campus Administrator who shall render,f -time service
and be appointed or designated by the Board upon the
recommendation of the search committee and the President of
the University, subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and
standards set by the Board. i

be :
Sec. 5. Allassets, real and personal, personnel, and records
of the NEUST-Nampicuan Campus, as well as liabilities or
obligations, shall be transferred to the University. The positions,
rights, and security of tenure of faculty members and personnel
employed at the NEUST-Nampicuan Campus under existing laws
prior to the integration to the University shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the NEUST-Nampicuan Campus shall be declared the property
of the University, and shall be titled under its name: Provided,
That should the University cease to exist or be abolished, or should.
such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by
the University, the same shall revert to the concerned local
government unit or to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case
may be.

SEC. 6. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997’, shall
form part of this Act, and together, shall serve as the governing
charter of the University.

SEc. 7. All other powers, functions, privileges,
responsibilities, and limitations of the state universities and
their officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to or
imposed upon the NEUST-Nampicuan Campus and its officials,
whenever appropriate. .

Sec. 8. The amount. necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

Skc. 9. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this Act
is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts or
provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 10. All laws, presidential décrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

SEc. 11. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

    

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on September 28, 2020 and January 17, 2022,
respectively.

  

 

Dahan )
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA d
Secretary of the Senate
Approved: APR 27 202
RODRIGO ROA DUTER'
President of the Philippines
oO
;
‘ ?
¢ oS fet

ory

    
 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILI
PRRD 2016 = 022191