S.No. 1616
H. No. 8861

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines

Meteo Manila
Svventeenth Congress

Chird Regular, Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

pte afb

{ RepusticActNo. 11262 ]

AN ACT AMENDING SECTIONS 85 AND 103 OF REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 9593, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS “THE TOURISM
ACT OF 2009”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 85 of Republic Act No. 9593,
otherwise known as “The Tourism Act of 2009”, is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 85. General Principles on the Grant and
Adminisiration of Incentives. —

“a) Recognizing the strategic economic
importance of tourism, the necessity that investments
within TEZs be properly coordinated with
environmental, cultural and developmental
imperatives, and the fundamental differences between

 

the export manufacturing and tourism industries, the
TIEZA shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to
grant the incentives hereinafter provided.

“In the formulation of rules and regulations
defining and implementing these incentives, and
without derogating therefrom, the TIEZA may
coordinate with the Board of Investments and other
government agencies or entities responsible for the
grant and administration of incentives to assist in
the development of a rationalized national investment
incentive policy.

“In the grant of incentives, it shall give equal
preference to large investments, those with great
potential for employment generation and those of local
small and medium enterprises. Registered tourism
enterprises owned and operated by overseas Filipino
investors shall enjoy the same incentives granted to
TEZ operators and registered enterprises in general.
The amount of required investments shall be defined
in the implementing rules and regulations of
Republic Act No. 9593. The incentive schemes set
forth in Sections 86, 87 and 88 of Republic Act
No. 9593 shall be in effect until December 31, 2029,
subject to review by the Joint Congressional
Oversight Committee.

“The TIEZA shall further coordinate with the
Bureau of Customs and the Bureau of Internal
Revenue in the preparation and enforcement of rules
and regulations to prevent the abuse of these
incentives.

“The jurisdiction of the TIEZA in the grant and
administration of incentives shall not be impliedly
repealed or modified.”

“b) The Department and the DTI shall
promulgate rules and regulations to govern the

relationship between TEZs created under this Act,
and economic zones created under Republic Act
No. 7227, otherwise known as the “Bases Conversion
and Development Act of 1992”, and Republic Act
No. 7916, as amended, otherwise known as the
“Special Economic Zone Act of 1995”, where an area
comprising a TEZ overlaps, falls within or
encompasses that of an economic zone: Provided,
That such rules and regulations shall consider the
special nature and requirements of tourism in
relation to other industries, establishments and
operations in economic zones. TEZs proclaimed as
such prior to the passage of this Act shall be
transferred to the supervision of the TIEZA.

“(c) The investment incentives offered under
this Act shall be without prejudice to availing other
incentives provided under other laws, decrees, and
presidential issuances. However, where such other
laws, decrees or presidential issuances provide for
similar or identical incentive schemes, the investor
may only elect to avail of the scheme provided under
one particular law, decree or presidential issuance.

“@) LGUs are likewise encouraged to provide
incentives for tourism enterprises through, among
others, reductions in applicable real estate taxes and
waivers of fees and charges, among others. Should
a LGU grant such incentives, it shall report the
same to the Department and the TPB to assist in
the marketing and promotions of investment in that
LGU.”

SEC. 2. Section 103 of Republic Act No. 9593 is likewise

amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 103. Joint Congressional Oversight
Committee. — A Joint Congressional Oversight
Committee, hereinafter referred to as the “Oversight
Committee”, is hereby constituted in accordance with

4 J

the provisions of this Act. The Oversight Committee This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1616

shall be composed of the Chairpersons of the and House Bill No. 8861 was passed by the Senate and the
Committee on Tourism of both Houses of Congress, \ House of Representativés on February 6, 2019.

the Chairpersons of the Committees on Ways and
Means of both Houses of Congress, the Chairperson
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of
Representatives, the Chairperson of the Committee

c

VON

    
 

on Finance of the Senate, and three (8) additional DANTE/ ROB. P, MALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
members from each House to be designated by the Acfing Sectetary General Secretary of the Senate
Senate President and the Speaker of the House of House of Representatives

Representatives.

“The Secretary shall report to the Oversight
Committee on a monthly basis the latest statistics Approved: APR 1 0 2619
on tourist arrivals and other relevant data. He or
she shall also report, on a quarterly basis, the status
of implementation of this Act based on the monthly
report submitted thereto by all attached agencies of
the Department with respect to the implementation
of their respective programs.”

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
SEC. 3. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders, President of the Philippines
rules and regulations or other issuances or parts thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

O

   

SEC. 4. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen ics
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

5 * - 8
newspaper of general circulation. PRRD 2016 - 01047
bts”

GLORIA APAGAL-ARROYO VICENTE Q. SOTTO III Sn aaa, Gena
Speaker of the House President bf the Senate [ Office of the resent
wpeaner of tne fouse CHEE BENAIE | MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

i
i

of Representatives wee ow
LED COPY |
(ATTY. CONCEDCIGR AERY © FERROLING-ENAD i
He 6-34-2095 - DIRECTOR f {

Approved,