~

H. No. 6656

Congress uf the Philippines
Metra Manila,
Eighteenth Gangress
Secont Regular Session

—_—_i— >

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh

day of July, two thousand twenty.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11520]

AN ACT EXTENDING THE AVAILABILITY OF ‘THE
2020 APPROPRIATIONS TO DECEMBER 31, 2021,
AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 60 OF
THE GENERAL PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 11465 OR THE GENERAL APPROPRIATIONS ACT
OF FISCAL YEAR 2020

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 60 of the 2020 General Appropriations
Act or Republic Act No. 11465 is hereby amended to read as
follows:

 

 

 

“SEC. 60. Cash Budgeting System. All
appropriations authorized in this Act, including
budgetary support to GOCCs, shall be available
for release and disbursement for the purpose
specified, and under the same general and special
provisions applicable thereto, until December 31,
2021. While the amount appropriated herein as
financial assistance to LGUs released during the
fiscal year shall be available for disbursement
for the purpose specified until December 31, 2021.
On the other hand, appropriations for the
statutory shares of LGUs shall be available for
obligations and disbursement until fully expended.

After the end of validity period, all unreleased
appropriations shall lapse, while unexpended
or undisbursed funds shall revert to the
unappropriated surplus of the General Fund in
accordance with Section 28, Chapter 4, Book VI
of E.O. No. 292 and shall not thereafter be
available for expenditure except by subsequent
legislative enactment. Departments, bureaus, and
offices of the National Government, including
constitutional offices enjoying fiscal autonomy,
SUCs and GOCCs, shall strictly observe the
validity of appropriations and the reversion of

funds

The balances of fund transfers between
agencies, instrumentalities and government-owned

International Trading Corporation shall not be
allowed. Any balances of fund transfers in the books
of the Philippine Intemational Trading Corporation
shall revert to the unappropriated surplus of the
General Fund upon the effectivity of this Act.

For FY 2020, the appropriations for
infrastructure capital outlays, including those
subsidy releases to GOCCs for infrastructure
projects, shall be valid for obligation until-
December 31, 2021, while the completion of
construction, inspection, and payment shall
be made not later than December 31, 2021. On the
other hand, appropriations for MOOE and
other capital outlays item shall likewise be
valid for obligation until December 31,- 2021,
while the delivery, inspection and payment shall
be made not later than December 31, 2021.

The DBM is authorized to issue the necessary
guidelines for the effective implementation of the
cash budgeting system.

A report on these releases, obligations and
disbursemerfts shall be submitted'to the Speaker
of the House of Representatives, the President
of the Senate of the Philippines, the House
Committee on Appropriations and the Senate
Committee on Finance, either in printed form
or by way of electronic document.”

or -controlled corporations which, while obligated, Sec. 2. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
remain unused, unutilized, unexpended, and decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations contrary to
undisbursed as of December 31, 2021 shall revert to or inconsistent with provisions of this Act are hereby repealed

the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund. . or modified accordingly.

Agency outsourcing requests or agreements by
agencies, intrumentalities and/or government-owned
or -controlled corporations with the Philippine

 

SEC. 3. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or
in a newspaper of general circulation.

 

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on December 14, 2020,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on December 15, 2020,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on December 16, 2020.

   
 

O &

: i
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: DEC # 9 2204

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines 1

oO

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES Office of the President
PRRD 2016 - 016199 MALACANSNG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFLED COPY
: A o
| arty concer RED
|_ ATTY, CONCERGIGH E. FERROLING-ERAD

Ud. até RT ce