H. No. 7879

¢ Republic of the Philippines
Gangress of the Philippines

Metro Manila
Righteenth Congress

Third Regular Session
—_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

AN ACT ESTABLISHING CAMPUSES OF THE UNIVERSITY
OF EASTERN PHILIPPINES (UEP) IN THE
MUNICIPALITIES OF ALLEN, VICTORIA, AND
LAVEZARES, PROVINCE OF NORTHERN SAMAR,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: of

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “University
of Eastern Philippines (UEP)-Allen, Victoria, and Lavezares
Campusés Act”.

SEc. 2. There are hereby established campuses of the
University of Eastern Phi ippines (UEP), hereinafter referred to
as the University, in the municipalities of Allen, Victoria, and
Lavezares, Province of Northern Samar, to be known as the
UEP-Allen Campus, UVEP-Victoria Campus, and UEP-Lavezares
Campus.

SEc. 3. The UEP-Allen Campus, UEP-Victoria Campus,
and UEP-Lavezares Campus shall primarily provide short-term,
technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate courses
within their respective areas of competency and specialization,
pursuant to the mandate of the University, and according to
their capabilities as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred
to as the Board, may deem necessary for the accomplishment
of the objectives of the University, and those which respond to
the human resources development needs of the Province of
Northern Samar and Region VIII.

The UEP-Allen Campus, UEP-Victoria Campus, and
UEP-Lavezares Campus are also mandated to undertake.
research and extension services.

SEc. 4. The UEP-Allen Campus, UEP-Victoria Campus,
and UEP-Lavezares Campus shall be headed by Campus
Directors who shall render full-time service and shall be
appointed or designated by the Board, upon the recommendation
of the search committee and the President of the University.
Such appointment or designation shall be subject to the
guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the Board: ,

SEc. 5. All assets, real and personal, and records of the
UEP-Allen Campus, UEP-Victoria Campus, and UEP-Lavezares
Campus, as well as liabilities or obligations, shall be transferred
to the University.

All parcels of land belonging to the government
occupied, by the UEP-Allen Campus, UEP-Victoria Campus,
and UEP-Lavezares Campus shall be declared to be the
property of the University and shall be titled under its
name: Provided, That should the University cease to exist or
be abolished, or should such aforementioned parcels of land
be no longer needed by the University, the same shall revert
to the concerned local government units or to the Republic of the
Philippines, as the case may be.

a re

»

SEc. 6. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292,
otherwise known as the “Higher Education Modernization
Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act, and together, shall
serve as the governing charter of the University.

SEc. 7. All other powers, functions, ‘privileges,
responsibilities, and limitations under existing laws shall be
deemed granted to or imposed upon the University and its
officials, whenever appropriate. *

SEC. 8. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

Src. 9. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining
parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force
and effect. ‘

SEC. 10. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 11. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
. general circulation.

Approved,

  

of Representatives

 

cementite a

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philtppines on November 25, 2020 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

mbar

MYRAMARIED. VILLARICA MARK Lio L MENDOZA
Secretary of the Senate br rftary Cxveral
HoxKe of Represoutatives

Approved: F 4
Lapeed smo inte 00 JUN 0 2022

  
     
 

dent, in accordance with Article VI,
Seetion 97 (1) of the Constitution

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

 

= are mae ateneniemomees Fae os ari nr PSS