H. No. 7332 ’

| Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Highteenth Congress
Second Regular Session

—__—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty. ]

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11537]

AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)

YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO MINDANAO .

ISLAMIC TELEPHONE COMPANY, INC., PRESENTLY
KNOWN AS DITO TELECOMMUNITY CORPORATION,
UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8627, ENTITLED “AN ACT
GRANTING THE MINDANAO ISLAMIC TELEPHONE
COMPANY, INC., A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
ESTABLISH, INSTALL, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE
WIRE AND/OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMS IN THE PHILIPPINES”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules
and regulations, the franchise granted to Mindanao Islamic
Telephone Company, Inc., now known as Dito Telecommunity
Corporation, granted under Republic Act No. 8627 and hereunder


referred to as the grantee, its successors or assignees, the right,
privilege and authority to carry on the business of providing
telecommunications services in and between provinces, cities and
municipalities in the Philippines and between the Philippines

and other countries and territories and, for this purpose, to ©

establish, operate, manage, lease, maintain and purchase
telecommunications systems, including mobile, cellular and wired
or wireless telecommunications systems, fiber optics,
satellite transmission and reception systems, and other
telecommunications systems and their value-added services such
as transmission of voice, data, facsimile, control signs, audio and
video, and all other telecommunications systems technologies as
are at present available or will be made available through technical
advances or innovations in the future, or construct, acquire, lease,
and operate or manage transmitting and receiving stations and
switching stations, both for local and international services, lines,
cables or systems, asis, or are, convenient or essential to efficiently
carry out the purpose of this franchise, is hereby renewed for
another twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of this Act.

In this Act, the term “telecommunications” shall include
electronic telecommunications. In addition, the following terms
shall have the meanings set forth herein:

‘Electronic communications network” shall mean (a) a
transmission system for conveyance by means of electrical,
magnetic, or electromagnetic energy, of signals of any description;
and (b) any of the following as are used by the persons providing
the system and in association with it, for conveyance of the signals:
@ apparatus comprised in the system; (ii) apparatus used for the
switching and routing of the systems; and (iii) software and stored.
data.

“Electronic communications service” shall mean a service -

consisting in or having as its principal feature the conveyance by
means of electronic communications network of signals. It
includes wired, wireless, fixed, cellular, and/or mobile, or
integrated telecommunications/computer/electronic services,
including value-added services, or technologies related to such
service, which are present available or made available through
technological advances or innovations in the future, and fixed
and mobile stations.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. ~
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
any way diminishing its own right to use its assigned wavelengths
or frequencies and the quality of transmission or reception thereon
as should maximize rendition of the grantee’s services or the
availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Authority of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) a Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity or the appropriate permits and licenses
for the construction, installation and operation of its
telecommunications systems or facilities. In issuing the certificate,
the NTC shall have the power to regulate and impose such
conditions relative to the construction, operation, maintenance,
or service level of the telecommunications systems or facilities.
Such certificate shail state the areas covered and the date the
grantee shall commence the service. The grantee shall not use~
any frequency in the radio spectrum without authorization from
the NTC. The NTC, however, shall not unreasonably withhold or
delay the grant of such authority, permit or license.

in case of any violation of the provisions ofthis franchise,
the NE shall have the authority to revoke or suspend, after due
process, the permits or licenses it issued pursuant to the franchise.
The assignment of frequencies to the franchisee shall be subject
to review at regular intervals. The NTC shall have the authority
to reallocate redundant frequencies held by the franchisee. The
NTC may recommend to Congress the revocation of the franchise
for any violation of the provisions of this franchise.

Sec. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. — For the
pufpose of erecting and maintaining poles or other supports for
said wires or other conductors for the purpose of laying and
maintaining underground wires, cables, or other conductors, it
shall be lawful for the grantee, its successors or assignees, with
the prior approval of the Department of Public Works and
Highways (DPWH) or the local government unit (LGU) concerned,
as may be appropriate, to make excavations or lay conduits in

any of the public places, roads, highways, streets, lanes, alleys,
avenues, sidewalks, or bridges of the province, cities, or
municipalities: Provided, however, That a public place, road,
highway, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge disturbed,
altered or changed by reason of erection of poles or other supports
or the underground laying of wires, other conductors or conduits,
shall be repaired and replaced in workmanlike manner by said
grantee, its successors or assignees, in accordance with the
standards set by the DPWH or the LGU concerned. Should the
grantee, its successors or assignees, after the ten (10)-day notice
from the said authority, fail, refuse, or neglect to repair or replace
any part of publicplace, road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue,
sidewalk, or bridge altered, changed or disturbed by the said
grantee, its successors.or assignees, then the DPWH or the LGU
concerned shail have the right to have the same repaired and
placed in good order and condition, and charge the grantee, its
successors or assignees at double the amount of the costs and
expenses for such repair or replacement.

SEC. 5. Responsibility to the Public. - The grantee shall
conform to the ethics of honest enterprise and not use its stations
or facilities for obscene or indecent transmission, or for
dissemination of deliberately false information, or willful
misrepresentation, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

The grantee shall operate and maintain all its stations,
lines, cables, systems, and equipment for the transmission and
reception of messages, signals, and pulses in a satisfactory
manner at all times, and as far as economical and practicable,
modify, improve, or change such stations, lines, cables, systems,
and equipment to keep abreast with the advances in science and
technology.

The grantee shall improve and extend its services in areas
not yet served, and in hazard- and typhoon-prone areas that shall
be determined by the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council, or its legal successor, in coordination with
the NTC. .

The grantee shall also improve and upgrade its equipment,
facilities and services, in order to ensure effective compliance with

the objectives of Republic Act No. 10639 or “The Free Mobile
Disaster Alerts Act”.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. — The charges and rates for
telecommunications services of the grantee, except the rates and
charges on those that may hereafter be declared or considered as
nonregulated services, whether flat rates or measured rates or
variation thereof, shall be subject to the approval of the NTC or
its legal successor.

SEC. 7. Right of the Government. —The radio spectrum is
a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony and the
use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the grantee by the State
and may be withdrawn any time after due process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster or disturbance of peace and order: to
temporarily take over and operate the stations, transmitters,
facilities, or equipment of the grantee; to temporarily suspend
the operation of any station, transmitter, facility, or equipment
in the interest of public safety, security, and public welfare; or to
authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency
of the government, upon due compensation to the grantee forthe
use of said stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment during
the period when these shall be so operated.

SEC. 8. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be
extended-and in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from
its expiration on April 24, 2023, unless sooner revoked or cancelled.
This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event
the grantee fails to operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 9. Renewal or Extension of Franchise. — The grantee
shall apply for the renewal or extension of its franchise three (3)
years before its expiration which shall be reckoned from fifteen
(15) days after the publication of the franchise in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

SEC. 10. Right of Interconnection. — The grantee is hereby
authorized to connect or demand connection of its
telecommunications systems to other telecommunications

'

systems installed, operated, and maintained by any other duly

- authorized person or entity in the Philippines for the purpose of
providing extended and improved telecommunications services to
the public, under the terms and conditions mutually agreed upon
by the parties concerned. This right shall be subject to the review
and modification of the NTC.

SEC. 11. Mobile Number Portability. -The grantee shall
provide mobile number portability (MNP) and its implementing
mechanism, including the required infrastructure and processes,
and shall interconnect, directly or indirectly, with the
infrastructure, facilities, systems, or equipment of other
telecommunications franchise grantees. It shall not install network
features, functions, or capabilities that will impede the
implementation of a nationwide MNP system.

SEc. 12. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. - The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, liabilities, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of
accidents causing injury to persons or damage te properties, during
the construction or operation of the stations, transmitters,
facilities, or equipment of the grantee.

Sec. 18. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. - The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity, nor
merge with any other corporation or entity, nor the controlling
interest of the grantee be transferred, simultaneously or
contemporaneously, to any person, firm, company, corporation,
or entity without the prior approval of the Congress of the
Philippines. Congress shall be informed of any sale, lease,
transfer, grant of usufruct, or assignment of franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder, or of the merger or
transfer of the controlling interest of the grantee, within sixty
(60) days after the completion of the said transaction. Failure to
report to Congress such change of ownership shall render the
franchise ipso facto revoked. Any person or entity to which this

’ franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be subject to the
same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 14. Dispersal of Ownership. - In accordance with

mu.n the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in

public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least ©
thirty percent (30%) of its outstanding capital stocks, or a higher
percentage that may hereafter be provided by law, in any
securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from
the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That in cases where public
offer of shares is not applicable, other methods of encouraging
public participation by citizens and corporations operating public
utilities must be implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall
render the franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 15. Business Development and/or Expansion Plan.
—Except where prevented by force majeure, the grantee shall be
obliged to carry out its business development and/or expansion
plan which shall contain, among others, the phases of business
development or expansion, courses of action to achieve the objectives
of the franchise, capitalization, and expected milestones within
the franchise term.

SEC. 16. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. — The grantee shall
create employment opportunities as well as accept on-the-job
trainees in the franchise operations: Provided, That priority shall
be accorded to the residents of the place where the principal office
of the grantee is located: Provided, further, That the grantee
shall ensure that at least sixty percent (60%) of its employees
are regular employees and in no case shall the percentage of
contractual employees, job orders, casuals, and independent
contractors combined, exceed forty percent (40%) of its total
workforce: Provided, finally, That the grantee shall comply with
the applicable labor standards and allowance entitlement under
existing labor laws, rulesand regulations, and similar issuances.

The employment opportunities or jobs created shall be
reflected in the General Information Sheet (GIS) to be submitted
to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) annually.
Inraddition, the grantee shall include in its annual report to
Congress the number of trainees and workers whose employment
status are made regular, and append the appropriate certificate
from the Department of Labor and Employment attesting that
it has complied with the employment requirement under
this section.

°

SEC. 17. Contract with Private Entities. — The grantee is
authorized to contract the installation and operation of the
telecommunications system which is the subject of this grant
with entities with expertise in the field of telecommunications
under such terms and conditions as may be approved by the
Commission.

SEC. 18. Tax Provisions. — The grantee, its successors or
assignees, shall be liable to pay the same taxes on their real estate,
buildings and personal property, exclusive of this franchise, as
other persons or corporations which are now or hereafter may be
required by law to pay, except radio telecommunications and
electronic communications equipment, machinery and spare
parts needed in connection with the business of the grantee which
shall be exempt from customs duties, tariffs and other taxes, as
well as those declared exemptin this section. In addition thereto,
the grantee, its successors or assignees, shall pay a value-added
tax on all gross receipts of the business transacted under this
franchise by the grantee, its successors or assignees, in the
Philippines, in lieu of any and all taxes of any kind, nature or
description levied, established or collected by an authority
whatsoever including, but not limited to, city, municipal,
provincial or national, from which the grantee is hereby expressly
exempted effective from the date of the effectivity of this Act:
Provided, That the grantee, its successors or assignees, shall
continue to be liable for income taxes payable under Title II of the
National Internal Revenue Code pursuant to Section 2 of Executive
Order No. 72 unless the latter enactment is amended or repealed,

in which case the amendment or repeal shall be applicable thereto.

The grantee shall file the return with and pay the tax due
thereon to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue or his duly
authorized representative in accordance with the National Internal
Revenue Code and the return shall be subject to audit by the
Bureau of Internal Revenue.

SEC. 19. Reportorial Requirement. - The grantee shall
submit an annual report on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations to the Congress
of the Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative

. Franchises of the House of Representatives and the Committee

 

on Public Services of the Senate, on or before April 30 of every
year during the term of its franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the roll-out,
development, operation and/or expansion of business; audited
financial statements; latest GIS officially submitted to the SEC,
ifapplicable; certification of the NTC on the status of its permits
and operations; and an update on the dispersal of ownership
undertaking, if applicable.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

The grantee shall make full report to the President and
Congress any form of disclosure of any data or information,
assistance, support or cooperation made to a foreign government,
its instrumentalities or agents. Failure to make such disclosure
shall be a ground for the revocation of the franchise.

The grantee shall also submit the regular security audits
of its network and facilities by the Department of Information -
and Communications Technology DICT) and the National Security
Council (NSC), among others, to the Congress of the Philippines
as part of its reportorial requirements.

SEC. 20. Fine. — Failure of the grantee to submit the
requisite-annual report to Congress shall be penalized with a fine
in the amount of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) per working
day of noncompliance, the effectivity of which shail commence
upon applicability with other telecommunications franchise
grantees: Provided, That in the interim, the grantee shall be
liable to pay the fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working
day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the NTC
from the delinquent franchise grantee separate from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC, and the same shail be
remitted to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 21. Equality of Treatment in the Telecommunications
Industry. ~ Any advantage, favor, privilege, exemption, or
immunity granted under existing franchises, or may hereafter

be granted, upon prior review and approval of Congress, shall
ipso facto become part of previously granted telecommunications
franchises and shall be ‘accorded immediately and unconditionally
to the grantees of such franchises: Provided, however, That the
foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions of
telecommunications franchises concerning territory covered by
the franchise, the life span of the franchise, or the type of service
authorized by the franchise.

SEC. 22. Applicability. — All other provisions of Republic
Act No. 8627 which are not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act and remain unrepealed shall continue to be in full force
and effect: Provided, That all pending suits of whatever kind or
nature, whether civil, criminal or administrative filed by or
against the grantee in connection with the provisions of Republic
Act No. 8627 shall continue to be prosecuted under the said law:
Provided, further, That all valid and existing liabilities, fines,
penalties, surcharges and/or unpaid tax assessments of the grantee
from April 19, 1998 until the effectivity of this new Act shall
remain valid and enforceable under Republic Act No. 8627.

SEC. 23. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privilege
herein provided for.

SEc. 24. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 25. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 26. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

   
  
 

ICENTE C. SOTTO III
President of the Senate

 

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on August 24, 2020,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on March 24, 2021, and
which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on March 25, 2021.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

  
         
  
   

LY]

MAR DRQ L. MENDOZA
g eral
Huse of Representatives

Approved: MAY 1 8 202i

—

RODRI OA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 017312