ios SE EES RESTORING

H. No. 6578
S. No. 1762

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Ailetro Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand seventeen.

[RepuBLic Act No. 110593 j

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A RETIREMENT BENEFIT
SYSTEM IN THE OFFICE OF THE OMBUDSMAN,
AUGMENTING ITS EMPLOYEE BENEFITS, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. ~ This Act shall be known as
the “Retirement Law of the Office of the Ombudsman”.

SEc. 2. Coverage. — This Act shall apply to the
\ Ombudsman and his or her Deputies, the Special Prosecutor,
and to all officials and employees of the Office of the Ombudsman
from Salary Grade 26 to 29 who are performing legal,
prosecution, investigation and corruption prevention functions,
and whose position requires membership in the Philippine bar
or a Master's degree in a relevant field as a qualification.

The Ombudsman shall enjoy the same retirement and
other benefits as those of the Presiding Justice of the Court of
Appeals, provided that he or she shall have served in such
capacity for a full term of seven (7) years, regardless of age or
number of years in government service. The Ombudsman’s
Deputies and the Special Prosecutor, meanwhile, shall enjoy
the same retirement and other benefits as those of an Associate
Justice of the Court of Appeals, provided that they have served
in such capacity for a full term of seven (7) years, regardless of
age or number of years in government service. All other officials
and employees covered by this Act shall enjoy the same
retirement and other benefits as those of the judges of the
Regional Trial Courts, Metropolitan Trial Courts, Municipal
Trial Courts in Cities, Municipal Trial Courts, Municipal
Circuit Trial Courts or other trial courts with the same salary
grades.

Any increase after the effectivity of this Act in the
salaries, allowances or retirement benefits, or any upgrading
of the salary grades or levels, of any or all of the Justices and
judges referred to in the preceding paragraph shall apply to
the corresponding Ombudsman official or employee covered by
this Act.

Sec. 8. Retirement Benefits. — When an official or
employee of the Office of the Ombudsman covered by this Act
who has rendered at least fifteen (15) years of service either in
the Office of the Ombudsman or in any branch of government,
or in both, retires for having attained the age of sixty-five (65)
years or resigns by reason of incapacity to discharge the duties
of the office as certified by the Ombudsman, such official or
employee shall, during the residue of his or her natural life, in
the manner hereinafter provided, receive a retirement pension
based on the highest monthly salary, plus the highest monthly
aggregate of transportation, living and representation
allowances which he or she was receiving at the time of his or
her retirement or resignation.

When an official or employee covered by this Act has
attained the age of sixty (60) years and has rendered at least
fifteen (15) years of service in government, the last five (5)
years of which must have been continuously rendered in the
Office of the Ombudsman, he or she shall likewise be entitled

eo

to retire and receive, during the residue of his or her natural
life, the same benefits provided for in this section: Provided,
however, That those with less than fifteen (15) years of service

in the government shall be entitled to a pro-rata pension
computed as follows:

No. of years Basic Pay plus the Highest Monthly
ingovernment x Aggregate of Transportation, Living
15 years and Representation Allowance

Upon retirement, an Ombudsman official or employee
covered by this Act shall automatically be entitled to a lump
sum of five (5) years’ gratuity computed on the basis of the
highest monthly salary plus the highest aggregate
transportation, living and representation allowances he or she
was receiving on the date of his or her retirement, and
thereafter, upon survival after the expiration of five (5) years,
to further annuity payable monthly during the residue of his
or her natural life pursuant to the first paragraph of this
section: Provided, however, if the reason for the retirement
be any total permanent disability, as certified by the
Ombudsman, contracted during the retiree’s incumbency in
the office and prior to the date of retirement, he or she shall
receive a gratuity equivalent to ten (10) years salary and
allowances aforementioned: Provided, further, That should
the retirement be with the attendance of any partial permanent
disability, as certified by the Ombudsman, contracted during
the retiree’s incumbency and prior to the date of the retirement,
he or she shall receive an additional gratuity equivalent to
two (2) years lump sum that he or she is entitled to under this
Act: Provided, furthermore, That if he or she survives after
ten (10) years or seven (7) years, as the case may be, he or she
shall receive a monthly retirement pension as computed under
this Act during the residue of his or her natural life pursuant
to Section 3 of this Act.

When the Ombudsman, his or her Deputies, or the Special
Prosecutor has completed his or her full term with the Office
of the Ombudsman, regardless of age or years in government
service, he or she shall likewise be entitled to the retirement
benefits under this Act.

SEC. 4. Death Benefits. — In case an official or employee
covered by this Act dies while in actual service, regardless of
his or her age and length of service as required in the first and
second paragraphs of Section 3 of this Act, his or her heirs
shall receive a lump sum of five (5) years’ gratuity computed
on the basis of the highest monthly salary plus the highest
aggregate of transportation, living and representation
allowances being received by the concerned official or employee
at the time of death: Provided, however, That where said
official or employee has rendered at least fifteen (15) years of
government service, either in the Office of the Ombudsman or
in any branch of government, or both, his or her heirs shall
instead be entitled to a lump sum of ten (10) years gratuity
computed on the same basis as indicated in this provision:
Provided, further, That the lump sum of ten (10) years gratuity
shall be received by the heirs of an Ombudsman official or
employee who was killed by reason of his or her duties as such:
Provided, That the official or employee has served in the Office
of the Ombudsman for at least five (5) years regardless of age
at the time of death. When an Ombudsman official or employee
is killed intentionally while in service, the presumption is that
the death is work-related.

Src. 5. Conditions. — To maintain entitlement to the
pension herein provided, no Ombudsman official or employee
covered by this Act shall appear as counsel before any judicial
or quasi-judicial agency in any civil case wherein the
government or any agency, subdivision, or instrumentality
thereof is an adverse party, or in any criminal case wherein
any officer or employee of the government is accused of an
offense committed in relation to their office, or in any
administrative proceeding to maintain an interest adverse to
the government, whether national, provincial, or municipal or
to any of its legally constituted officers.

When an Ombudsman official or employee covered by
and receiving any benefit under this Act shall assume an
elective position in government, he or she shall not, upon
assumption of office and during his or her tenure as an elected
official, receive the monthly pension or any of the allowances
provided in this Act.

on

SEC. 6. Automatic Increase. — All pension benefits of
retired officials or employees of the Office of the Ombudsman
shall be automatically increased whenever there is an increase

in the salary and allowance in the same position from which
they retired.

SEc. 7. Survivorship Benefits. — In case an Ombudsman
official or employee covered by this Act dies during his or her
retirement, the surviving legitimate spouse and dependent
children of said official or employee shall be entitled to receive
all the retirement benefits that the deceased was receiving or
entitled to receive. A “dependent” means a legitimate,
illegitimate or legally-adopted child who is chiefly dependent
on the said deceased Ombudsman official or employee if such
dependent is not more than twenty-one (21) years of age,
unmarried and not gainfully employed, or if such dependent,
regardless of age, is incapable of self-support because of mental
or physical defect. The said surviving legitimate spouse shall
continue to receive such retirement benefits during his or her
lifetime or until he or she remarries: Provided, That if the
surviving spouse is receiving benefits under existing retirement
laws, he or she shall only be entitled to the difference between
the amount provided for in this Act and the benefits that he or
she is receiving.

SEC. 8. Retroaciivity. ~ The benefits mentioned in
Sections 3, 4 and 7 hereof shall be granted to all those who

retire, resign or die one (1) year prior to the effectivity of this
Act.

SEC. 9. Appropriations. — The amount necessary for
the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against
the current year’s savings of the Office of the Ombudsman.
Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continued
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

Sec. 10. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). —
Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
Ombudsman shall promulgate the rules and regulations for
the effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 11. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
section or provision of this Act is declared to be unconstitutional

or invalid, the other sections or provisions of this Act which
are not affected shall continue in full force and effect.

SEC. 12. Repealing Clawse. — All acts, laws, decrees,
executive orders, letters of instructions and regulations or any
part thereof which are inconsistent with any provision of this
Act are hereby repealed and or modified accordingly.

SEC. 13. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or
in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

     
 
  

Approved,
Cstlhun 7
/
VICENTE C. SOTTO I] ALEON D. REZ
President oflthe Senate Speaker of the

of Representati

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 6578
and Senate Bill No. 1762 was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate on May 30, 2018.

dihern.— CAS S9
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA CESAR STRAIT PAREJA

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved: AUG 17 2018

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

   

ee
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 -~ 007262

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CER EERVED COPY

 
  

i
E
t