LA ARE ES REET I COLA TADS

' Meteo Manila

Thick Regular Session

day of July, two thousand eighteen.

AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ORGANIC LAW FOR THE
BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM
MINDANAO, REPEALING FOR THE PURPOSE
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6734, ENTITLED “AN ACT
PROVIDING FOR AN ORGANIC ACT FOR THE
AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO,”
AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9054, ENTITLED
“AN ACT TO STRENGTHEN AND EXPAND THE
ORGANIC ACT FOR THE AUTONOMOUS REGION
IN MUSLIM MINDANAO”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

PREAMBLE

Imploring the aid of Almighty God, in recognition of the
aspirations of the Bangsamoro people and other inhabitants in
the autonomous region in Muslim Mindanao to establish an
enduring peace on the basis of justice, balanced society and
asserting their right to conserve and develop their patrimony,
reflective of their system of life as prescribed by their faith, in
harmony with their customary laws, cultures and traditions,
within the framework of the Constitution and the national
sovereignty as well as territorial integrity of the Republic of the
Philippines, and the accepted principles of human rights, liberty,
justice, democracy, and the norms and standards of international
law, and affirming their distinct historical identity and birthright
to their ancestral homeland and their right to chart their political
future through a democratic process that will secure their identity
and posterity, and allow genuine and meaningful self-governance,
the Filipino people, by the act of the Congress of the Philippines,
do hereby ordain and promulgate this Organic Law for the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.

ARTICLE I
NAME AND PURPOSE

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This law shall be known as
the “Organic Law for ihe Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in
Muslim Mindanao.”

Skc. 2. Name. — The political entity under this Organic
Law shall be known as the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in
Muslim Mindanao, hereinafter referred to as the “Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.”

SEC. 3. Purpose. — The purpose of this Organic Law is to
establish a political entity, provide for its basic structure of
government in recognition of the justness and legitimacy of
the cause of the Bangsamoro people and the aspirations of
Muslim Filipinos and all indigenous cultural communities
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao to
secure their identity and posterity, allowing for meaningful

self-governance within the framework of the Constitution and
the national sovereignty as well as territorial integrity of the
Republic of the Philippines.

ARTICLE II

BANGSAMORO IDENTITY

SEC. 1. Bangsamoro People. — Those who, at the advent
of the Spanish colonization, were considered natives or original
inhabitants of Mindanao and the Sulu archipelago and its
adjacent islands, whether of mixed or of full blood, shall have the
right to identify themselves, their spouses and descendants, as
Bangsamoro.

Stc. 2. Bangsamoro Symbol. — The Bangsamoro
Parliament, hereinafter referred to as the “Parliament,” shall
adopt the official flag, emblem, and hymn of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. The flag of the Republic of the Philippines
shall always be displayed alongside the Bangsamoro flag.
Whenever the Bangsamoro hymn is sung. it shall always be
preceded by the singing of the Philippine National Anthem.

ARTICLE III
TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION

Ske. 1. Territorial Jurisdiction. - Territorial jurisdiction
is the land mass as well as the waters over which the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region has jurisdiction, which shall always be an
integral, indivisible, and inseparable part of the national territory
of the Republic of the Philippines as defined by the Constitution
and existing laws.

SEC. 2. Composition. — The territorial jurisdiction of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, subject to the plebiscite as

provided in Section 3, Article XV of this Organic Law, shall be
composed of:

(a) The present geographical arda known as the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao created under Republic
Act No. 6734, as amended by Republic Act No. 9054, which shall

subsist as such until this Organic Law is ratified through a
plebiscite;

(b) The municipalities of Baloi, Munai, Nunungan, Pantar,
Tagoloan, and Tangkal in the Province of Lanao del Norte that
yoted for inclusion in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
during the 2001 plebiscite;

(©) The following thirty-nine (39) barangays in the
municipalities of Aleosan, Carmen, Kabacan, Midsayap,
Pigkawayan, and Pikit in the Province of North Cotabato that
voted for inclusion in the Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao during the 2001 plebiscite:

(1) Dunguan, Lower Mingading, and Tapodoc in the
Municipality of Aleosan (3);

2) Manarapan and Nasapian in the Municipality of
Carmen (2);

(9) Nanga-an, Simbuhay, and Sanggadong in the
Municipality of Kabacan (3);

(4) Damatulan, Kadigasan, Kadingilan, Kapinpilan,
Kudarangan, Central Labas, Malingao, Mudseng, Nabalawag,
Olandang, Sambulawan. and Tugal in the Municipality of
Midsayap (12);

(5) Lower Baguer, Balacayon, Buricain, Datu Binasing,
Kadingilan, Matilac, Patot, and Lower Pangangkalan in the
Municipality of Pigkawayan (8); and

(6) Bagoinged, Balatican, S. Balong, S. Balongis,
Batulawan, Buliok, Gokotan, Kabasalan, Lagunde, Macabual,
and Macasendeg in the Municipality of Pikit (11);

() The City of Cotabato;

© The City of Isabela in the Province of Basilan; and

@® All other contiguous areas where a resolution of the
local government unit or a petition of at least ten percent (10%) of
the registered voters in the area seeks for their inclusion at least
two (2) months prior to the conduct of the ratification of this
Organic Law.

The establishment of the territorial jurisdiction of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall take effect upon ratification
of this Organic Law by majority of the votes cast in the
abovementioned territorial jurisdiction in a plebiscite conducted
for the purpose: Provided, That in all cases, the political units
directly affected shall vote favorably in the plebiscite, as provided
in Section 3, Article XV of this Organic Law.

Sec. 3. Inland Waters. - Allinland waters such as lakes,
rivers, river systems, and streams within its territorial
jurisdiction shall form part of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
inland waters. The preservation and management of the inland
waters shall be under the Bangsamoro Government as provided
for in Section 22, Article XIII of this Organic Law.

Src. 4. Bangsamoro Municipal and Regional Waters. —
The municipal and regional waters of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall extend up to fifteen (15) kilometers and nineteen
(19) kilometers, respectively, from the low-water mark of the coasts
that are part of the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction.

Where a constituent local government unit of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and an adjoining local
government unit are so situated on opposite shores such that
there is thirty (30) kilometers of waters or less between them, a
line equally distant from the opposite shores shall be drawn to
demarcate the Bangsamoro waters and the municipal waters of
the adjoining local government unit.

In case the constituent local government unit of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and an adjoining local
government unit are so situated on opposite shores that there is
more than thirty (30) kilometers but less than thirty-four (34)
kilometers of waters between them, a line shall be drawn at the

edge of the fifteen-kilometer municipal waters of the adjoining
local government unit to demarcate it from the Bangsamoro
waters.

SEC. 5. Constitwent Units. — The constituent units of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region are the provinces, cities,
municipalities, barangays, and geographical areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.

ARTICLE IV
GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES

Sec. 1. Territorial Integrity and Allegiance. ~ The
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region is an integral, indivisible, and
inseparable part of the territory of the Republic of the Philippines.
The Bangsamoro people shall uphold the Constitution as the
fundamental law of the land and unequivocally owe allegiance
and fidelity to the Republic of the Philippines.

SEC. 2. Self-Governance. — In the exercise of its right to
self-governance, the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region is free to
pursue its political, economic, social, and cultural development
as provided for in this Organic Law.

SEc. 8. Democratic Political System. — The Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region shall have a democratic political system that
allows its people to freely participate in the political processes
within its territorial jurisdiction. The Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall have a parliamentary form of government.

SEc. 4. Electoral System. — The Bangsamoro Government
shall adopt an electoral system which shall be consistent with
national election laws, allow democratic participation, encourage
the formation of genuinely principled political parties, and ensure
accountability.

SEC. 5. Civilian Government. — Governance in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be the responsibility of
the duly elected civilian government. Civilian authority is, at all
times, supreme over the military.

SEC. 6. Promotion of Unity. - The Bangsamoro
Government shall promote unity, peace, justice, and goodwill

among all peoples, as well as encourage a just and peaceful
settlement of disputes.

SEC. 7. Social Justice. - The Bangsamoro Government
shall ensure every Filipino citizen in its territorial jurisdiction
the provision of the basic necessities and equal opportunities in
life. Social justice shall be promoted in all aspects of life and
phases of development in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 8. International Treaties and Agreements. — The
Bangsamoro Government shall respect and adhere to all
international treaties and agreements binding upon the National
Government.

SEC. 9. Righis of Non-Moro Indigenous Peoples. — The
Bangsamoro Government shall recognize and promote the rights
of non-Moro indigenous peoples within the framework of the
Constitution and national laws. -

SEc. 10. Freedom of Choice. — The freedom of choice of
all peoples within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be
respected. Indigenous peoples shall have the freedom to retain
their distinct indigenous and ethnic identity in addition to their
Bangsamoro political identity. There shall be no discrimination
on the basis of identity, religion, and ethnicity.

ARTICLE V
POWERS OF GOVERNMENT

!

SEC. 1. Powers of the National Government. — All powers,
functions, and responsibilities not granted by the Constitution or
by national law to the Bangsamoro Government shall be vested
in the National Government.

Sec. 2. Powers of ihe Bangsamoro Government. — Subject
to Section 20, Article X of the Constitution and%his Organic Law,
the Bangsamoro Government shall exercise its authority over
the following matters without prejudice to the general supervision
of the President of the Republic of the Philippines:

(a) Administration of justice;

(b) Administrative organization;

(©) Agriculture, livestock, and food security;
@) Ancestral domain and natural resources;
© Barter trade and countertrade;

() Budgeting;

(g) Business name registration;

(h) Cadastral land survey;

@ Civil service;

G) Classification of public lands;

(k) Cooperatives and social entrepreneurship;

(@) Creation, division, merger, abolition or alteration of
boundaries of municipalities and barangays;

(m) Creation of government-owned or controlled corporations
and pioneer firms;

(n) Creation of sources of revenues;

(© - Cultural exchange, and economic and technical
cooperation:

(p) Culture and language;
(q) Customary laws;

() Development programs and laws for women, labor, the
youth, the elderly, the difrerently-abled, and indigenous peoples;

(s) Disaster risk reduction and management;

() Ecological solid waste management and pollution

control;

(a) Economic zones, industrial centers, and free ports;
(vy) Education and skills training:
(w) Eminent domain;

(x) Environment, parks, forest management, wildlife, and

nature reserves conservation;

(y) Fishery, marine. and aquatic resources;
(@ Grants and donations;

(aa) Hajj and Umrah;

(bb) Health;

(cc) Housing and human settlements;

(dd) Humanitarian services and institutions;
(ee) Human rights;

® Indigenous peoples’ rights;

(gg) Inland waters;

(hh) Inland waterways for navigation:

Gi) Islamic banking and finance;

. %
(i) Labor, employment, and occupation;

(kk) Libraries and museums, and historical, cultural, and
archaeological sites;

@) Loans, credits, and other forms of indebtedness;

(mm) Mechanisms for consultations for women and
marginalized sectors;

(an) People’s organizations;

(oo) Power sector investments;

(pp) Public utilities’ operations:

(qq) Public works and infrastructure;
Gv) Quarantine regulations;

(ss) Registration of births, marriages, and deaths, copies
to be furnished the Philippine Statistics Authority;

(tt) Regulation of the manufacture and cistribution of food,
drinks, drugs, and tobacco;

(uv) Science and technology, research councils and
scholarship programs;

(vv) Social services, social welfare, and charities;
(ww) Sports and recreation;

(xx) Technical cooperation for human resource
development;

(yy) Tourism development;
(zz) Trade and industry;

(aaa) Urban and rural planning development;

ll
(bbb) Urban land reform and land use; and

(ccc) Water supply and services, flood control, and
irrigation systems.

SEC. 3. General Welfare. - The Bangsamoro Government
shall exercise the powers expressly granted, those necessarily
implied therefrom, as well as powers necessary, appropriate, or
incidental for its efficient and effective governance and those which
are essential to the promotion of general welfare. Within its
territorial jurisdiction, the Bangsamoro Government shall ensure
and support, among other things, the preservation and enrichment
of culture, promote health and safety, enhance the right of the
people to a balanced ecology, encourage and support the
development of appropriate and self-reliant scientific and
technological capabilities, improve public morals, enhance
economic prosperity and social justice, promote full employment
among its residents, maintain peace and order, and preserve the
comfort and convenience of its inhabitants.

ARTICLE VI
INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS

SEC. 1. General Supervision. - The President shall
exercise general supervision over the Bangsamoro Government
io ensure that laws are faithfully executed. The President may
suspend the Chief Minister for a period not exceeding six (6)
months for willful violation of the Constitution, national laws, or
this Organic Law.

S&C. 2. Intergovernmental Relations Mechanism. - There
is hereby created a National Government-Bangsamoro
Government Intergovernmental Relations Body, hereinafter
referred to as “Intergovernmental Relations Body,” to coordinate
and resolve issues on intergovernmental relations through regular
consultation and continuing negotiation in a non-adversarial
manner.

¢

The Intergovernmental Relations Body shall exhaust all
means to resolve issues brought before it. Unresolved issues shall
be elevated to the President, through the Chief Minister.

The National Government and the Bangsamoro
Government shall each appoint representatives to the
Intergovernmental Relations Body. The Intergovernmental
Relations Body shall be supported by a joint secretariat.

SEC. 3. Philippine Congress-Bangsamoro Parliament
Forum. — There shall be created a Philippine Congress-
Bangsamoro Parliament Forum for purposes of cooperation and
coordination of legislative initiatives.

SEC. 4. Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board. — There
is hereby created an Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board that
shall address revenue imbalances and fluctuations in regional
financial needs and revenue-raising capacity of the Bangsamoro
Government, whose functions and composition are provided for
in Sections 37 to 38, Article XII of this Organic Law.

SEC. 5. Joint Body for the Zones of Joint Cooperation. —
There is hereby created a Joint Body for the Zones of Joint
Cooperation, which shall be responsible for formulating policies
relating to the Zones of Joint Cooperation in the Sulu Sea and
Moro Gulf as provided for in Section 19, Article XIII of this
Organic Law. :

Src. 6. Intergovernmenial Infrastructure Development
Board. — There is hereby created an Intergovernmental
Infrastructure Development Board, which shall be responsible
for coordinating and synchronizing national and Bangsamoro
infrastructure development plans.

The Intergovernmental Infrastructure Development Board
shall be composed of the heads or representatives of the appropriate
ministries and offices in the Bangsamoro Government. The
National Government shall likewise be represented in the
Intergovernmental Infrastructure Development Board by the
Secretary of Public Works and Highways and such other officials
as may be necessary to be designated by the Secretary of Public
Works and Highways.

SEC. 7. Intergovernmental Energy Board. - There is
hereby created an Intergovernmental Energy Board. It shall
resolve all matters specified in Section 36, Article XII of this
Organic Law and other energy issues referred to it by the
Intergovernmental Relations Body. It shall be composed of the
representatives of the National Government and the Bangsamoro
Government from their respective energy regulatory commissions
and electrification administrations.

SEC. 8. Bangsamoro Sustainable Development Board. —
The Parliament shall create a Bangsamoro Sustainable
Development Board composed of representatives from the National
Government and the Bangsamoro Government. The Bangsamoro
Sustainable Development Board shall ensure the integration and
harmonization of economic, social, and envirohmental
considerations as vital dimensions of sustainable development
policy and practice in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The funding support for the Bangsamoro Sustainable
Development Board shall be included in the annual budget of the
Bangsamoro Government. However, ifthere are revenues collected
from the exploration, development, and utilization of any natural
resources within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, a certain
percentage of the revenues shall be allocated for the operation of
the Bangsamoro Sustainable Development Board, as may be
provided in a law to be passed by the Parliament.

Ssc. 9. Council of Leaders. — There shall be a Council of
Leaders that shall advise the Chief Minister on matiers of
governance in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall
consist of the following members:

(a) Chief Minister as head of the council;

(b) Members of the Congress of the Philippines from the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

(©) Provincial governors, and mayors of chartered cities in
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

@) Representatives of traditional leaders, non-Moro
indigenous communities, women, settler communities, the Ulama,
youth, and Bangsamoro communities outside of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region; and

@) Representatives of other sectors.

The mechanism of representation and number of
representatives in paragraphs (d) and (e) shall be determined by
the Parliament. The representation of the non-Moro indigenous
communities shall be pursuant to their customary laws and
indigenous processes.

SEC. 10. Bangsamoro Government and its Constituent
Local Government Units. — The authority of the Bangsamoro
Government to regulate the affairs of its constituent local
government units shall be guaranteed in accordance with this
Organic Law and a Bangsamoro local government code to be
enacted by the Parliament. The privileges already enjoyed by
local government units under Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise
known as the “Local Government Code of 1991,” as amended,
and other existing laws shall not be diminished.

The Parliament may create, divide, merge, abolish, or
substantially alter boundaries of municipalities or barangays in
accordance with a law enacted by the Parliament. The
municipalities or barangays created, divided, merged, or whose
boundaries are substantially altered, shall be entitled to their
appropriate share in the national taxes or Internal Revenue
Allotment: Provided, That the criteria laid down in Republic Act
No. 7160, as amended, and other national laws shall he satisfied:
Provided, further, That it shall be approved by a majority of the
votes cast in a plebiscite in the political units directly’affected.

When such acts require the creation of a legislative district,
the Bangsarnoro Government shall cooperate and coordinate with
the National Government through the Philippine Congress-
Bangsamoro Parliament Forum to prioritize the deliberations on
the creation of a legislative district.

Nothing in this Organic Law shall be construed to allow
the Bangsamoro Government to create legislative districts.

SEC. 11. Bangsamoro Participation in National
Government. — As far as practicable, the Bangsamoro
Government shall be represented in the departments, offices,
commissions, agencies and bureaus of the National Government
that implement and enforce policies, programs, and projects of
the National Governmentin the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 12. Assistance to Other Bangsamoro Communities.
— The National Government shall ensure the protection of the
rights of the Bangsamoro people residing in communities outside
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and undertake programs
for their rehabilitation and development. The Bangsamoro
Government, in coordination with the local government units
where these communities are located and the appropriate national
government agencies, shall provide assistance to enhance their
economic, social, and cultural development.

SEC. 13. National Programs and Projects. — National
programs and projects such as the Pantawid Pamiiyang Pilipino
Program, Health Facility Enhancement Program, School Building
Program, retained hospitals of the Department of Health,
PhilHealth, social pension for senior citizens, and the Task Force
Bangon Marawi shall continue to be funded by the National
Government, without prejudice to the power of the Bangsamoro

Government to provide for supplemental funding for such programs
and projects.

ARTICLE VII
BANGSAMORO GOVERNMENT

SEC. 1. Seat of Government. — The Parliament shall fix
by law the permanent seat of the Bangsamoro Government
anywhere within the territorial jurisdiction of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region taking into consideration accessibility and
efficiency in which its mandate may be carried out under this
Organic Law.

SEc. 2. Powers of Government. — fhe powers of
government shall be vested in the Parliament which shall exercise
those powers and functions expressly granted to it in this Organic

Law, and those necessary for, or incidental to, the proper
governance and development of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region. It shall set policies, legislate on matters within its
authority, and elect a Chief Minister who shall exercise executive
authority on its behalf. :

Src. 3. Legislative Authority. - The Parliament shall
have the authority to enact laws on matters that are within the
powers and competencies of the Bangsamoro Government.

SEc. 4. Executive Authority. — The executive function
and authority shall be exercised by the Cabinet which shall be
headed by a Chief Minister. The Chief Minister shall be elected
by a majority vote of all the members of the Parliament.

The Chief Minister shall nominate two (2) Deputy Chief
Ministers who shall be elected by the Parliament, as provided for
in Section 35 of this Article, and appoint the members of the
Cabinet, majority of whom shall come from the Parliament.

Bangsamoro Parliament

SEC. 5. Powers. — The Parliament shall have the following
powers:

(a) Enact laws to promote, protect, and ensure the general
welfare of the Bangsamoro people and other inhabitants in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

(b) Call for a referendum on important issues affecting the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

(©) Enacta law on initiatives;

(a) Conduct inquiries in aid of legislation in accordance
with its rules. The rights of persons appearing in or affected by
such inquiry shall be respected;

(e) Enact a law that allows the Chief Minister, Speaker of
the Parliament, and the Presiding Justice of the Shariah High
Court to augment any item in the general appropriations law for
their respective offices from savings in other items of their
respective appropriations;

() Enact alaw within the competencies of the Bangsamoro
Government to regulate the grant of regional franchises and
concessions, and empower the Chief Minister to grant leases,
permits, and licenses over agricultural lands and for forest
management;

(g) Discipline its members as provided in Section 26,
Article VI of this Organic Law;
£
(h) Enact laws declaring Bangsamoro holidays; and

(i) Be consulted on matters affecting the environment.

Sec. 6. Composition. — The Parliament shall be composed
of eighty (80) members, unless otherwise increased by the Congress
of the Philippines.

Src. 7. Classification and Allocation of Seats. ~ The seats
in the Parliament shall be classified and allocated as follows:

(a) Party Representatives. - One-halfof the members of
the Parliament shall be representatives of political parties who
are elected through a system of proportional representation based
on the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction.

Any organized group in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
may register as a political party with the Bangsamoro Electoral
Office, with qualifications to be prescribed by the Bangsamoro
Electoral Code.

Each registered political party shall submit to the
Bangsamoro Electoral Office before the election a manifestation
of intent to participate in the parliamentary¢lection of party
representatives in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region,

incorporating therein a list of nominees, ranked from one (1) to
forty (40), from which party representatives shall be chosen in
case they obtain the required number of votes. No person shall be
nominated in more than one (1) list.

The number of seats allocated for each political party shall
be based proportionately on the percentage of votes obtained by
each political party as against the total votes cast in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region for the election of party
representatives.

Any elected party representative who changes political party
affiliation during the representative's term of office shall forfeit
the seat in the Parliament: Provided, That if the elected party
representative changes political party affiliation within six (6)
months before an election, the same person shall not be eligible
for nomination as party representative under the new party or
organization.

(b) Parliamentary District Seats. — Not more than forty
percent (40%) of the members of the Parliament shall be elected
from single member parliamentary districts apportioned for the
areas and in the manner provided for by the Parliament. For the
first parliamentary election following the ratification of this
Organic Law, the allocation of the parliamentary district seats
shall be determined by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority as
provided for in Section 4, Article XVI of this Organic Law. In the
allocation of district seats, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority
shall adhere to the standards set in Section 10, Article VII of this
Organic Law.

The Parliament may undertake by law new redistricting
in order to ensure a more equitable representation of the
constituencies in the Parliament.

The district representatives shall be elected through direct
plurality vote by the registered voters in the parliamentary
districts.

(©) Reserved Seats and Sectoral Representatives. —
Reserved seats and sectoral representatives shall constitute at
least ten percent (10%) of the members of the Parliament, which

shall include two (2) reserved seats each for non-Moro indigenous
peoples and settler communities. Women, youth, traditional
leaders, and the Ulama shall have one sectoral seat each:
Provided, That the reserved seats and sectoral representatives
shall in no case be less than eight (8) seats.

The Parliament shall determine the manner of election of
the reserved seats and sectoral representatives.

For the first parliamentary election following the ratification
of this Organic Law, the allocation of reserved and sectoral
representative seats shall be determined by the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority as provided for in Section 4, Article XVI of
this Organic Law.

if

SEC. 8. Election for Reserved Seats for Non-Moro
Indigenous Peoples. — Notwithstanding the immediately
preceding sections, reserved seats for non-Moro indigenous peoples,
such as Teduray, Lambangian, Dulangan Manobo, B’laan, and

Higaonon, shall adhere to their customary laws and indigenous
processes based on the following:

(a) Primacy of customary laws and practices;
(b) Primacy of consensus building;

(c) Acceptability to the community:

(@) Inclusivity and full participation;

(e) Representation of the collective interests and
aspirations of non-Moro indigenous peoples;

() Sustainability and strengthening of indigenous political
structures;

(g) Track record and capability; and

(h) Gender equality.

oe

Sec. 9. Regional Parties. — A free and open regional party
system shall be allowed to evolve according to the free choice of
the people. Towards this end, only regional political parties duly
accredited by the Bangsamoro Electoral Office, as approved by
the Commission on Elections, shall participate in the
parliamentary elections in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.
The Bangsamoro Government shall ensure the inclusion of
women’s agenda and the involvement of women and the youth in
the electoral nominating process of the political parties.

SEC. 10. Redistricting for Parliamentary Membership. —
The Parliament shall have the power to reconstitute by law the
parliamentary districts apportioned among the provinces, cities,
municipalities, and geographical areas of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region to ensure equitable representation in the
Parliament. The redistricting, merging, or creation of
parliamentary districts shall be based on the number of
inhabitants and additional provinces, cities, municipalities, and
geographical areas, which shall become part of the Bangsamoro
territorial jurisdiction.

For the purpose of redistricting, parliamentary districts
shall be apportioned based on population and geographical area:
Provided, That each district shall comprise, as far as practicable,
contiguous, compact, and adjacent territorial jurisdiction:
Provided, further, That each district shall have a population of
at least one hundred thousand (100,000).

SEC. 11. Term of Office. — The term of office of the
members of the Parliament shall be three (3) years: Provided,
That no member shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive
terms. Voluntary renunciation of office for any length of time or
the dissolution of the Parliament by the Wali shall not be
considered as an interruption in the continuity of the service for
the full term for which the member was elected.

SEC. 12. Qualifications. — No person shall be a member
of the Parliament unless the person is a citizen of the Philippines,
at least twenty-five (25) years of age on the day of the election,
able to read and write, and a registered voter in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.

/ Acandidate for youth representative shall not be less than
eighteen (18) years and not more than thirty (30) years of age at
the time of election.

Acandidate for district representative must be a registered
voter of the district in which the person is a candidate, and has
resided in the district for at least one (1) year immediately
preceding the day of the election.

SEC. 13. Salaries of Members of the Parliament. — The
Parliament shall determine the salaries and emoluments of its
members: Provided, That the salaries and emoluments of the
members of the Parliament shall not be higher than those of a
Provincial Governor: Provided, further, That the salaries and
emoluments of the Deputy Chief Ministers and the Speaker of
the Parliament shall be one salary grade higher than those of the
members: Provided, furthermore, That the salaries and
emoluments of the Chief Minister shall not be higher than those
of the Members of the Congress of the Philippines.

The Parliament shall adopt the Revised Compensation and
Position Classification System of the National Government as
provided for in Republic Act No. 6758, as amended, and relevant
executive issuances: Provided, finally, That no increase in the
compensation shall take effect until after the expiration of the
full term of all the members of the Parliament approving such
increase.

For the first Parliament, the salaries and emoluments of
its members shall be determined by a law to be passed by the
Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

Members of the Parliament shall not receive during their
tenure other salary and emoluments from the Bangsamoro
Government or from the National Government.

SEC. 14. Disclosure. - Members of the Parliament shall,
upon their assumption of office, make a full disclosure of their
financial and business interests, including the$e of their spouses
and children, They shall notify the Parliament of any potential
conflict of interest that may arise from the filing of bills or
resolutions of which they are authors.

SEC. 15. Prohibition Against Conflict of Interest. — The
Chief Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers, members of the Cabinet,
and members of the Parliament, during their term, shall not
engage, directly or indirectly, in any business or commercial
enterprise in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region where there
may be a conflict of interest in the exercise of their functions.

SEC. 16. Prohibited Business and Pecuniary Interest. —

(a) Itshall be unlawful for the Chief Minister, Deputy Chief
Ministers, members of the Cabinet, and members of the Parliament.
to directly or indirectly:

(1) Engage in any business transaction with the
Bangsamoro Government or with any ofits authorized boards,
officials, agents, or attorneys, whereby money is to be paid, or
property or any other thing of value is to be transferred, directly
or indirectly, out of the resources of the Bangsamoro Government
to such person or firm;

(2) Hold such interests in any cockpit or other games
licensed by the Bangsamoro Government:

(3) Purchase any real estate or other property forfeited in
favor of the Bangsamoro Government for unpaid taxes or
assessment, or by virtue of a legal process at the instance of the
Bangsamoro Government;

(4) Be asurety for any person contracting or doing business
with the Bangsamoro Government for which a surety is required;
and

(5) Possess or use any public property of the Bangsamoro
Government for private purposes.

(b) Allother prohibitions governing the conduct of national
public officers relating to prohibited business and pecuniary
interest as provided for under Republic Act No. 6713, otherwise
known as the “Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public
Officials and Employees,” and other national laws shall also be
applicable to the Chief Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers, members
of the Cabinet, and members of the Parliament.

SEC. 17. Practice of Profession. -—

(a) The Chief Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers, and
members of the Cabinet are prohibited from practicing their
profession or engaging in any occupation other than the exercise
of their functions as officials of the Bangsamoro Government.

(b) Members of the Parliament who are not holding Cabinet
positions may practice their professions, engage in any occupation,
or teach in schools except during session hours: Provided, That
members of the Parliament who are also members of the Philippine
Bar shall not:

(1) Appear as counsel before any court in anyrcivil case
wherein the Bangsamoro Government or any office, agency, or
instrumentality of the government is the adverse party;

(2) Appear as counsel in any criminal case wherein an
officer or employee of the National Government or the Bangsamoro

Government is accused of an offense committed in relation to the
office;

(3) Collect any fee for appearance in administrative
proceedings involving the Bangsamoro Government: and

(4) Use property and personnel of the government except
when the member concerned is defending the interest of the
government.

(©) Doctors of medicine may practice their profession even
during official hours of work only on occasions of emergency:
Provided, That the members concerned do not derive monetary
compensation therefrom.

SEC. 18. Statement of Assets, Liabilities, and Net Worth.
— Officials and employees of the Bangsamoro Government shall
file sworn statements of assets, liabilities, and net worth, lists of
relatives within the fourth civil degree of consapiguinity or affinity
in government service, financial and business interests, and
personal data sheets as required by national law.

SEC. 19. Forfeiture of Seat. — The seat of a member of
the Parliament shall be forfeited under any of the following
circumstances:

(a) Voluntary resignation in the form of either a written
or oral declaration in the Parliament;

(b) Conviction of a grave offense by a regular court or a
finding of guilt of a grave offense as defined by the rules of the
Parliament for treason, high crimes, heinous crimes, crimes
against morality, or other crimes punishable by more than
six (6) years of imprisonment;

(©) Permanent physical or mental incapacity that makes
the Member unable to discharge the duties of a member, or death;

(@ Substitution by the party to which the member belongs
with another member of the same party, the member having
been elected under the proportional representation system;

@) Expulsion by the Parliament for disorderly behavior,
with the concurrence of two-thirds of all its members; and

(®) Such other grounds as may be provided in the Bangsamoro Electoral Code.

SEC. 20. Filling of Vacancy. — In case of a vacancy of a
proportional representation seat, the party to which that seat
belongs shall fill the vacancy.

Incase of a vacancy of a district seat by an affiliated member
of the Parliament, the party to which the member belongs shall,
within thirty (30) days from the occurrence of such vacancy,
nominate a new member who shall be appointed by the Chief
Minister subject to the Bangsamoro Electoral Code.

In case of a vacancy in the seat occupied by an unaffiliated
member of the Parliament occurring at least one (1) year before
the expiration of the term of office, a special election may be called
to fill such vacancy in the manner prescribed by a law enacted by
the Parliament.

The appointed or elected member of the Parliament, as the
case may be, shall serve the unexpired term of the vacant office.

SEC. 21. Privileges and Immunities. — Any member of
the Parliament who commits an offense within the Bangsamoro
territorial jurisdiction that is punishable by not more than six (6)
years imprisonment, shall be privileged from arrest while the
Parliament is in session.

No member of the Parliament shall be questioned or be
held liable in any other place for any speech or debate in the
Parliament or in any of its committees.

SEC. 22. Sessions of the Parliament. — The Parliament
shall conduct its regular session forty-five (45) days &fter the
election of the Parliament up to thirty (30) days before the opening
ofits next regular session, unless earlier dissolved by a vote of no
confidence. A special or emergency session may be called by the
Speaker, upon the request of the Chief Minister or by a majority
of all the members of the Parliament.

SEC. 23. Officers of the Parliament. ~ On the first day of
session of the Parliament following their election, the members
shall elect by a majority vote of all its members the Speaker, 2
Deputy Speaker, and the other officers of the Parliament, as the
rules of the Parliament may provide.

In case of death, removal, resignation, or permanent
disability or legal incapacity of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker
shall act as Speaker until a new Speaker shall have been elected
by the Parliament.

SEC. 24. Presiding Officer. - The Speaker, Deputy
Speaker, or any other person presiding over the Parliament shall:

(a) Secure the honor and dignity of the Parliament;

(b) Ensure the rights and privileges of al] the members;
and ¥

(c) Assure public access to the proceedings of the
Parliament and its committees.

Src. 25. Rules of the Parliament. — The Parliament shall
adopt its own rules for the conduct of its business.

(a) Every bill passed by the Parliament shall embrace only
one subject which shall be expressed in the title thereof.

(b) No bill shall become a law in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region unless it has passed three (3) readings on
separate days and printed copies thereof in its final form have
been distributed to members of the Parliament three (3) days
before its passage, except when the Chief Minister certifies to the
necessity of its immediate enactment to meet a public calamity
or emergency.

(©) Every bill passed by the Parliament shall, before it
becomes a law, be presented to the Chief Minister. The Chief
Minister shall sign the bill within thirty (30) days after the date
of its receipt, otherwise, it shail become a law as if the Chief
Minister had signed it.

@) The Speaker of the Parliament shall, within ten (10)
working days from their approval thereof, submit to the President
and to the Congress of the Philippines a certified true copy of all
laws and resolutions approved by the Parliament.

) The rules of the Parliament or any amendment thereto
shall be effective fifteen (15) days following its complete publication
in a regional newspaper of general circulation.

SEC. 26. Proceedings. — A majority of all the members of the Parliament shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner, and under such penalties as the Parliament may provide.

The Parliament may punish its members for disorderly
behavior, and with the concurrence of two-thirds of all its members,
suspend or expel a member. A penalty of suspension, when
imposed, shall not exceed sixty (60) days.

The Parliament shall keep a Journal of its proceedings,
and from time to time publish the same, excepting such parts as
may, in its judgment affect national and/or regional security;
and the yeas and nays on any question shall, at the request of
one-fifth of the members present be entered into the Journal. The
Parliament shall also keep a record of its proceedings.

SEC. 27. Appropriations. — No public money, including
the block grant and other national government subsidies and
support funds given in lump sum, shall be spent without an
appropriations law clearly defining the purpose for which it is
intended. The Parliament shall pass an annual appropriations
law.

SEc. 28. Budget. — The form, content, and manner of
preparation of the Bangsamoro budget shall be prescribed by law
enacted by the Parliament. consistent with existing laws, rules
and regulations of the National Government. For this purpose,
the Parliament shall create a Bangsamoro Budget Office.

SEC. 29. Reenacied Budget. — If, by the end of a fiscal
year, the Parliament shall have failed to pass the Bangsamoro
appropriations bill for the ensuing fiscal year, the Bangsamoro
appropriations law for the preceding fiscal year shall be deemed
reenacted and shall remain in force and effect until a new
Bangsamoro appropriations bill is passed by the Parliament.

i

Only the annual appropriations for salaries and wages of
existing positions, statutory and contractual obligations, and
operating expenses authorized in the annual budget of the
preceding year shall be deemed reenacted and the disbursement
of funds shall be in accordance therewith.

Executive Officers

SEC. 30. Qualifications of the Chief Minister. - No person
shall be elected as Chief Minister unless a member of the
Parliament, anatural-born citizen of the Philippines, and at least
twenty-five (25) years of age on the day of the election.

SEC. 31. Election of the Chief Minister. — On the first day
of session following the election of the members of the Parliament,
the Parliament shall elect the Chief Minister by a majority vote
of allits members.

If no member of the Parliament obtains the majority vote
necessary to be elected Chief Minister in the first round of voting,
a runoff election shall be conducted: Provided, That the members
of the Parliament shall elect the Chief Minister from the two (2)
candidates who obtained the highest number of votes cast in the
first round.

SEc. 32. Powers, Duties, and Functions of the Chief
Minister. - The Chief Minister shall exercise the following powers,
duties, and functions:

(a) Head the Bangsamoro Government:

(b) Appoint heads of ministries, agencies, bureaus, and
offices of the Bangsamoro Government or other officers of
Bangsamoro-owned or controlled corporations or entities with
original charters;

(c) Appoint other officers in the Bangsamoro Government,
as may be provided by the Parliament;

() Formulate a platform of government subject to the
approval of the Parliament;

(e) Issue executive orders and other policies of the
Bangsamoro Government;

() Represent the Bangsamoro Government in the affairs
of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

(g) Proclaim a state of calamity whenever typhoons, flash
floods, earthquakes, tsunamis, or other natural or man-made
calamities that cause widespread damage or destruction to life or
property in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region; and

(h) Exercise such other powers and functions inherent to
the office.

SEC. 33. Administration of the Oath of Office. - The Wali
shall administer the oath of office of the Chief Minister and all
the members of the Parliament upon their election.

SEC. 34. Membership in Other Offices. - The Chief
Minister shall be a member of the Mindanao Development
Authority. The Chief Minister shall be an ex officio member of
the National Security Council and the National Economic and
Development Authority Board on matters concerning the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 35. Deputy Chief Ministers. — There shall be two (2)
Deputy Chief Ministers who shall be nominated by the Chief
Minister and elected by members of the Parliament.

The Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall have three (3)
subregions, namely: south western Mindanao, north central
Mindanao, and south central Mindanao, all within the
Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction. To ensure representation of
all the subregions, the two (2) Deputy Chief Ministers shall come
from the other two (2) subregions different from that of the Chief
Minister.

i
For purposes of this provision, the coverage of each
subregion shall be determined by the Parliament.

The Deputy Chief Ministers may each hold a cabinet position.

In case of death, permanent physical «ower incapacity,
removal from office, or resignation of the Chief Minister, the
Deputy Chief Minister, more senior in age, shall act as the Chief

Minister until the Parliament shall have elected a new Chief
Minister. The election shall be held within thirty (30) days from
the occurrence of the vacancy.

SEC. 36. Dissolution of Parliament Upon a Voie of No
Confidence. ~ Within seventy-two (72) hours upon a vote of no
confidence of at least two-thirds of all the members of the
Parliament against the government of the day, the Chief Minister
shall advise the Wali to dissolve the Parliament and call for a
new parliamentary election. The election for a new Parliament
shall be held not later than one hundred twenty (120) days from
the date of dissolution.

The incumbent Chief Minister and the Cabinet shall
continue to conduct the affairs of the Bangsamoro Government
until a new Parliament is convened and a new Chief Minister is
elected and qualified.

In no case shall the Wali countermand the advice of the
Chief Minister.

SEC. 37. Prohibitions During Holdover. — After a vote of
no confidence against the government of the day shall have been
obtained, and before a new government is formed, the Chief
Minister and the Cabinet shall continue to perform their duties
and functions: Provided, That they shall not contract loans,
approve new contracts. or disburse public funds except those for
payment of salaries and wages and expenses for the regular
operations of the government.

The Chief Minister and the Cabinet, during the holdover
period, shall not make appointments, except temporary
appointments to positions when continued vacancies therein will
prejudice public service or endanger public safety.

Administrative Organization

SEC. 38. Organization of the Bureaucracy. — The
Bangsamoro Government shall have the power to create offices
and organize its own bureaucracy. It may establish other offices
and institutions necessary for the exercise of its functions and
delivery of social services in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC 39. Civil Service. — The Civil Service Commission
shall establish a regional Civil Service field office and other field
offices as may be needed in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
for the efficient performance of its powers and duties.

The Bangsamoro Government shall enact a civil service
law: Provided, That it shall be in accordance with existing
national laws. In case of conflict with the national laws, the
Constitution and existing national civil service laws, rules, and
regulations shall prevail.

This law shall govern the conduct of civil servants, the
qualifications for nonelective positions, adopt the merit and fitness
system, and protect civil service eligibles in various government
positions, including government-owned or controlled egrporations
with original charters in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.
The Bangsamoro Government shall have disciplinary authority
over its own officials and employees.

SEc. 40. Bangsamoro Electoral Office. - The Commission
on Elections shall establish a Bangsamoro Electoral Office under
its supervision and control which shall implement and enforce
its orders, rulings, and decisions. The budget of the Bangsamoro
Electoral Office shall be part of the yearly budget of the
Commission on Elections.

SEC. 41. Accountability of Public Officers. — Public office
is a public trust. Public officers and employees shall at all times
be accountable to the people, serve them with utmost
responsibility, integrity, loyalty, and efficiency, act with
patriotism and justice, and lead modest lives.

SEC. 42. Other Offices. - The Parliament may create other
offices such as for the youth, women, settler communities, disaster
risk reduction and management, and planning and development,
including a Bangsamoro Pilgrimage Authority which shall exercise
jurisdiction over Hajj and Umrah matters affecting pilgrims from
within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

J
¥

ARTICLE VIII
WALI

SEc. 1. Appointment of Wali. - Consistent with a
parliamentary form of government, there shall be a Wali who
shall serve as the ceremonial head of the Bangsamoro
Government.

The Parliament shall issue a resolution reflecting its
consensus on the selection of the Wali from a list of names of
eminent residents of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
submitted by the Council of Leaders.

SEC. 2. Qualifications of the Wali. - The Wali shall possess
the following qualifications at the time of his nomination:

(a) Natural-born citizen of the Philippines;
(b) Able to read and write in Filipino, English, or Arabic;
(ec) At least forty (40) years of age:

() Avesident of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region for
at least fifteen (15) years; and

(e) No prior conviction for any criminal or administrative
offense by any court or quasi-judicial body.

SEc. 3. Ceremonial and Ministerial Duties of the Wali.—
The Wali shall only perform ceremonial duties such as opening
the session of the Parliament, administering the oath of office,
dissolving the Parliament upon the advice of the Chief Minister
after a vote of no confidence against the government of the day,
calling for election of a new Parliament, and attending to public
ceremonies.

SEC. 4. Oath and Term of Office of the Wali. — The first
Wali, who shall hold office for three (3) years, shall be appointed
by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority through a resolution

reflecting its consensus. The Wali shail take his oath of office
before a duly authorized officer. Each succeeding Wali shall hold
office for a term of six (6) years.

Src. 5. Per Diem of the Wali. — The Wali shall receive

per diem, subject to existing rules and regulations on the grant
of per diems.

The per diem shall be sourced from the funds of the
Bangsamoro Government and shall be provided for in its annual
appropriations law.

SEC. 6. Grounds for Removal of the Wali. — The Wali
may be removed from office by the Parliament on any of the
following grounds:

(a) Failure to dissolve the Parliament after a vote of no
confidence;

(b) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude:
(c) Failure to perform the functions of a Wali: and
@ Such other grounds as the Parliament may provide.

ARTICLE IX
Basic RIGHTS

Sec. 1. Transitional Justice. - The Bangsamoro
Parliament, taking into account the report of the Transitional
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, shall enact a transitional
justice mechanism to address the legitimate grievances of the
Bangsamoro people and the indigenous peoples, such as historical
injustices, human rights violations, and marginalization through
unjust dispossession of territorial and proprietary rights and
customary land tenure.

i

SEC. 2. Reparation for Unjust Disposeension: — The
Parliament shall enact laws providing for adequate reparation to
the Bangsamoro people affected by unjust dispossession of

territorial and proprietary rights or customary land tenure, which
may include payment of just compensation to and relocation of
such people. No land title issued by the National Government
under the Torrens System shall be invalidated.

SEc. 3. Indigenous Peoples’ Righis. — The Bangsamoro
Government recognizes the rights of the indigenous peoples and
shall adopt measures for the. promotion and protection of the
following rights:

(a) Native titles or fusaka inged;
(b) Indigenous customs and traditions;
(e) Justice systems and indigenous political structures;

(d) Equitable share in revenues from the utilization of
resources in their ancestral lands:

(e) Free, prior and informed consent;

@® Political participation in the Bangsamoro Government
including reserved seats for the non-Moro indigenous peoples in
the Parliament;

(g) Basic services; and
(h) Freedom of choice as to their identity.

The Bangsamoro Government shall create a ministry for
indigenous peoples and shall have the primary responsibility to
formulate and implement policies, plans, and programs to promote
the well-being of all indigenous peoples in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in recognition of their ancestral domain as
well as their rights thereto.

Any measure enacted by the Parliament shall in no way
diminish the rights and privileges granted to indigenous peoples
by virtue of the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of

Indigenous Peoples and the United Nations Declaration on
Human Rights, and other laws pertaining to indigenous peoples
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

This Organic Law shall not in any manner diminish the
rights and benefits of the non-Moro indigenous peoples in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region under the Constitution, national
laws, particularly Republic Act No. 8371, otherwise known as
the “Indigenous Peoples’ Rights Act of 1997.”

SEC. 4. Customary Rights and Traditions. — The customs,
beliefs, and traditions of the Bangsamoro people are hereby
recognized, protected, and guaranteed.

-

The Parliament shall adopt measures to ensure mutual
respect and protection of the distinct beliefs, customs, and
traditions of the Bangsamoro people and the other inhabitants in
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

No person in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall
be subjected to any form of discrimination on account of creed,
religion, ethnic origin, parentage, or gender.

SEC. 5. Religious Freedom. - The Bangsamoro
Government shall guarantee religious freedom and the free
exercise thereof pursuant to the Constitution. national laws, and
principles of international law. The Bangsamoro Government shall
protect all persons from harassment or any undue pressure.
coercion, and violence on account of religion. Any establishment
and institution shall be free to implement policies and undertake
activities pursuant to their respective religious beliefs and values.

SEC. 6. Human Rights. - The Bangsamoro Government
shall fully respect human rights.

SEC. 7. Bangsamoro Human Rights Commission. - There
is hereby created a Bangsamoro Human Rights Commission. The
chairperson and two (2) commissioners of the Commission shall
be appointed by the President upon recommendation of the Chief
Minister. The composition of the Commission shall reflect the
ethnic distribution of the population of the Bangsamoro

Autonomous Region. The chairperson shall be a member of the
Philippine Bar and a resident of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region. A commissioner shall preferably be a member of the
Philippine Bar or holder of bachelor’s degree from colleges or
universities recognized by the National Government, and a
resident of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Commission
shall be provided by law to be enacted by the Parliament. It shall
cooperate and closely coordinate with the national Commission
on Human Rights.

The Parliament shall fix the salaries and perquisites of
the chairperson and the commissioners of the Commission in
consonance with Republic Act No. 6758, as amended.

Social Justice

SEC. 8. Right of Access to Basic Services. - The
Bangsamoro Government shall provide, maintain, and ensure
the delivery of basic and responsive health programs, quality
education, appropriate services, livelihood opportunities, affordable
and progressive housing projects, power and electricity, and water
supply, among others, to the Bangsamoro people and other
inhabitants of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall
maintain appropriate disaster-preparedness units for immediate
and effective relief services to victims of natural and man-made
calamities, It shall also ensure the rehabilitation of
calamity-affected areas and victims of calamities.

SEc. 9. Housing and Human Settlements. — The
Parliament shall pass a law creating a housing and human
settlements agency to address the lack of shelters, settlements,
and livelihood for the disadvantaged and homeless, especially those
victims of conflicts and atrocities. The agency may directly solicit
and receive assistance, donations, aids, and grants from donors
for its housing, settlements, and livelihood programs and
development.

The Bangsamoro Government, in cooperation with the
private sector, shall develop its own housing and human
settlement programs.

SEC. 10. Rights of Labor. — The Bangsamoro Government
shall guarantee the fundamental rights of all workers to
self-organization, collective bargaining and negotiations, and
peaceful concerted activities, including the right to strike, in
accordance with the Constitution and the Labor Code of the
Philippines. In this regard, the rights of workers, whether
publicly or privately employed, to form unions, associations, or
federations shall not be abridged.

The workers shall participate in policy and decision-making
processes affecting their rights and benefits, as may be provided
by a law that shall be enacted by the Parliament. The rights of
workers to security of tenure, humane conditions of work, and a
living wage shall be guaranteed. No trafficking of persons and
engagement of minors in any hazardous or deleteriotis forms of
employment shall be tolerated.

The Parliament may pass labor laws that expand or enhance the rights stated herein.

SEC. 11. Participation of Women in ihe Bangsamoro
Government. — Aside from the reserved seat for women in the
Parliament, there shall be at least one (1) woman to be appointed
to the Bangsamoro Cabinet. The Pazliament shall enact a law
that gives recognition to the important role of women in
nation-building and regional development, ensuring the
representation of women in other decision-making and
policy-determining bodies of the Bangsamoro Government.

The Parliament shall create by law a commission on women
and shall define its powers, functions, and composition.

SEC. 12. Protection of Women. — The Bangsamoro
Government shall uphold and protect the fundamental rights of
women, including the right to engage in lawful employment, and
to be protected from exploitation, abuse, or discrimination, as
embodied in the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of

Discrimination Against Women. j
¢
The Parliament shall enact the necessary laws for the
implementation of this section.

SEC. 13. Rights of the Youth. — The Bangsamoro
Government shall recognize the vital role of the youth in
nation-building, promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual,
intellectual, and social well-being. It shall inculcate patriotism
and nationalism, encourage involvement in public and civic affairs,
and promote mental and physical fitness through sports.

The Parliament shall create by law a commission on youth
affairs and shall define its powers, functions, and composition.

SEC. 14. Rights of Children. - The Bangsamoro
Government shall respect, protect, and promote the rights of
children, especially orphans of tender age. They shall be protected
from exploitation, abuse, or discrimination. Their education and
development, both physical and mental, shall be fully addressed.

Bangsamoro policies and programs shall take into utmost
consideration the best interest of children, and promote and protect
the rights of children, youth, and adolescents, including their
survival and development.

The Bangsamoro Government and its constituent local
government units shall provide for adequate funding and effective
mechanisms for the implementation of this policy.

SEC. 15. Settler Communities. - The Bangsamoro
Government shall ensure that settlers enjoy the rights guaranteed
in this Organic Law. For this purpose, the Parliament shall
create an office for settler communities to promote the welfare
and address issues and concerns of settlers in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.

Education

SEC. 16. Integrated System of Quality Education. — It
shall be a top priority of the Bangsamoro Government to establish,
maintain, and support a complete and integrated system of
quality education, which shall be a subsystem of the national
education system. The Bangsamoro Government shall develop
an educational framework relevant and responsive to the needs,
ideals, and aspirations of the Bangsamoro people. For this

purpose, the Bangsamoro Government shall conform to the
minimum standards set by the National Government.

The Bangsamoro Government shall institutionalize peace
education in all levels of education.

Any school, college or university existing in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region as of the effectivity of this Organic Law, and
such other schools and institutions that may be established
hereinafter, shall be deemed integral components of the educational
system of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, and shall be
governed by their respective charters. The National Government
shall continue to support, enhance, and strengthen the Mindanao

State University System. 1

The Chairperson of the appropriate committee in the
Parliament shall be a member in the boards of the state
universities and colleges in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The Bangsamoro Government shall supervise and regulate
private schools, including sectarian and nonsectarian institutions
of learning in any level. Three (3) representatives of private
schools shall have the right to participate in the deliberations of
the appropriate Bangsamoro Government ministry, and
Bangsamoro offices of the Commission on Higher Education,
Technical Education and Skills Development Authority, and other
government agencies on matters dealing with private schools.

The right of sectarian and educational institutions to
propagate their religious beliefs shall not be curtailed. The regional
educational system shall not discriminate against the sectarian
educatibnal institutions in any manner or form.

SEC. 17. Vocational, Technical, Nonformal, and Special
Education. — The thrusts and programs of vocational, technical,
nonformal, and special education of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region educational system for the poor, illiterate, out-of-school
youth, persons with special needs, disadvantaged, and senior
citizens shall be supportive and relevant to théhuman resource
requirements of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, which shall
conform to the minimum standards set by the National
Government.

SEC. 18. Madaris Educational Sysiem, Islamic and Arabic
Studies. — In coordination with the Department of Education,
Commission on Higher Education, and Technical Education and
Skills Development Authority, the Bangsamoro Government shall
establish, maintain, and supervise Madaris education in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. In the case of Madaris teachers,
the Civil Service Commission shall promulgate rules and
regulations to set the standards for their qualifications,
appointments, and promotions.

The Bangsamoro Government shall ensure the integration
inthe elementary and high school education curricula the teaching
of Islamic and Arabic studies for Muslim pupils and students in
public schools.

The Parliament shall enact legislation to develop and
strengthen the Madaris educational system in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.

Sec. 19. Tribal University System. — The Parliament
shall create a tribal university system in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region to address the higher educational needs of
the non-Moro indigenous peoples.

The Parliament shall pass a law to recognize and support
the indigenous peoples’ educational system for its integration in
the Bangsamoro educational system.

SEC. 20. Physical Education, Sporis Developmeni, and
Bangsamoro Sports Commission. ~ The Bangsamoro
educational system shall develop and maintain an integrated and
comprehensive physical education program. It shall develop
healthy, disciplined, innovative, and productive individuals, and
promote sportsmanship, cooperation, and teamwork.

The Bangsamoro educational system shall encourage and
support sports programs, league competitions, indigenous games,
martial arts, and amateur sports including training for regional,
national, and international competitions.

The Parliament shall pass a law creating a Bangsamoro
sports commission.

Science and Technology

SEC. 21. Science and Technology. - The Bangsamoro
Government recognizes science and technology as essential to
national and regional progress. The Bangsamoro Government
shall give priority to science, research, inventions, technology
education, and their development. It shall ensure the full and
effective participation of all sectors in the planning, programming,
coordination, and implementation of scientific and technological
researches. The Bangsamoro Government shall prioritize the
acquisition, adoption, innovation, and application of science and
technology for development.

Health

£

SEC. 22. Comprehensive and Integrated Health Service
Delivery. — The Bangsamoro Government shall adopt a policy
on health that provides for a comprehensive and integrated health
service delivery for its constituents. It shall establish by law a
general hospital system to serve the health requirements of its
people and ensure that the individual basic right to life shall be
attainable through the prompt intervention of excellent and
affordable medical services.

The Bangsamoro Government shall protect and promote
the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness
among them. It shall also uphold the people’s right to have access
to essential goods, health, and other social services that promote
their well-being. The Parliament shall enact appropriate
legislation towards this end, including the regulation of the
manufacture and distribution of food, drinks, drugs, and tobacco
concerned national government agencies.

The Bangsamoro Government shall assist and cooperate
with the National Government in the provision of quarantine
services for the prevention and control of epidemic and other
communicable diseases.

a
SEC. 23. Support for Persons with Spé&ial Needs, Senior
Citizens, and Disadvantaged Groups. —- The Bangsamoro
Government shall establish a special agency, support facilities

and livelihood or skills training for persons with special needs,
and other disadvantaged persons for their rehabilitation and
productive integration into mainstream society.

The Bangsamoro Government shall coordinate all existing
governmental and nongovernmental agencies concerned with the
rehabilitation and education of these persons.

The Bangsamoro Government shall ensure the welfare of
senior citizens by upholding their rights and providing the benefits
and privileges they presently enjoy.

Aris and Culture

SEC. 24. Preservation of the Cultural Heritage of the
Bangsamoro People. —- The Bangsamoro Government shail
preserve the history, culture, arts, traditions, and the richcultural
heritage of the Bangsamoro people and their Sultanates, such as
those of Sulu, Maguindanao, Kabuntalan, Buayan, the Royal
Houses of Ranao and of the Iranun, and the non-Moro indigenous
peoples of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. For this purpose.
it shall create the Bangsamoro Commission for the Preservation
of Cultural Heritage in coordination with the appropriate and
relevant national government agencies.

SEC. 25. Primary Responsibility of the Bangsamoro
Commission for ihe Preservation of Cultural Heritage. — The
Bangsamoro Commission for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage
shall have the primary responsibility to write the history of the
Bangsamoro people and to establish and sustain the cultural
institutions, programs, and projects in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. The Commission shall coordinate and work
closely with the National Commission for Culture and the Arts,
National Historical Commission of the Philippines, National
Museum of the Philippines, and other concerned cultural agencies
for the preservation of cultural heritage, shall establish libraries
and museums, declare and restore historical shrines and cultural
sites to preserve the Bangsamoro heritage for posterity. The
Commission shall ensure the inclusion of Philippine history,
culture, and heritage in the establishment of museums and similar
institutions, programs and projects to foster unity among the
Filipinos.

SEC. 26. Management of Bangsamoro Historical and
Cultural Sites. — The National Government shall transfer the
management of Bangsamoro historical and cultural sites currently
under the jurisdiction of the National Museum of the Philippines,
National Historical Commission of the Philippines, or other
agencies of the National Government to the Bangsamoro
Commission for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage through
the intergovernmental relations mechanisms. The Bangsamoro
Commission for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage shall
coordinate with relevant agencies of the National Government on
the regulation, excavation, and preservation of cultural artifacts
and on the recovery of lost historical and cultural heritage.

ARTICLE X
BANGSAMORO JUSTICE SYSTEM

SEC. 1. Justice System in the Bangsamoro. - The
Bangsamoro justice system shall be administered in accordance
with the unique cultural and historical heritage of the Bangsamoro.

The dispensation of justice in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall be in consonance with the Constitution, Shariah,
traditional or tribal laws, and other relevant laws.

Shari'ah or Islamic law forms part of the Islamic tradition
derived from religious precepts of Islam, particularly the Qur’an
and Sunnah.

Shariah shall apply exclusively to cases involving Muslims.
Where a case involves a non-Muslim, Shariah law may apply
only if the non-Muslim voluntarily submits to the jurisdiction of
the Shariah court.

The traditional or tribal laws shall be applicable to disputes
of indigenous peoples within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The provisions of this Article shall not prejudice the rights

of non-Muslims and nonindigenous peoples. ¥

SEC. 2. Shari‘ah Courts. — Shari‘ah courts within the
Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction shall form part of the
Philippine judicial system subject to the supervision of the
Supreme Court. The regular courts within the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region shall continue to function under the
supervision of the Supreme Court.

The Congress of the Philippines may create additional
Shari‘ah courts in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region upon the
recommendation of the Supreme Court. It may also create
Shari’ah courts outside the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in
areas where a considerable number of Muslims reside.

SEc. 3. Sources of Shari'ah. — The following are the
sources of Shari‘ah:

Principal Sources:

(a) Al-Qur’an or the Koran;

(b) Al-Sunnah or traditions of Prophet Muhammad SAW;

Secondary Sources:

(a) Al-Ijma or Consensus; and

(b) Al-Qiyas or Analogy.

Sec. 4. Power of the Parliament to Enact Laws Pertaining
to Shari‘ah. - The Parliament shall have the power to enact
laws on personal, family, and property law jurisdiction.

The Parliament has the power to enact laws governing
commercial and other civil actions not provided for under
Presidential Decree No. 1083, as amended, otherwise known as
the “Code of Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines,” and
criminal jurisdiction on minor offenses punishable by arresto

menor or ta’zir which must be equivalent to arresto menor or
fines commensurate to the offense.

SEC. 5. Jurisdiction of the Shariah Circuit Courts. — The
Shariah Circuit Courts in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
shall exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over the following
cases where either or both parties are Muslims: Provided, That
the non-Muslim party voluntarily submits to its jurisdiction:

(a) Allcases involving offenses defined and punished under
Presidential Decree No. 1083, where the act or omission has been
committed in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

(b) Allcivil actions and proceedings between parties residing
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region who are Muslims or have
been married in accordance with Article 13 of Presidential Decree
No. 1083, involving disputes relating to: .

(1) Marriage:

(2) Divorce;

(3) Betrothal or breach of contract to marry;

(4) Customary dower or mahr;

(5) Disposition and distribution of property upon divorce:
(6) Maintenance and support, and consolatory gifts; and
(7) Restitution of marital rights;

(c) All cases involving disputes relative to communal
properties;

(d) All cases involving ta’zir offenses defined and punishable
under Shari‘ah law enacted by the Parliament punishable by
arresto menor or the corresponding fine, or both;

(e) All civil actions under Shariah law enacted by the
Parliament involving real property in#he Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region where the assessed value of the property does
not exceed Four hundred thousand pesos (P400,000.00); and

@® All civil actions, if they have not specified in an
agreement which law shall govern their relations, where the
demand or claim does not exceed Two hundred thousand pesos
(P200,000.00).

SEC. 6. Jurisdiction of the Shari’ah District Courts. ~
The Shari'ah District Courts in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over the
following cases where either or both are Muslims: Provided, That
the non-Muslim party voluntarily submits to its jurisdiction:

(a) All cases involving custody, guardianship, legitimacy,
and paternity and filiation arising under Presidential Decree
No. 1083;

(b) All cases involving disposition, distribution, and
settlement of the estate of deceased Muslims, probate of wills,
issuance of letters of administration, or appointment of
administrators or executors regardless of the nature or the
aggregate value of the property;

(c) Petitions for the declaration of absence and death,
and for the cancellation or correction of entries in the Muslim
Registries mentioned in Title VI of Book Two of Presidential
Decree No. 1083;

@ All actions arising from customary and Shariah
compliant contracts in which the parties are Muslims, if they
failed to specify the law governing their relations;

@) All petitions for mandamus, prohibition, injunction,
certiorari, habeas corpus, and all other auxiliary writs and
processes, in aid of its appellate jurisdiction;

() Petitions for the constitution of a family home, change
of name, and commitment of an insane person to an asylum;

(g) All other personal and real actions not falling under
the jurisdiction of the Shariah Circuit Courts wherein the parties
involved are Muslims, except those for forcible entry and unlawful
detainer, which shall fall under the exclusive original jurisdiction
of the Municipal Trial Court;

(h) Allspecial civil actions for interpleader or declaratory
velief wherein the parties are Muslims residing in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region or the property involved belongs exclusively
to Muslims and is located in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;

(i) All civil actions under Shari‘ah law enacted by the
Parliament involving real property in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region where the assessed value of the property
exceeds Four hundred thousand pesos (P400,000.00); and

g) All civil actions, if they have not specified in an
agreement which law shall govern their relations where the
demand or claim exceeds Two hundred thousand pesos
(P200,000.00). £

The Shariah District Court in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall exercise appellate jurisdiction over all cases
decided upon by the Shari'ah Circuit Courts in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region within its territorial jurisdiction, as provided
under Article 144 of Presidential Decree No. 1083, as amended.

Sec. 7. Shariah High Couri. - There is hereby created
within the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction, as part of the
Philippine judicial system, a Shariah High Court. It shall exercise
exclusive original jurisdiction over the following cases where either
or both parties are Muslims: Provided, That the non-Muslim
party voluntarily submits to its jurisdiction:

(a) All petitions for mandamus, prohibition, injunction,
certiorari, habeas corpus, and all other auxiliary writs and
processes, in aid of its appellate jurisdiction; and

(b) All actions for annulment of judgments of Shari’ah
District Courts.

The Shari‘ah High Court shall exercise exclusive appellate
jurisdiction over cases under the jurisdiction of the Shariah
District Courts within or outside the Bangsagloro Autonomous
Region. :

The decisions of the Shari‘ah High Court shall be final and
executory except on questions of law which may be raised before
the Supreme Court following the procedure for appeals from the
Court of Appeals to the Supreme Court.

Nothing contained herein shall affect the original and
appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court as provided in the
Constitution.

Pending the complete organization of the Shari‘ah High
Court, the decisions of the Shari'ah District Courts shall be
appealable to the Court of Appeals.

SEC. 8. Qualifications of Shariah Judges. —

(a) Shariah Cireuit Court. — Noperson shail be appointed
judge of the Shari‘ah Circuit Court unless a citizen of the
Philippines who is a Muslim, a regular member of the Philippine
Bar, at least thirty (30) years of age, must have been engaged in
the practice of law for five (5) years or more, and has completed at
least two (2) years of Shari'ah or Islamic Jurisprudence.

(b) Shariah District Court. ~ No person shall be appointed
judge of the Shari’ah District Court unless a citizen of the
Philippines who is a Muslim, a regular member of the Philippine
Bar, at least thirty-five (35) years of age. must have been engaged
in the practice of law for ten (10) years or more, and has completed
at least two (2) years of Shari'ah or Islamic Jurisprudence.

(c) Shari‘ah High Court. — No person shall be appointed
justice of the Shariah High Court unless a natural-born citizen
of the Philippines who is a Muslim, a regular member of the
Philippine Bar, at least forty (40) years of age, must have been
engaged in the practice of law for fifteen (15) years or more, and
has completed at least two (2) years of Shari‘ah or Islamic
Jurisprudence.

A Shariah Justice or Judge must be a person of competence.
integrity, probity, and independence.

The Supreme Court may grant the incumbent Shari‘ah
District and Circuit Court judges who are not regular members
of the Philippine Bar a reasonable period within which to qualify,
pending which they shall be allowed to continue discharging their
duties.

SEC. 9. Composition of the Shari‘ah High Court. - The
Shariah High Court shall be composed of five (5) Justices,
including the Presiding Justice.

SEC. 10. Compensaiion, Benefiis, Tenure, and Privileges.
— Justices of the Shari’ah High Court shall have the same rank,
prerogatives, salaries, allowances, benefits, tenure, and privileges
as the Justices of the Court of Appeals. -

Judges of the Shari'ah District Courts shall have the same
rank, prerogatives, salaries, allowances, benefits, tenure, and
privileges as judges of the Regional Trial Court.

Judges of the Shari'ah Circuit Courts shall have the same
rank, prerogatives, salaries, allowances, benefits, tenure, and
privileges as judges of the Municipal Trial Court.

SEC. 11. Shariah Rules of Court. — The existing Special
Rules of Procedure in Shariah courts shall continue to be in
force and effect until the Supreme Court promulgates a new
Shari'ah Rules of Court.

Sc. 12. Special Bar Examinations for Shari‘ah. — The
Supreme Court shall administer Shari'ah Special Bar
Examinations for admission of applicants to the Philippine Bar
as special members thereof to practice law in the Shari‘ah courts.
A successful examinee who has qualified for special membership
in the Philippine Bar shall be duly conferred the title of
counselor-at-law.

SEC. 13. Practice of Law Before Shari’ah Courts. — The
following are eligible to practice before Sharyshy courts:

(a) A Shari’ah counselor-at-law; and

(b) A regular member of the Philippine Bar: Provided,
That a Muslim, or a non-Muslim who submits to the jurisdiction
of the Shari‘ah court, who acts on one’s behalf as counsel, shall
be allowed to appear as such before any Shari‘ah court.

SEC. 14. Appointment and Discipline of Shariah Couri
Personnel. — The Supreme Court shall appoint the Shari’ah
court personnel and shall have the power to discipline them.

SEC. 15. Bangsamoro Shari'ah Integrated Bar. — The
Supreme Court may adopt the rules for the integration of the
Shariah Bar under such conditions as it shall see fit in order to
raise the standards of the profession and improve the
administration of justice in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 16. Creation of New Offices. - The Parliament may
create a Shariah public assistance office, a Shariah special
prosecution service, a Shariah academy, and the Office of the
Jurisconsult of Islamic Law. Pending the creation of the Shariah
special prosecution service, the existing national prosecution
service of the Department of Justice shall prosecute criminal cases
before the Shariah courts.

SEC. 17. Traditional or Tribal Justice Systems. - The
Parliament shall enact laws to promote and support the traditional
or tribal justice systems that are appropriate for the indigenous
peoples.

The indigenous peoples shall have the right to use their
own commonly accepted justice systems, conflict resolution
institutions, peace building processes or mechanisms, and other
customary laws and practices within their respective communities
and as may be compatible with the national legal system and
with internationally recognized human rights.

The traditional justice systems are the mechanisms to
determine, settle, and decide controversies and enforce decisions
involving disputes between members of the indigenous peoples
concerned in accordance with the customary laws of these
communities.

SEC. 18. Office for Traditional or Tribal Justice System.
— There is hereby created an Office for Tribal Justice System
that shall be responsible for overseeing the study, preservation,
and development of the tribal justice system within the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. The powers and functions of
the Office for Tribal Justice System shall be defined by the
Parliament.

The Office for Tribal Justice System shall ensure the full
participation of indigenous peoples in the formulation,
implementation, and evaluation of policies related to the
strengthening of tribal justice systems: Provided, That such
systems shall maintain their indigenous character in accordance

with the respective practices of each tribe. 3

SEc. 19. Regular Courts. — Regular courts in the

Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall continue to exercise their
judicial functions, as provided by national law.

SEC. 20. Aliernative Dispute Resolution. — The
Bangsamoro Government shall adopt the principles of conciliation
and mediation in settling disputes, with the Parliament enacting
the necessary legislation to institute the mechanism for alternative
dispute resolution. The Shariah courts and traditional or tribal
adjudicatory tribunals may utilize this mode of settlement and
resolution of cases.

ARTICLE XI

NATIONAL DEFENSE AND SECURITY, PUBLIC ORDER AND
SAFETY, AND Coast GUARD SERVICES

SEc. 1. National Defense and Security. — The defense
and security of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be the
responsibility of the National Government.

Src. 2. Public Order and Safety. - The Philippine
National Police shall create a Police Regioydl Office in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region which shall be organized,
maintained, supervised, and utilized for the primary purpose of
law enforcement and maintenance of peace and order in

the Bangsamoro in accordance with Republic Act No. 6975,
otherwise known as the “Depariment of the Interior and Local
Government Act of 1990,” as amended by Republic Act No. 8551,
otherwise known as the “Philippine National Police Reform
and Reorganization Act of 1998.” The Police Regional Office in
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be under the
direct operational control and supervision of the Philippine
National Police.

The Police Regional Office in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall be headed by a Regional Director who shall, upon
consultation with the Chief Minister, be appointed in accordance
with Republic Act No. 6975, as amended.

To facilitate entry into the Philippine National Police of
Moro Islamic Liberation Front and Moro National Liberation Front
members from the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, the age,
height, and educational attainment requirements may be waived
by the National Police Commission, subject io existing rules and
regulations: Provided, That such shall be availed of within a
period of five (5) years from the ratification of this Organic Law:
Provided, further, That the requirement of educational attainment
shall be complied within fifteen (15) years from their entry:
Provided, finally, That their ranks and grades shall be subject to
existing laws, rules and regulations governing the Philippine
National Police.

SEc. 3. Regional Office of the National Police Commission.
— The National Police Commission shall establish the National
Police Commission Bangsamoro Regional Office under its direct
control, supervision, and administration, in accordance with
Republic Act No. 6975, as amended. The Secretary of the Interior
and Local Government shall appoint the Regional Director
who shall head the National Police Commission Bangsamoro
Regional Office.

The National Police Commission Bangsamoro Regional
Office shall have the power to investigate complaints against
members of the Police Regional Office in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. Appeals from the decisions of the National
Police Commission Bangsamoro Regional Office shall be filed with
the National Police Commission. Pending resolution of the appeal,

the decision of the National Police Commission Bangsamoro Regional Office may be executed.

SEC. 4. Consuliation with the Chief Minister on Police
Matters Affecting the Police Regional Office in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. — The National Police Commission shall
consult the Chief Minister on police matters affecting the Police
Regional Office in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 5. Jail Management and Penology. — The Bureau of
Jail Management and Penology shall establish a regional office
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region under its direct
operational and administrative control and supervision, in
accordance with Republic Act No. 6975, as amended, ayd Republic
Act No. 9263, otherwise known as the “Bureau of Fire Protection
and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology Professionalization
Act of 2004.” The Bureau of Jail Management and Penology shall
support the regional office in the establishment, maintenance,
and improvement and procurement of jail facilities, the
appropriation for the subsistence of detainees and prisoners. the
establishment, maintenance, operation, and management of
separate detention homes, and the designation of jail wardens.

SEC. 6. Fire Protection. - The Bureau of Five Protection
shall establish a regional office in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region under its direct operational and administrative control
and supervision, in accordance with Republic Act No. 6975, as
amended, and Republic Act No. 9263. The Bureau of Fire
Protection shall support the regional office in the establishment,
maintenance, and improvement and procurement of fire protection
and prevention facilities, the enforcement of Republic Act
No. 9514, otherwise known as the “Fire Code of the Philippines
of 2008,” and other existing laws on fire safety enforcement,
protection, and prevention.

SEC. 7. Coast Guard Services. — The Philippine Coast
Guard shall establish a regional office in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region which shall be organized, maintained,
supervised, and utilized for the primary purpos¥of law enforcement
over coast guard matters. It shall be under the direct operational
and administrative control and supervision of the Philippine
Coast Guard.

ARTICLE XII
FISCAL AUTONOMY

SEc. 1. Fiscal Autonomy. — The Bangsamoro Government
shall enjoy fiscal autonomy with the end in view of attaining
economic self-sufficiency and genuine development. The
Bangsamoro Governmentis entitled to all fund sources enumerated
herein. and shall have the power to create its sources of revenues
as provided in this Organic Law, which shall be spent in a
programmatic, transparent, performance-based, and phased
manner. It shall prepare its budget and allocate funds in
accordance with an annual appropriations law passed by the
Parliament.

SEC. 2. Auditing. — Pursuant to the Constitution, the
Commission on Audit shall be the exclusive auditor of the
Bangsamoro Government and its constituent local government
units. The Bangsamoro Government shall establish an auditing
body which shall have internal auditing responsibility in
accordance with Republic Act No. 3456, otherwise known as the
“Internal Auditing Act of 1962,” as amended. The Bangsamoro
Government shall implement transparency and accountability
mechanisms consistent with open government practices and
generally accepted financial management principles.

SEC. 3. Local Government Finance. - There is hereby
created a Bangsamoro Regional Office of the Bureau of Local
Government Finance under the Department of Finance which
shall have the authority to coordinate, assist, and monitor the
treasury and assessment operations of constituent local
government units within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
in pursuance of good governance and local autonomy. The regional
office shall be guided by the standards set by the Department of
Finance-Bureau of Local Government Finance including the
requirements set for the appointment of local treasurers.

SEC. 4. Bangsamoro Treasury Office. — There is hereby
created a Bangsamoro Treasury Office whose primary function
is to receive and safeguard all the revenues generated and collected
by the Bangsamoro Government, The Office shall be headed by a

on
a

Regional Treasurer who shall be appointed by the Chief Minister
and whose term shall be determined by a law to be passed by the
Parliament.

SEc. 5. National Government Assistance. — The National
Government shall extend assistance to the Bangsamoro
Government on tax administration and fiscal management,
including capacity building and training programs, in accordance
with the plans to be developed by the Bangsamoro Government
in consultation with the National Government.

Sources of Revenues

SEC. 6. Sources of Revenues. - The Bangsamoro
Government shall have the power to create its own sources of
revenues and to levy taxes, fees, and charges, subject to the
provisions of this Organic Law and consistent with the principles
of equalization, equity, accountability, administrative simplicity,
harmonization and economic efficiency, and fiscal autonomy.
Such taxes, fees, and charges shall accrue exclusively to the
Bangsamoro Government.

The sources of revenues of the Bangsamoro Government
inchide, among others, the following:

(a) Taxes, in accordance with the provisions of this
Organic Law;

(b) Fees and charges;
(©), Annual block grant from the National Government;

(d) Revenues or shares in revenues from the exploration,
development, and utilization of natural resources derived from
land or water areas or territories within the Bangsamoro
territorial jurisdiction;

(e) Share in the National Governmentythxes, fees, and
charges collected in the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction;

@® Dividends from Bangsamoro government-owned or
controlled corporations and other corporations, and shares from
the dividends of national government-owned or controlled
corporations and their subsidiaries in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region as may be determined by the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board;

(g) Grants from economic agreements or conventions
entered into by the Bangsamoro Government to which the
National Government is a party;

(th) Grants, endowments, donations, foreign assistance,
and other forms of aid;

@ Loans and official development assistance;

@) Shares and revenues generated from the operations of
public utilities within the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction;

(k) Appropriations and other budgetary allocations from
the National Government; and

@ Tax ofnot more than ten percent (10%) of fair market
value in the locality per cubic meter of ordinary stones, sand,
gravel, earth, and other quarry resources, as defined in the
National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, extracted from
public lands or from the beds of seas, lakes, rivers, streams, creeks,
and other public waters within its territorial jurisdiction, the
proceeds of which shall be distributed as follows:

(1) Thirty percent (30%) tothe Bangsamoro Government;
and

(2) Seventy percent (70%) to the local government units
where the sand, gravel, and other quarry resources are extracted,
as follows:

@ Thirty percent (30%) to the province;

Gi) Thirty percent (30%) to the component city or
municipality; and

(ai) Forty percent (40%) to the barangay.

The constituent local government units in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region shall continue to exercise the taxing powers
granted under Republic Act No. 7160, as amended.

SEC. 7. Uniform and Equitable Taxation; Prohibition
Against Confiseatory Taxes, Fees, and Charges. — The
Parliament shall exercise, subject to the provisions of the
Constitution, the power to levy taxes, fees, and charges, which
shall inure solely to the benefit of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region: Provided, That the principles of uniformity and equity
in taxation shall be observed: Provided, further, That such shall
not be unjust, excessive, oppressive, confiscatory, or contrary to
public policy: Provided, furthermore, That their collection shall
not be delegated to any private person.

The power to impose any tax under this Organic Law shall
be exercised by the Parliament, through an appropriate
legislation, which shall not be enacted without any prior public
hearing conducted for the purpose. The Bangsamoro Government
shall evolve a progressive, responsive, and culture sensitive system
of taxation which shall, among other things, provide for incentives
for the prompt payment of taxes and penalize tax evasion and
delinquency.

Nothing in this provision shall preclude any future
legislation on national taxes nor allow both National Government
and Bangsamoro Government to impose similar taxes on the same
entity.

"SEC. 8. Tax Incentives. — The Parliament may grant tax
exemptions and incentives under this Organic Law upon a vote
of majority of all its members: Provided, That these tax
exemptions and incentives shall not diminish national revenues:
Provided, further, That the grant of tax exemptions and incentives
administered by the Regional Board of Investments of the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao gs provided for in
Executive Order No. 458, Series of 1991, in ylation to Executive
Order No. 226, Series of 1987, otherwise known as the “Omnibus
Investments Code,” shall continue to apply.

Nothing in this Organic Law shall be construed to alter,
diminish, or repeal the incentives already granted and
administered by investment promotion agencies of the National
Government to existing locators or registered business entities.

SEC. 9. Limitations on the Taxing Powers; Excepiions. —
Unless otherwise provided herein, the taxing power of the
Bangsamoro Government shall. not extend to the following:

(a) Income tax, except when levied on banks and other
financial institutions;

(b) Customs duties, registration fees of vessels and wharfage
on wharves, tonnage dues, and all other kinds of customs fees,
charges, and dues except vessels which are registered by their
owners with the Bangsamoro Government and wharfage on
wharves constructed and maintained by the Bangsamoro
Government or its constituent local government uniis:

(c) Taxes. fees, or charges and other impositions upon goods
carried into or out of, or passing through the territorial
jurisdictions of the provinces, cities, municipalities, or barangays
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in the guise of charges
for wharfage, tolls for bridges or otherwise, or other taxes, fees,
or charges in any form whatsoever upon such goods or
merchandise, except tolls on bridges or roads constructed and
maintained by the Bangsamoro Government or its constituent
provinces, cities, municipalities, or barangays concerned;

(d) Taxes, fees, or charges on agricultural and aquatic
products when sold by marginal farmers or fisherfolk;

(e) Taxes on business enterprises certified by the Board of
Investments or by the Parliament as pioneer or non-pioneer for a
period of six (6) and four (4) years, respectively, from the date of
registration;

() Excise taxes on articles enumerated under the National
Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, and taxes, fees, or
charges on petroleum products;

(g) Percentage or value-added tax on sales, barters, or
exchanges or similar transactions on goods or services except as
otherwise provided by national law;

(h) Taxes on the gross receipts of transportation contractors
and persons engaged in the transportation of passengers or freight
by hire and common carriers by air, land, or water except as
provided in this Organic Law;

@) Taxes on premiums paid by way of reinsurance or
retrocession;

@) Taxes, fees, or other charges on Philippine products
actually exported, except as otherwise provided by law enacted by
the Congress of the Philippines;

(k) Taxes, fees, or charges on countryside and barangay
business enterprises and cooperatives duly registered under
Republic Act No. 6810, otherwise known as the “Magna Caria for
Countryside and Barangay Business Enterprises,” and Republic
Act No. 6938, otherwise known as the “Cooperative Code of the
Philippines,” as amended; and

@) Taxes, fees, or charges of any kind on the National
Government, its agencies and instrumentalities, and local
government units except on government-owned or controlled
corporations or entities that are primarily organized to do business.

However, where all taxable elements are within the
Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction, the Parliament may impose
the following taxes to the exclusion of the Bureau of Internal
Revenue of the National Government:

(1) Capital Gains Tax. — Tax imposed on the gains
presumed to have been realized by the seller from the sale,
exchange, or other disposition of real properties, classified as
capital assets, including pacto de retro sales and other forms of
conditional sale; ‘ !

(2) Documentary Stamp Tax. - Tax on documents,
instruments, loan agreements, and papers evidencing the
acceptance, assignment, sale, or transfer of the obligation, right
or property incident thereto;

(3) Donor's Tax. — Tax on a donation or gift that is
imposed on the gratuitous transfer of property between two (2) or
more persons who are living at the time of the transfer. It shall
apply whether the transfer is in trust or otherwise, whether the
gift is direct or indirect, and whether the property is real or
personal, tangible or intangible; and

(® Estate Tax. —Tax on the right of the deceased person
to transmit to the lawful heirs and beneficiaries of the deceased
person at the time of death and on certain transfers, which are
made by law as equivalent to testamentary disposition.

In case the Parliament does not impose the abovementioned
taxes, the Bureau of Internal Revenue of the National Government
shall continue to levy and collect said taxes: Provided, That if
the Bangsamoro Government shall impose them, the tax rates
shall be pursuant to the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended: Provided, further, That in no case shall the
abovementioned taxes be imposed and collected by both the Bureau
of Internal Revenue and the Bangsamoro Government.

The Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board shall
promulgate rules on the determination of taxable elements in
relation to taxes (1) to (4) above, and the sharing of revenues from
the collection of such taxes where the taxable elements are both
situated within and outside of the Bangsamoro territorial
jurisdiction. Any dispute between the National Government and
the Bangsamoro Government arising from the imposition of the
above taxes shall be resolved by the Intergovernmental Fiscal
Policy Board.

SEC. 10. Sharing of Taxes Collected by the National
Government. — National Government taxes, fees, and charges
collected in the Bangsamovo Autonomous Region, other than tariff
and customs duties, shall be shared as follows:

(a) Twenty-five percent (25%) to the National Government:
Provided, That for the first ten (10) years following the effectivity
of this Organic Law, this share shall accrue to the Bangsamoro
Government: Provided, further, That after this first ten
(10)-year period, upon petition of the Bangsamoro Government,
the National Government may extend the period as it shall deem
necessary; and

(b) Seventy-five percent (75%) to the Bangsamoro
Government. inclusive of the shares of the constituent local
government units.

The shares in taxes, fees, and charges provided under this
section shall be separate and distinct from the annual block grant
appropriated to the Bangsamoro Government under Section 15
of this Article.

SEC. 11. Assessmeni and Collection of Taxes; Bangsamoro
Revenue Office. — The Parliament shall establish by law the
Bangsamoro Revenue Office for the assessment and collection of
Bangsamoro taxes, as well as all other collectible taxes in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Uniil such time that the Bangsamoro Revenue Office is
established, tax collection shall be undertaken by the Bureau of
Internal Revenue. The share of the Bangsamoro Government shall
be retained by the National Government collecting agencies and
remitted to the Bangsamoro Government in lump sum without
need of an appropriations law.

Upon its establishment, the Bangsamoro Revenue Office
shall start collecting such taxes regularly: Provided, That it shall
report promptly all its collections to, and remit the share of, the
National Government through a duly accredited government
depository bank: Provided, further, That the National
Government and the Bangsamoro Government shall share the
costs of administering the tax collection as provided herein.

ad
SEC. 12. Payment of Taxes by a Parinerships,
or Firms. — Corporations, partnerships, or firms directly engaged
in business in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall pay

their corresponding taxes, fees, and charges in the province or
city where the corporation, partnership, or firm is doing business.

Corporations, partnerships, or firms whose central, main,
or head offices are located outside the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region but are doing business within its territorial jurisdiction.
shall pay the income taxes for income derived from their business
operations in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region to the city or
municipality where their branch offices or business operations or
activities are located. The Bureau of Internal Revenue and the
Bangsamoro Revenue Office shall agree on modalities for the
filing of income tax returns through the Intergovernmental Fiscal
Policy Board.

The Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board shall
promulgate rules to implement this provision, including the
determination of covered entities and the allocation of income for
covered entities,

Src. 13. Share of the Constitueni Local Government Units
in Taxes Within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. — The
Parliament shall enact a law detailing the shares of constituent
local government units in the seventy-five percent (75%) share of
the Bangsamoro Government in the national taxes, fees, and
charges collected in the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction.

Sec. 14. Bangsamoro Tax and Revenue Code. — The
Parliament shall enact a Bangsamoro tax and revenue code, which
shall cover the taxing powers of the Bangsamoro Government, in
accordance with the Constitution and this Organic Law.

Block Grant

Src. 15. Annual Block Grant. — The National Government
shall provide an annual block grant which shall be the share of
the Bangsamoro Government in the national internal revenue
tax collections of the Bureau of Internal Revenue and collections
of the Bureau of Customs. The amount shall be sufficient for the
exercise of the powers and functions of the Bangsamoro
Government under this Organic Law and in no case shall be less

than the last budget received by the Autonomous Region in
Muslim Mindanao immediately before the establishment of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 16. Block Grant Amount. — For the budget year
immediately following the year of the effectivity of this Organic
Law, the amount of the block grant shall be equivalent to five
percent (5%) of the net national internal revenue tax collection of
the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the net collection of the Bureau
of Customs from the third fiscal year immediately preceding the
current fiscal year.

For purposes of this section, the net national internal
revenue tax collections of the Bureau of Internal Revenue is the
sum of all internal revenue tax collections of the Bureau of Internal
Revenue during the base year less the internal revenue allotment
of local government units, the amount released during the same
year for tax refunds, payments for informers’ reward, and any
portion of internal revenue tax collections which are presently
set aside, or hereafter earmarked under special laws for payment
to third persons.

SEc. 17. Automatic Appropriation. — The annual block
grant shall be automatically appropriated in the General
Appropriations Act of the Congress of the Philippines to the
Bangsamoro Government.

Sec. 18. Regular Release. — The block grant shall be
released without need of any further action, directly and
comprehensively to the Bangsamoro Government, and shall not
be subject to any lien or holdback that may be imposed by the
National Government for whatever purpose.

SEc. 19. Allocation of the Block Grant. — The Parliament
shall pass an annual appropriations law allocating the block grant
to various agencies and programs according to the powers and
functions of the Bangsamoro Government. The Parliament shall
assign the highest budgetary priority to education, health, and
social services as may be provided in its apjopriations law. The
Parliament shall not include the procurement of firearms,
ammunition, armaments, and explosives in its annual

appropriations law from the block grant. Copies of the development
plans of the Bangsamoro Government shall be furnished the
Department of the Interior and Local Government. In the
allocation of the block grant, the national laws and the budgeting
rules and regulations implemented by the Department of Budget
and Management and Department of the Interior and Local
Government applicable to local government units shall apply.

The Bangsamoro Government's annual appropriations
law shall set performance standards and targets for each sector.
Any unspent amount in the current year’s block grant shall
revert to the Bangsamoro Treasury under a Special Fund for
reappropriation: Provided, however, That any subsequent
appropriation thereof shali follow the same conditions as
provided in this section.

SEC. 20. General Limitations. — The use of funds shall be
subject to the following limitations:

(a) The total appropriations, whether annual or
supplemental, for Personal Services of the Bangsamoro
Government for one (1) fiscal year shall not exceed forty-five
percent (45%) of the total revenue sources of the Bangsamoro
Government as provided under Section 6 of this Article. The
appropriations for salaries, wages, representation and
transportation allowances of officials and employees of the public
utilities and economic enterprises owned, operated, and
maintained by the Bangsamoro Government shall not be included
in the annual budget or in the computation of the maximum
amount for Personal Services. The appropriations for Personal
Services of such economic enterprises shall be charged against
their respective budgets;

(b) No official or employee shall be entitled to a salary rate
higher than the maximum fixed for the position or other positions
of equivalent rank by applicable laws or rules and regulations
issued thereunder;

(c) The Bangsamoro Government shall not appropriate
funds to provide any salaries, wages or any form of emoluments
to officials and employees of the National Government;

(@) Incases of abolition of positions and the creation of new
ones resulting from the abolition of existing positions in the
Bangsamoro Government, such abolition or creation shall be made
The provisions of civil service laws, rules, and regulations shall
apply suppletorily;

(©) Positions in the official plantilla for career positions
that are occupied by incumbents holding permanent appointments
shall be covered by adequate appropriations:

6 No changes in designation or nomenclature of positions
resulting in a promotion or demotion in rank or increase or
decrease in compensation shall be allowed except when the position
is actually vacant, and the filling of such positions shall be strictly
is in accordance with civil service laws, rules, and regulations;
an

, (g) The creation of new positions and salary increases or
adjustments shall not be made retroactive.

SEC. 21. Deductions from the Block Grant; Exceptions. -
Twenty (20) years from the operationalization of the Bangsamoro
Government, the following shall be deducted from the block grant:

/ (a) Revenues from the following taxes imposed and collected
in the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction by the Bangsamoro
Government three (3) years prior:

@ Capital Gains Tax;
(2) Documentary Stamp Tax;
(8) Donor’s Tax; and

(4) Estate Tax; and
'

(b) Share of the Bangsamoro Governntent in the income
derived from the exploration, development, and utilization of
natural resources, as provided under Section 34, Article XII of
this Organic Law, collected three (8) years prior.

The amount allocated for the operation of the Bangsamoro
Sustainable Development Board, as provided in Section 8, Article
V1 of this Organic Law, shall not be included in the amount herein
to be deducted from the block grant. The abovementioned
deduction shall not include the shares of constituent local
government units and of indigenous communities in government
income derived from the exploration, development, and utilization
of natural resources under Sections 35 and 36 of this Article.
respectively.

SEC. 22. Review of the Block Grant Formula. — The
formula of the block grant, as provided above, shall be reviewed
by the Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board five (5) years after
its effectivity, and every five (5) years thereafter to consider, among
others, the fiscal needs of the Bangsamoro Government and the
actual revenues it shall be able to generate and to ensure that all
block grant expenditures are transparent and performance-based:
Provided, That if the National Government shall no longer have
any representative in the Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board,
the review shall be undertaken by the Intergovernmental
Relations Body.

SEC. 23. Development Programs and Projects. —
immediately after the ratification of this Organic Law, and for
another five (5) years thereafter, the National Government shall
provide for additional funds that will subsidize expenditures for
development projects and infrastructure in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region, including provincial and municipal roads,
Bangsamoro Government. The National Government and the
Bangsamoro Government, through the Intergovernmental
Relations Body, shall agree on the amount and manner of the
release of said amount to the Bangsamoro Government.

Loans

Src. 24. Foreign and Domestic Loans; Bonds, Noies, and
Obligations. —

(a) Loans, Credits, and Other Forms of Indebtedness. —
The Bangsamoro Government may contract loans, credits, and
other forms of indebtedness to finance the construction,

installation, improvement, expansion, operation or maintenance
of public utilities, infrastructure facilities, housing projects,
acquisition of real property, implementation of other capital
Investment projects, and for the development and welfare of the
people of the Bangsamoro.

Subject to acceptable credit worthiness, and in compliance
with the Constitution, relevant laws and regulations, such loans
may be secured from domestic and foreign lending institutions,
except foreign and domestic loans requiring sovereign guaranty,
whether explicit or implicit, which would require the approval of
the National Government.

The Parliament hy a vote of the majority of all its members
may authorize the Chief Minister to contract such domestic or
foreign loans.

The National Government shall assist the Bangsamoro
Government in complying with the requirements for a speedy
issuance of the sovereign guaranty to finance local infrastructure
and other socioeconomic development projects in accordance with
the Bangsamoro Development Plan. Within thirty (30) days from
the submission by the Bangsamoro Government of its application
for sovereign guaranty, the National Government shall inform

the Bangsamoro Government of the actions taken on the
application.

(b) Bonds, Notes, Debentures, and Obligations. - The
Bangsamoro Government shall have the authority to issue bonds,
debentures, securities, collaterals, notes, obligations, and other
debt papers or documents, as well as redeem or retire the same,
pursuant to a law enacted by the Parliament, to finance
self-liquidating and income-producing development or livelihood

i pursuant to the priorities established in its development
plan.

(c) Payment of Loans and Indebtedness.~The Bangsamoro
Government shall appropriate in its annual budget the amounts
sufficient to pay its incurred loans and indebtédlness: Provided,
That the amount of appropriations for debt sérvicing shall not
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the regular sources of revenue,

excluding those coming from grants, endowments, donations,
loans, foreign assistance and official development assistance of
the Bangsamoro: Provided, further, That not more than twenty
percent (20%) of the block grant shail be utilized for loan payments.

(@) Publication. —Any domestic or foreign-assisted loan and
the purpose thereof shall be published once a week for two (2)
consecutive weeks in at least one (1) newspaper of general
circulation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 25. Official Development Assistance. — The
Bangsamoro Government may avail of official development
assistance, upon review and approval of the National Government
the “Official Developmeni Assistance Aci of 1996,” as amended,
to achieve inclusive growth and poverty reduction through the
implementation of priority development projects.

Grants and Donations

SEC. 26. Granis and Donations. — Departments, bureaus,
offices, and state universities and colleges of the Bangsamoro
Government may accept donations, contributions, grants,
bequests, or gifts, in cash or in kind, from domestic or foreign
sources for purposes relevant to their functions.

In case of such grants or donations from governments of
foreign countries, their agencies and instrumenialities or
multilateral institutions or organizations, acceptance thereof
shall be subject to the prior clearance and approval by the
President or his authorized representative.

The Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board shall
promulgate rules for the implementation of this section.

Economic Agreements and Conventions

SEC. 27. Economic Agreements. — Subject to the provisions
of the Constitution, the Bangsamoro Government shall evolve a
system of economic agreements and trade compacts to generate
block grants for regional investments and improvements of

regional economic structures which shall be authorized by a law
enacted by the Parliament. Pursuant to specific recommendations
of a regional economic and development planning body which shall
be created by the Parliament, the Bangsamoro Government may
assist its constituent local government units in their requirements
for counterpart funds for foreign-assisted projects.

SEC. 28. Cultural Exchange, and Economic and Technical
Cooperation. ~ The Bangsamoro Government may establish
linkages for cultural exchange, economic and technical cooperation
with countries having diplomatic relations with the Philippines
upon review and approval of the National Government. The
Bangsamoro Government may recommend to the National
Government the assignment of qualified persons in Philippine
embassies and consulates, and their participation in international
delegations.

SEc. 29. Benefits from Conventions. — The Bangsamoro
Government shall be entitled to benefits resulting from conventions
to which the National Governmentis a party. Such benefits shall
be equitable, considering the available human and material
resources and comparative advantage of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region, as well as its socioeconomic conditions and
needs.

Government-Owned or Controlled Corporations

SEC. 30. Governmeni-Owned or Conirolled Corporations.
— Upon coordination with the National Government, the
Parliament shall have the power to create government-owned or
controlled corporations in compliance with the provisions of
Republic Act No. 10149, otherwise known as the “GOCC
Governance Act of 2011,” by a grant of legislative charter, or
under Batas Pambansa Big. 68, otherwise known as “The
Corporation Code of the Philippines:” Provided, That those duly
registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission may
likewise operate outside the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The Parliament may create a and other business entities to boost economic development in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 31. Existing Government-Owned or Controlled
Corporations Operating Exclusively in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. — The Bangsamoro Government shall have
the authority and control over existing government-owned or
controlled corporations operating exclusively in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region after determination by the Intergovernmental
Fiscal Policy Board of their feasibility: Provided, That they shall
have the option to transfer their operations outside of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, which shall be effected through
the necessary changes in their governing boards.

SEC. 32. Existing Government-Owned or Controlled
Corporations in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. — The
Bangsamoro Government shall be represented in the board of
directors or in the policy-making bodies of government-owned or
controlled corporations that operate a substantial portion of their
businesses directly or through their subsidiaries in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region or where the Bangsamoro
Government has a substantial interest.

The Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board shall determine
the extent of the participation of the Bangsamoro Government as
well as its shares from the results of the operations of these
corporations and their subsidiaries based on a formula that it
shall determine: Provided, That the Bangsamoro Government
shall have at least one (1) seat in the governing boards of the said
corporations.

SEC. 33. Southern Philippines Development Authority and
Al-Amanah Islamic Investment Bank. — Within six (6) months
from the establishment of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority,
the Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board shall determine the
participation of the Bangsamoro Government in the Al-Amanah
Islamic Investment Bank of the Philippines and the Southern
Philippines Development Authority as provided in Presidential
Decree No. 690, as amended. In the event of the transfer of
ownership or disposal of any property of the Southern Philippines
Development Authority, the local government unit where the
property is located shall have the preferential right to acquire the
property.

Sharing in the Exploration, Development,
and Utilization of Natural Resources

SEC. 34. Sharing in Exploration, Developmeni, and
Utilization of Natural Resources. ~ Government revenues
generated from the exploration, development, and utilization of
all natural resources in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region,
including mines and minerals, shall pertain fully to the
Bangsamoro Government. In the case of uranium and fossil fuels
such as petroleum, natural gas, and coal, the same may be
co-managed and the revenues shared equally between the National
Government and Bangsamoro Government, subject to the
limitations provided in the Constitution.

SEC. 35. Share of the Constituent Local Gowernmeni
Uniis. ~ The share of the Bangsamoro Government in the
revenues referred to in the immediately preceding section shall
be inclusive of those for its constituent local government units.

The share of the Bangsamoro Government is hereby
apportioned as follows: thirty percent (30%) to the Bangsamoro
Government; and to all its constituent local government units,
twenty percent (20%) to the provinces; fifteen percent (15%) to
the cities; twenty percent (20%) to the municipalities; and fifteen
percent (15%) to the barangays.

SEC. 36. Share of Indigenous Communities. — Indigenous
peoples and communities shall have an equitable share of the
revenues generated from the exploration, development, and
utilization of natural resources that are found within the
territories covered by a native, traditional, or customary title in
their favor, which shall be provided by a law to be passed by the
Parliament detailing the sharing mechanism and percentages:
Provided, That the rights and privileges granted to indigenous
peoples by Republic Act No. 8371 and other laws pertaining to
indigenous peoples shall not be diminished,

Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board
}

SEC. 37. Functions. - The ecg Fiscal Policy
Board created under Section 4, Article VI of this Organic Law
shall have the following functions:

(a) Recommend the necessary fiscal policy adjustments by
undertaking periodic reviews of the taxing powers, tax base, rates,
wealth sharing arrangements, and sources of revenues of the
Bangsamoro Government vis-d-vis its development needs;

(b) Address disputes between the National Government and
the Bangsamoro Government involving the collection of capital
gains tax, documentary stamp tax, donor's tax, and estate tax:

(c) Determine the extent of the participation of the
Bangsamoro Government in the board of directors or the
policy-making bodies of government-owned or controlled
corporations that operate a substantial portion of their businesses
directly or through their subsidiaries in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region or where the Bangsamoro Government has
substantial interest;

(@) Determine the participation of the Bangsamoro
Government in the operations of government-owned or controlled
corporations and their subsidiaries operating in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region, and its shares from the results of said
operations:

(e) Determine the participation of the Bangsamoro
Government in the Al-Amanah Islamic Investment Bank of the
Philippines, and the Southern Philippines Development Authority,
subject to the provisions of Section 33 of this Article: and

( Define the modalities for the filing of income tax returns
for corporations or firms whose central, main, or head offices are
located outside the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region but are doing
business within its territorial jurisdiction to determine the income
realized from such operations in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region, which shall be attributed as income derived therein and
subject to the sharing scheme between the National Government
and the Bangsamoro Government.

SEC. 38. Composition of the Intergovernmental Fiscal
Policy Board. - The Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board
shall be composed of the heads or representatives of the appropriate
departments and agencies of the National Government and heads

or representatives of the ministries and offices in the Bangsamoro
Government: Provided, That the Secretary of Finance and the
Minister of the appropriate ministry from the Bangsamoro
Government shall be its co-chairpersons: Provided, further, That
the Secretary of Budget and Management, Secretary of Trade
and Industry, and the Director-General of the National Economic
and Development Authority shall be members thereof.

Sic. 39. Meetings and Annual Report. - The
Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board shall meet at least once
every six (6) months or as often as necessary, and shall adopt its
own rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings.

An annual report shall be submitted by the
Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board to the National
Government and the Bangsamoro Government, and shall be made
available to the public.

SEc. 40. Full Disclosure Policy. -— The Bangsamoro
Government adopis a policy of full disclosure of its budget,
finances, bids and public offerings, and shall provide protocols for
the guidance of local authorities in the implementation of said
policy which shall include, among others, the posting of the
Summary of Income and Expenditures, and the participation of
representatives from civil society in the budget process. The same
policy shal! apply to its constituent local government units as
may be provided in 2 Bangsamoro local government code to be
enacted by the Parliament.

SEC. 41. Additional Fiscal Powers. - The
Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board may recommend to the
Congréss of the Philippines or the appropriate agency of the
National Government the grant of additional fiscal powers to the
Bangsamoro Government.

ARTICLE XIII
REGIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY
SEC. 1. Social Justice and Economic System. — The

Bangsamoro Government shall establish an economic system
based on the principles and state policies declared in the

Constitution. Pursuant to these principles, the Parliament shall
enact laws pertaining to the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
economy and patrimony that are responsive to the needs of
its people.

Sustainable Development

SEC. 2. Equitable and Sustainable Development. — In
order to protect and improve the quality of life of its inhabitants,
the development in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be
carefully planned taking into consideration the ecological balance
and the natural resources that are available for its use and for
the use of future generations.

The Bangsamoro Government shall promote the effective
use of economic resources and endeavor to attain economic
development that facilitates growth and full employment, human
development, and social justice.

The Bangsamoro Government shall likewise provide
equitable opportunities for the development of constituent local
government units and shall strengthen governance systems to
ensure people’s participation.

SEc. 3. Comprehensive Framework for Sustainable
Development. — The Bangsamoro Government shall develop a
comprehensive framework for sustainable development through
the proper conservation, utilization, and development of natural
resources, which shall guide it in adopting program and policy
mechanisms that focus on the environment dimensions of social
and economic interventions. It shall include measures for
environmental justice and governance, as well as for the reduction
of the vulnerability of women and marginalized groups to climate
change and variability.

Sc. 4. Bangsamoro Economic and Development Council.
~ The Parliament shall establish the Bangsamoro Economic and
Development Council which shall serve as the planning,
monitoring, and coordinating agency for all development plans,
programs, and projects of the Bangsamoro Government. It shall

evaluate and recommend short, medium, and long-term
comprehensive development plans, programs, and projects for the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region for approval by the Parliament.
The development plans, programs, and projects shall take into
account the development plans of the provinces, cities,
municipalities, and barangays as approved by their respective
local development councils.

SEC. 5. Gender and Development. — The Bangsamoro
Government shall recognize the role of women in governance and
ensure their fundamental equality before the law. It shall
guarantee full and direct participation of women in governance
and development process, ensuring that women shall benefit
equally in the implementation of development programs and
projects. é

In the utilization of public funds, the Bangsamoro
Government shall ensure that the needs of the Bangsamoro people,
regardless of gender, are adequately addressed. For this purpose,
ai least five percent (5%) of the total budget appropriation of each
ministry, office, and constituent local government unit of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be set aside for
gender-responsive programs, in accordance with a gender and
development plan. In the same manner, five percent (5%) to thirty
percent (30%) of the official development assistance received by
the Bangsamoro Government shall be set aside to complement
the gender and development budget allocation.

The Bangsamoro Government shall establish a mechanism
for consultation with women and local communities to further
ensure the allocation and proper utilization of development funds.
It shall identify and implement special development programs
and laws for women.

SEC. 6. Participation in National Development Planning.
—- To ensure that the Bangsamoro development plans are
reflected in the national development plans, a representative of
the Bangsamoro Government shall sit as member of a national
development plan steering committee or its equivalent and shall
participate in relevant planning activities of the National Economic
and Development Authority.

SEC. 7. Disaster Risk Reduction and Management and
Climaie Change Adaptation. — The Bangsamoro Government
recognizes the importance of disaster risk reduction and
management and climate change adaptation.

There is hereby created a Bangsamoro Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Council headed by the Chief Minister,
with powers and functions that shall be defined by the Parliament
in a law providing for disaster preparedness and response:
Provided, That it shall formulate the Bangsamoro Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Plan, which shall complement that
of the National Government: Provided, further, That through
the Chief Minister, it shall recommend to the President the
mobilization of resources of national defense in times of disaster
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The relevant agencies of the National Government and
Bangsamoro Government shall cooperate and coordinate on
disaster risk reduction and management.

The Bangsamoro Government, consistent with Republic Act
No. 9729, otherwise known as the “Climate Change Act of 2009,”
shall ensure that its constituent local government units formulate
their respective local climate change action plans and for the
proper and effective implementation thereof.

Natural Resources

Suc. 8. Natural Resources, Nature Reserves, and
Protecied Areas. — Subject to the provisions of the Constitution,
the Bangsamoro Government shall have the power, authority,
and right to explore, develop, and utilize the natural resources,
including surface and subsurface rights, inland waters, coastal
waters, and renewable and nonrenewable resources in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The protection, conservation, rehabilitation, and
development of forests, coastal, and marine resources, including
the adoption of programs and projects, to ensure the maintenance
of ecological balance and biodiversity shall be given priority.

nd
a

The Bangsamoro Government shall also have the power to
declare nature reserves and aquatic parks, forests, watershed
reservations, and other protected areas in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.

The Parliament shall pass a law to establish protected areas,
the procedure for the declaration and the management thereof,
and the role of the Bangsamoro Government and other
stakeholders in the process: Provided, That protected areas
to be declared within the ancestral domains shall be subject
to the free, prior and informed consent of the non-Moro
indigenous peoples.

Pending the enactment of such law, the declaration and
management of protected areas shall be governed by existing laws,
rules and regulations. Existing nature reserves and protected
areas shall remain as such. These, including those to be declared,
shall be managed in accordance with sustainable development
and biodiversity conservation policies and principles as contained
in international conventions and treaties to which the Philippines
is a party.

Src. 9. Transfer of Management of Existing Nature
Reserves and Protecied Areas, - The management and proiection
of nature reserves and aquatic parks. forests, watershed
reservations, and other protected areas in the territorial
jurisdiction of the Bangsamoro that have already been defined by
and under the authority of the National Government shall be
transferred to the Bangsamoro Government.

Within three (3) months from the establishment of the
Bangsamoro Transition Authority, the Bangsamoro Government
and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, as
well as other relevant government agencies, shall start the process
of transferring the management of these areas to the Bangsamoro
Government, including the conduct of surveys of all affected areas
and the planning and transition for each and every protected
area. The transfer shall be completed within a berjod not exceeding
two (2) years. ¥

SEc. 10. Exploration, Development, and Utilization of
Fossil Fuels and Uranium. — Subject to the provisions of the
Constitution and national laws, the Bangsamoro Government and
the National Government shall jointly exercise the power to grant
rights, privileges, and concessions over the exploration,
development, and utilization of uranium and fossil fuels such as
petroleum, natural gas, and coal in the territorial jurisdiction of
the Bangsamoro. The use of renewable energy shall be promoted
for power generation to achieve the sustainable development goals
and promote low carbon energy generation policies as provided in
Section 2 of this Article.

The National Government, through the Department of
Energy, and the Bangsamoro Government shall adopt a
competitive and transparent process for the grant of rights,
privileges, and concessions in the exploration. development. and
utilization of fossil fuels and uranium.

The Department of Energy and the Bangsamoro
Government shall identify and select prospective contract areas
to be offered for exploration and development. Qualified Filipino
citizens who are bona fide residents of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region shall be given a rating higher than other
proponents during the evaluation process. The award of the
service contract shall be made jointly by the Department of Energy
and the Bangsamoro Government.

SEC. 11. Preferential Righis of Bona Fide Residents of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. — Qualified citizens who are
bona fide residents of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, all
other conditions being equal, shall have preferential rights over
the exploration, development, and utilization of natural resources,
including uranium and fossil fuels such as petroleum, natural
gas, and coal within the territorial jurisdiction of the Bangsamoro.
Existing rights over the exploration, development, and utilization
of natural resources shall be respected until the expiration of the
corresponding leases, permits, franchises, or concessions, unless
legally terminated.

SEC. 12. Rights of Indigenous Peoples io Natural
Resources. — The Parliament shall enact a law recognizing the
rights of indigenous peoples in the Bangsamoro Autonomous

Region in relation to natural resources within the areas covered
by a native title, including their share in revenues as provided in
this Organic Law, and priority rights in the exploration,
development, and utilization of such natural resources within
their area.

The right of indigenous peoples to free, prior and informed
consent in relation to development initiatives and the exploration,
development, and utilization of the natural resources within
ancestral domains covered by Certificate of Ancestral Domain
Title shall be respected.

SEC. 13. Mines and Mineral Resources. - Subject to the
provisions of the Constitution and national laws, the Bangsamoro
Government shall have the authority and jurisdiction over the
exploration, development, and utilization of mines and minerals
in its territorial jurisdiction, taking into consideration
environmental protection and ecological balance. The Bangsamoro
Government shall have the power to grant permits, licenses, and
contracts for this purpose.

SEC. 14. Financial and Technical Assistance Agreemenis.
— The Bangsamoro Government may endorse to the President
financial and technical agreements covering mineral resources
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, in accordance with the
mining policy that shall be adopted by the Parliament.

SEC. 15. Regulation of Small-Scale Mining. — Small-scale
mining shall be regulated by the Bangsamoro Government to the
end that the ecological balance, safety and health, and the interests
of the affected communities, the miners, the indigenous peoples,
and the local government units of the place where such operations
are conducted are duly protected and safeguarded. All gold
produced by small-scale miners in any mineral area shall be sold
to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, or its duly authorized
representatives, which shall buy the same at prices competitive

with those prevailing in the world market, regardless of volume
or weight. }

¥
SEC. 16. Bangsamoro Mining Policy. ~ Policies on mining
and other extractive industries shall be established by the
Parliament in accordance with a comprehensive sustainable

development plan and overall medium-term and long-term
Bangsamoro Development Plan.

SEC. 17. Cadastral Land Surveys; Land Classification and
Urban Land Reform and Land Use Program. ~ The classification
of public lands in the Bangsamoro into alienable and disposable
lands shall be recommended by the Bangsamoro Government to
the President for the timely. implementation of Bangsamoro
development plans and targets.

The Bangsamoro Government may, upon authority of the
President, conduct cadastral surveys, lot surveys, and isolated
and special surveys in the Bangsamoro: Provided, That it shall
furnish the results of these surveys to, and coordinate with, the
relevant national government agencies to effect inclusion into
the National Cadastral Survey.

Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Parliament
may enact an urban land reform and land use program for the
region.

SEC. 18. Zones of Joint Cooperation. - Zones of Joint
Cooperation in the Sulu Sea and the Moro Gulf are hereby created,
the coordinates of which shall be defined by an ad hoc Joint Body
composed of representatives from the Department of Environment
and Natural Resources and the National Mapping and Resource
Information Authority, and a corresponding number of
representatives from appropriate agencies of the Bangsamoro
Government.

The Joint Body shall be convened within thirty (30) days
after the ratification of this Organic Law and shall cease to exist
after it has established the coordinates of the Bangsamoro
territorial jurisdiction, including the Bangsamoro Waters and
the Zones of Joint Cooperation.

SEC. 19. Joint Body for the Zones of Joint Cooperation.
— The Joint Body created for the Zones of Joint Cooperation
provided in Section 5, Article VI of this Organic Law, shall
establish the policies therein and shall be composed of the following:

$1

(@) Secretary of Agriculture and a Bangsamoro Minister
as co-Chaizpersons;

(b) Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources and
2 counterpart Minister of the Bangsamoro Government:

© Secretary of Transportation anda counterpart Minister
of the Bangsamoro Government:

(@) At least one (1) representative of a constituent local
government unit of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region adjacent
to the Sulu Sea;

(e) At least one (1) representative of a constityent local
government unit of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region adjacent
to the More Gulf:

@ Atleast one (1) representative from an adjoining non-
Bangsamoro local government unit adjacent to the Sulu Sea: and

(gj At least one (1) representative from an adjoining
non-Bangsamoro local government unit adjacent to the Moro Gulf.

The Bangsamoro Government and the National Government
shall ensure the free movement of vessels, goods, and people in
these Zones of Joint Cooperation, working together to regulate
the waters therein and formulating policies jointly for the
following purposes:

(@) Protection of the traditional fishing grounds:

i) Equitable sharing of the benefits from the resources
therein; and

(©) Ensuring the interconnectivity of the islands and
mainland areas comprising the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
towards a cohesive Bangsamoro political entity.

SEC. 20. Exploration, Development, and Utilization of
Noniliving Resources in the Zones of Joint Cooperation. -
Subject to the limitations provided in the Constitution, the Joint

Body for the Zones of Joint Cooperation shall ensure cooperation
and coordination between the National Government and the
Bangsamoro Government on the exploration, development, and
utilization of nonliving resources in the Zones of Joint Cooperation
and determine the sharing of income and revenues derived
therefrom.

SEc. 21. Transportation Routes in the Zones of Joint
Cooperation. — Direct transportation routes connecting the
islands in Sulu, Basilan, Tawi-Tawi, or the mainland parts of
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and passing through the
Zones of Joint Cooperation shall be considered intra-regional
routes.

SEC. 22. Managemeni of Inland Waters. -— The
Bangsamoro Government shall have exclusive powers over inland
waters, including lakes, marshes, rivers, and tributaries within
its territorial jurisdiction, except those that provide energy to
power generating plants. The Parliament shall enact laws on the
regulation, conservation, management, and protection of these
resources, and may classify inland waters in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. It shall create a Bangsamoro Authority and
offices for specific inland bodies of water that shall exercise
management and regulatory powers over these bodies of water.

If any inland water is a source of energy for areas outside
of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. the principle of
co-management of fossil fuels under Section 10 of this Article and
Section 34 of Article XU of this Organic Law shall apply.

The Bangsamoro Government shall ensure that the
utilization of these waters shall be for the primary benefit of the
people in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and shall give host
communities their share from the revenues generated from such
utilization.

The Bangsamoro Government shall coordinate and
cooperate with the Philippine Coast Guard concerning inland
waterways for navigation.

SEC. 23. Agriculture, Fisheries, and Aquatic Resources.
~ Consistent with the provisions of Republic Act No. 8550,
otherwise known as “The Philippixe Fisheries Code of 1998,” as
amended, and other relevant national laws, the policies and laws
of the Bangsamoro Government on agriculture, fisheries, and
aquatic resources shall advance agriculture as a key development
strategy, promote productivity measures, and provide support
for small farmers, landholders, and marginal fisherfolk. The
Bangsamoro people, indigenous peoples, and resident marginal
fisherfolk shall enjoy preferential fishing rights in the Bangsamoro
regional waters, without prejudice to the fishing rights of other
citizens of the Philippines, whether residents or nonresidents of
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Trade and Industry and Tourism

SEC. 24. Trade and Indusiry in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. — The Bangsamoro Government recognizes
the private sector as a mover of trade, commerce, and indusiry.
To achieve equity, social justice, and economic development, it
shall encourage and support the building up of entrepreneurial
capability in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and shall
recognize, promote, protect, and support the development of
cooperatives and other medium, small, and micro enterprises.
It shall adopt and implement cooperative development policies
and programs through the enactment of a Bangsamoro
cooperative code.

The Bangsamoro Government shall promote trade and
industry in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region by providing
avenues through which other countries may learn about its
unique industries, economic opportunities, and culture through
participation in trade missions, trade fairs, and other promotional
activities, It may also organize trade missions to other countries

observing the necessary coordination with the relevant government
agencies,

The Bangsamoro Government shall also prqmote domestic
trade preference for goods produced and materifis sourced from
within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and adopt measures
to increase their competitiveness. The Bangsamoro Government
shall also ensure that Bangsamoro products and services gain

S4

considerable access to the markets of its trading partners.
Particular attention shall also be given to the markets of its
trading partners who have historic and cultural ties to the
Bangsamoro people.

SEC. 25. Registration of Business Names. — The
Bangsamoro Government shall have the power to register
business vames which shall be listed in the Philippine Business
Registry.

SEC. 26. Barter Trade and Counterirade. - The
Bangsamoro Government shall regulate traditional barter trade
with the Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East
ASEAN Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA) Member States and
counterirade with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Member States. The goods or items that are traded
with the said countries shall not be sold elsewhere in the country
without the payment of appropriate customs or import duties in
accordance with existing national laws.

Countertrade with ASEAN Member States shall be in
accordance with the spirit, intent, goals, processes, modalities,
and arrangements in the ASEAN economic integration
agreements.

Sec. 27. Cooperatives and Social Entrepreneurship. -
The Bangsamoro Government shall recognize, protect, and
promote the establishment of cooperative enterprises. It shall
likewise encourage and promote social entrepreneurship as a
means to engage the private sector to assist in the development,
funding, and implementation of solutions to social, cultural, or
environmental issues.

The Parliament shall pass laws to strengthen the growth
and development of social enterprises in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region to achieve social justice, social equity, and
economic efficiency.

SEC. 28. Economic Zones, Industrial Estates, and Free
Ports. — The Bangsamoro Government may establish economic
zones, industrial estates, and free ports in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region, including the establishment ofa Bangsamoro

Economic Zone Authority which shall have similar powers as
those of the Philippine Economic Zone Authority. The Parliament
may provide such additional powers and functions to the
Bangsamoro Economic Zone Authority as may be necessary to
meet the special circumstances of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region.

Once the Bangsamoro Economic Zone Authority is created,
the Philippine Economic Zone Authority shall no longer create
any other economic zone within the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region. Any corporation, firm, or entity established within the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region by the Philippine Economic Zone
Authority shall be placed under the jurisdiction of the Bangsamoro
Economic Zone Authority, and shall continue to enjoy theenefits
granted to it by the Philippine Economic Zone Authority.

Through the intergovernmental relations mechanism, ihe
Bangsamoro Government and the National Government shall
cooperate on customs, immigration, and quarantine services
including the attendant international commitmenis thereto, in
order to implement and make fully operational such economic
zones, industrial estates, and free ports within one (1) year from
their establishment. Business and other enterprises operating
within the Bangsamoro economic zones, industrial estates, and
free ports are entitled to the fiscal incentives and other benefits
provided by the National Government to special economic zones,
The Bangsamoro Government shall provide fiscal incentives and
other benefits to investors in economic zones, industrial estates,
and free ports: Provided, That, for goods consumed and services
rendered outside the established economic zones, industrial estates,
and free ports in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, all relevant
national taxes shall be imposed.

Bangsamoro free ports shall be contiguous or adjacent toa
seaport or airport. The area of coverage of a free port may be so
much as may be necessary of that portion of the constituent
local government units in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region,
subject to such criteria as the Parliament may pyovide in a law
for that purpose. The administration of existing ¥ree ports in the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao are hereby transferred
to the Bangsamoro Government.

SEC. 29. Prohibition Against Toxie or Hazardous
Substances. - The Bangsamoro Government shall regulate,
restrict, or prohibit the use, importation, transit, transport,
deposit, disposal, and dumping of toxic or hazardous substances
within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall, in the
same manner, regulate activities that may adversely impact the
environment and may be harmful to the health, safety, and welfare
of the Bangsamoro people.

Sec. 30. Halal Program. — The Bangsamoro Government
shall have the power to accredit halal-certifying bodies in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall promote awareness
through the development and implementation of a halal campaign
program.

The Parliament shall enact laws to further strengthen its
policy and programs on halal development.

SEC. 31. Banks and Financial Institutions. - The
Bangsamoro Government shall encourage the establishment of:

(a) Banks and financial institutions and their branches
including an Islamic window in domestic and foreign conventional
banks; and

(b) Offshore banking units of foreign banks within the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, and in accordance with the
principles of the Islamic banking system.

SEC. 32. Islamic Banking and Finance. —- The Bangsamoro
Government, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Department
of Finance, and the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos
shall jointly promote the development of an Islamic banking and
finance system, to include, among others, the establishment of a
Shariah Supervisory Board and the promotion and development
of Shari’‘ah-compliant financial institutions. The Bangko Sentral
ng Pilipinas shall determine the type of organizational structure
to be created and its composition.

To facilitate the establishment of an Islamic banking and
finance system, the Bangsamoro Government and the National
Government shall review existing market environment policies,

adopt measures to enhance the competitiveness of Islamic finance
products, and ensure that Islamic financial players are not
inhibited from introducing Islamic finance products. It shall
further promote investor awareness and acceptance in order to
build a broader customer and asset base.

The operation of Islamic banks, Shari‘ah-compliant
financial institutions and other institutions performing similar
functions shall be subject to the power of supervision of the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas.

The Parliament shall enact laws that promote the growth
of Islamic finance such as those that promote tax incentives
and ensure tax neutrality of Islamic finance transactions in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. ‘

SEC. 33. Islamic Banking Unit in the Central Bank of the Philippines. — An Islamic banking unit shall, as far as practicable, be established in the Central Bank of the Philippines which shall be headed and staffed by qualified Islamic banking experts.

SEC. 34. Functions of the Shariah Supervisory Board and
Qualifications of lis Members. ~ Without prejudice to the crafting
of the Bangsamoro Islamic banking and finance framework by
the Parliament, the following ave the functions and qualifications
ofthe Shari'ah Supervisory Board:

(a) Functions. - The Shariah Supervisory Board shall be
responsible for monitoring the compliance of Shari’ah rules in
banking and finance transactions and issuance of Shari’ah
products. Furthermore, as a representative of the various Ulama,
it shall have the authority to issue fatwas regarding the products
and practices employed by banks and other institutions.

(b) Qualifications. — Subject to other qualifications that
the Parliament may enact, the members of the Board shall have
the necessary knowledge of both Islamic jurisprudence and
conventional banking and finance. }

¥

SEC. 35. Tourism. — The Bangsamoro Government shall
promote tourism within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

It may recommend the designation of tourism enterprise
zones to the Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone
Authority, in accordance with Republic Act No. 9593, otherwise
known as “The Tourism. Act of 2009.”

Public Utilities and Infrastructure

SEC. 36. Energy and Power Generation. - The
Bangsamoro Government shall promote investments in the energy
and power generation sector, domestic and international, public
and private, in the power sector industry in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region: Provided, That it shall as far as practicable,
promote low carbon sustainable power generation in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region consistent with sustainable
development goals and sustainable power generation policies
provided in this Organic Law: Provided, further, That the
Bangsamoro Government shall notify the National Government
insofar as power generation investments are concerned.

(a) Power Generation and Distribution Utilities Operating
Exclusively in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. - The
Bangsamoro Government shall have the authority to build power
generation and distribution utilities operating exclusively in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region through the Ministry of Energy
it shall create: Provided, That the Bangsamoro Government shall
divest its ownership of the utilities twenty-five (25) years after
their creation, It shall promote investments, domestic and
international, in the power sector industry in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.

Consistent with sustainable development goals and low
carbon sustainable power generation policies to reduce costs
associated with transmission including line losses and network
investment, distributed power generation shall be aggressively
promoted as part of the Bangsamoro Government's power
development plan. Power generation plants and distribution
utilities operating exclusively in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall be able to interconnect, sell, and buy power over the
national transmission grid subject to limitations under Republic
Act No. 9136, otherwise known as the “Electric Power Industry
Reform Act of 2001.” In the same way, transmission lines

operating exclusively in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall
be able to connect to the national transmission grid. Such power
plants and distribution networks may only sell power over the
national transmission grid once the power supply needs of its
customers have been completely met. The Bangsamoro
Government may assist electric cooperatives operating exclusively
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in accessing funds and
technology to ensure their financial and operational viability,
Assistance may be in the form of restructuring of debts, with
rehabilitation and efficiency improvement measures based ona
set of clear time-bound operational reform programs.

(b) Agus Hydropower Complex. — In the event of the
privatization of the Agus Hydropower Complex, the Bangsamoro
Government shall have preferential rights to acquire the
hydroelectric plants situated within its territorial jurisdiction.
Nevertheless, the National Government and the Bangsamoro
Government shall cooperate and coordinate through the
Intergovernmental Energy Board insofar as the utilization of water
from Lake Lanao for the Agus Hydropower Complex is concerned.
This is without prejudice to the payment of the obligation of
National Power Corporation or Power Sector Assets and Liabilities
Management Corporation to the Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao which now accrues to the Bangsamoro Government.

SEC. 37. Public Works and infrastructure. — The National
Government shall fund and implement the co ction and
maintenance of national roads, bridges, water supply and services,
and flood control and irrigation systems and for the maintenance
of existing airports, seaports, and wharves in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region: Provided, That with regard to water supply
and services, flood control, and irrigation systems that connect to
or from facilities outside the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region,
there shall be cooperation and coordination between the
Bangsamoro Government and the appropriate national or local
government bodies. All national roads and bridges in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be included in the:National
Road Network Information System. Natipnally-funded
infrastructure projects shall be implementedyby the National

Government.

The Bangsamoro Government shall submit proposals to the
appropriate national government agency for the inclusion of the
cost of such maintenance in the latter’s budget that shall be
submitted to the Congress of the Philippines for inclusion in the
General Appropriations Act. Funding for national roads, bridges,
and irrigation systems shall be regularly released to the relevant
departments of the National Government.

Transportation and Telecommunications

SEC. 38. Transportation. — The Bangsamoro Government
shall have the authority to grant regional franchises, licenses,
and permits to land, sea, and air transportation plying routes in
the provinces or cities within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region:
Provided, That the National Government shall regulate the
airside operations of all existing airports.

The Bangsarnore Government shall have the authority over
the following:

ia) Regulation of transportation in the Zones of Joint
Cooperation, subject to the provisions in Section 19 of this Article;

(b) Registration of land, water. and air transportation
operating exclusively within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region:
and

(c) Exercise of quasi-judicial powers over the operation of
land and water transportation in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in accordance with the rules of procedure established by
the Parliament.

SEC. 39. Telecommunications. - The Bangsamoro
Government shall have the authority to grant regional franchises,
licenses, and permits to telecommunication utilities whose
frequencies are confined to and whose main offices are located
within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region: Provided, That
nothing herein shall be construed as limiting in any way the
power of the Congress of the Philippines to grant national
franchises in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The Bangsamoro Government shall have authority over
the following:

(a) Issuance of certificates of public convenience and
necessity, special permits and provisional authority to operate
telecommunication companies in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region;

(b) Registration of telecommunication companies in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region: and

(©) Exercise of quasi-judicial powers over the operation of
telecommunication companies in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in accordance with the rules of procedure estabashed by
the Parliament.

ARTICLE XIV
REHABILITATION AND DEVELOPMENT

SEC. 1. Rehabilitation and Development. - The
Bangsamoro Government, with funding support from the National
Government, shall intensify development efforts for the
rehabilitation, reconstruction, and development of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region as part of the normalization process. It shall
formulate and implement a program for rehabilitation and
development that will address the needs of Moro Islamic Liberation
Front/Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Force members and its
decommissioned women auxiliary force, Moro National Liberation
Front/Bangsamoro Armed Forces members, and address the needs
of internally displaced persons, widows and orphans, and
poverty-stricken communities. It shall observe, promote, and
ensure gender-responsiveness in all aspects of security and peace
building, including the participation of women in decision-making.

SEC. 2. Special Development Fund. ~ The National
Government shall provide a special development fund to the
Bangsamoro Government for the rebuilding, rekdbilitation, and
development of its conflict-affected communities,

The amount equivalent to Fifty billion pesos
(P50,000,000,000.00), at Five billion pesos (P5,000,000,000.00)
per year, for a period of ten (10) years from the ratification
of this Organic Law, shall be allocated for this purpose.

The utilization of the funds shall be in accordance
with the Bangsamoro Development Plan to be adopted by the
Bangsamoro Government, as provided in Section 6, Article XIII
of this Organic Law.

ARTICLE XV
PLEBISCITE

SEC. 1. Establishment of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region. - The establishment of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region and the determination of its territorial jurisdiction shall
take effect upon ratification of this Organic Law by majority of
the votes cast in a plebiscite in the following:

ia) The present geographical area known as the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao created under
Republic Act No. 6734, as amended by Republic Act No. 9054,
which shall subsist as such until this Organic Law is ratified
through a plebiscite;

(b) The municipalities of Baloi, Munai, Nunungan, Pantar,
Tagoloan, and Tangkal in the Province of Lanao del Novte that
voted for inclusion in the Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao during the 2001 plebiscite;

() The following thirty-nine (39) barangays in the
municipalities of Aleosan, Carmen, Kabacan, Midsayap,
Pigkawayan, and Pikit in the Province of North Cotabato that
voted for inclusion in the Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao during the 2001 plebiscite:

(1) Dunguan, Lower Mingading, and Tapodoc in the
Municipality of Aleosan (3);

@) Manarapan and Nasapian in the Municipality of
Carmen (2);

(8) Nanga-an, Simbuhay, and Sanggadong in the
Municipality of Kabacan (3);

(4) Damatulan, Kadigasan, Kadingilan, Kapinpilan,
Kudarangan, Central Labas, Malingao, Mudseng, Nabalawag,
Olandang, Sambulawan, and Tugal in the Municipality of
Midsayap (12);

(6) Lower Baguer, Balacayon, Buricain, Datu Binasing,
Kadingilan, Matilac, Patot, and Lower Pangangkalan in the
Municipality of Pigkawayan (8):

&

(6) Bagoinged, Balatican, S. Balong, S. Balongis,
Batulawan, Buliok, Gokotan, Kabasalan, Lagunde, Macabual,
and Macasendeg in the Municipality of Pikit (11);

(7) The City of Cotabato;
(8) The City of Isabela in the Province of Basilan; and

(2) Those qualified for inclusion in the plebiscite, by way
of resolution or petition.

SEC. 2. Period for Plebiscite. — The plebiscite herein
mentioned shall be conducted not earlier than ninety (90) days
nor later than one hundred fifty (150) days after the
effectivity of this Organic Law.

For this purpose, the Commission on Elections shall
undertake the necessary steps to enable the holding of the
plebiscite within the period.

SEC. 3. Results of the Plebisciie, —

(a) The Bangsamoro Autonomous ion shall be
established and all the provinces and cities ofthe Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao created under Republic Act No. 6734,

as amended by Republic Act No. 9054, shall form part of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region if the majority of the votes
cast in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao shall be in
favor of the approval of this Organic Law: Provided, That the
provinces and cities of the present Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao shall vote as one geographical area.

(b) Any of the municipalities of Baloi, Munai, Nunungan,
Pantar, Tagoloan, and Tangkal in the Province of Lanao del Norte
that votes favorably for its inclusion in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region shall form part of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region: Provided, That the majority of the votes
cast in the Province of Lanao del Norte shall be in favor of the
inclusion of the municipality in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region.

(¢) Any ofthe barangays in the municipalities of Kabacan.
Carmen, Aleosan, Pigcawayan, Pikit, and Midsayap as
enumerated in paragraph (c), Section 1 of this Article that votes
favorably for its inclusion in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
shall form part of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region:
Provided, That the majority of the votes cast in the municipality
to which the barangay belongs shall be in favor of the inclusion of
the barangay in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

@ The City of Cotabato shall form part of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region if the majority of the votes
cast in the city shall be in favor of its inclusion.

@) The City of Isabela in the Province of Basilan shall
form part of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region if the
majority of the votes cast in the city shall be in favor ofits inclusion
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region: Provided, That the
majority of the votes cast in the Province of Basilan shall be in
favor of the inclusion of the City of Isabela in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.

> Any other contiguous area where there is a resolution
of the local government unit or a petition of at least ten percent
(10%) of the registered voters in the local government unit
asking for its inclusion at least two (2) months prior to the conduct

of the ratification of this Organic Law shall form part of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region if the majority of the votes cast
in the political units directly affected shall be in favor of the
inclusion of the petitioning local government unit in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

SEC. 4. Reconstitution of Local Government Units. — The
Parliament may, by law, provide for the reconstitution of
geographical areas in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region into
appropriate territorial or political subdivisions depending on the
results of the plebiscite. Nothing herein shall be construed to
allow the Parliament to create legislative districts,

SEC. 5. Plebiscite Questions. — The questions tobe asked
of the voters in the plebiscite shall be determined by the
Commission on Elections.

SEC. 6. Plebiscite Monitoring. - The Commission on
Elections shall also provide for the accreditation of plebiscite
monitors, including the international-domestic monitoring body
created by the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and
the Moro Islamic Liberation Front peace panels, in accordance
with established international standards on election monitoring.
The monitoring body shall have access to all operations related to
the conduct of the plebiscite and conduct regular and random
checks. The reports of the international-domestic monitoring body
shall be made available to the peace panels for their disposition.

SEC. 7. Qualified Voters. — All registered voters in the
provinces, cities, municipalities, and barangays mentioned under
Sections 1 and 3 of this Article shall be qualified to participate in
the plebiscite on the establishment of the Bangsamoro Autonomous

Region.

SEC. 8. Special Registration. — The Commission on

Elections shall conduct a special registration before the date of
the plebiscite. ’

J
SEC. 9. Promulgation of Rules for Me Conduct of
Plebiscite. - The Commission on Elections shall promulgate
rules necessary for the conduct of plebiscite, including those for
the accreditation of plebiscite monitors, voluntary inclusion in

the plebiscite, and the special registration of voters as provided
herein, within fifteen (15) days from the effectivity of this
Organic Law, with the primary objective of optimizing the
opportunity for participation in the plebiscite of qualified voters
in the areas specified for the establishment of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.

SEC. 10. Information Campaigns. - The Commission on
Elections shall supervise the conduct of information campaigns
on the plebiscite, including sectoral campaigns for indigenous
communities, women, youth, religious, professionals and public
and private sector employees, in every barangay, municipality,
city, and province where the plebiscite is to be conducted.

Public conferences, assemblies, or meetings on dates
before the plebiscite day itself shall be held to inform the residents
thereof regarding the significance and meaning of the plebiscite
and to help them to cast their votes intelligently. Free, full, and
constructive discussion and exchange of views on the issues shall
be encouraged.

For this purpose, the Bangsamoro Transition Commission
shall assist in the information dissemination campaign. Such
campaign shall be without prejudice to other information
dissemination and public advocacy initiatives by the other
government or nongovernment groups or individuals.

For information campaigns and other public advocacy
initiatives with indigenous communities, local leaders shall be
engaged to lead discussions in their respective communities.

Public advocacy initiatives shall be conducted within
the framework of solidarity, cooperation, and unity among
Bangsamoro people, non-Moro indigenous peoples, and settler
communities. Consultations shall give due respect to the
roles of non-Moro indigenous and Moro women, and encourage
their active participation.

SEC. 11. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to
provide for the requirements of the conduct of the plebiscite,
including the monitoring, information campaign, and the

registration of voters shall be charged against available funds in
the current General Appropriations Act.

ARTICLE XVI
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY

SEC. 1. Transition Period. — The transition period for
the establishment of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
shall commence upon ratification of this Organic Law.

This Organic Law shall be deemed ratified when approved
by a majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite as proclaimed by
the Commission on Elections or its duly authorized officers.

The transition period shall end upon the dissolution
of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority as provided in this
Organic Law.

The transition period shall be without prejudice to the
initiation or continuation of other measures that may be required
by post-conflict transition and normalization even beyond the
term of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

SEC. 2. Bangsamoro Transition Authority. — There is
hereby created a Bangsamoro Transition Authority which shall
be the interim government in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region during the transition period. The Moro Islamic Liberation
Front shall lead the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, without
prejudice to the participation of the Moro National Liberation
Front in its membership.

The compensation of the members of the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority shall be subject to existing rules and
regulations of the National Government.

The Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall be composed
of eighty (80) members, who shall be appointed Hy the President:
Provided, That, in addition, the elected officials df the Autonomous
Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao shall automatically

become members of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority
and shall serve until noon of the 30 of June 2019: Provided,
further, That non-Moro indigenous communities, youth, women,
settler communities, traditional leaders, and other sectors shall
have representatives in the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

SEC. 8. Powers and Authorities. — Legislative and
executive powers in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region during
transition shall be vested in the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.
During the transition period, executive authority shall be exercised
by the interim Chief Minister who shall be appointed. by the
President as such, while legislative authority shall be exercised
by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

All powers and functions of the Bangsamoro Government
as provided in this Organic Law is vested in the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority during the transition period.

For purposes of mechanisins for intergovernmental relations
with the National Government and local government units in
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, the Bangsamoro Transition
Authority shall be deemed as the Bangsamoro Government for
the duration of the transition period.

Sc. 4. Functions and Priorities. - The Bangsamoro
Transition Authority shall ensure the accomplishment of the
following priorities during the transition period:

(a) Enactment of priority legislations such as the
Bangsamoro Administrative Code, Bangsamoro Revenue Code,
Bangsamoro Electoral Code, Bangsamoro Local Government Code,
and Bangsamoro Education Code consistent with powers and
prerogatives vested in the Bangsamoro Government by this
Organic Law: Provided, That until the abovementioned laws
are enacted, the Muslim Mindanao Autonomy Act No. 25,
otherwise known as the “Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao Local Government Code,” and subsisting laws on
elections and other electoral matters shall apply in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

The Bangsamoro Transition Authority may also enact a
Bangsamoro Civil Service Code, as provided in this Organic
Law, subject to the Constitutional mandate of the Civil
Service Commission.

The Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall enact a law
to recognize, protect, promote, and preserve the rights of the
indigenous peoples in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.
Until the law is enacted, subsisting regional laws on indigenous
peoples in the Bangsamoro shall be operational.

These rights shall be promoted, protected, and enforced
by the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs as provided
under Section 8 of this Article. é

(b) Determination of parliamentary districts for the first
regular election for the members of the Parliament subject to the
standards set in Section 10, Article VII of this Organic Law;

(©) Organization of the bureaucracy of the Bangsamoro
Government during transition, including the approval and
implementation of a transition plan, and the institution of a
placement process for hiring of personnel during transition. This
also includes the setting up of offices and other institutions
necessary for the continued functioning of government and
delivery of social services in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region,
as well as those necessary for the smooth operations of the first
elected Bangsamoro Government in 2022:

@ Full transier of powers and properties of the Autonomous
Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao to the Bangsamoro
Government, except those properties, land, and structures located
outside of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. The land
and permanent buildings or structures located outside the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, owned, controlled,
administered, or in the possession of the Autonomous Regional
Government in Muslim Mindanao, shall be purchased by the
National Government at a price to be determingd through the
intergovernmental relations mechanism within ohe (1) year from
the ratification of this Organic Law. Any dispute on the price
may be appealed to the Office of the President which shall decide

on the price with finality within three (8) months from the receipt
of the appeal. The proceeds of the purchase shall be remitted to
the Bangsamoro Government;

(©) The disposition of the personnel of the Autonomous
Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao as provided in
Section 10 of this Article;

@ Transition from the Autonomous Regional Government
in Muslim Mindanao to the Bangsamoro Government, as
provided in this Organic Law; and

(g) Other matters that may be necessary for the protection
and promotion of the general welfare of the constituents
of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.

Src. 5. Continuity of Government. — To foreclose any
political interregnum in the governance of the region, the
twenty-five (25) incumbent elected officials of the Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao, and the Bangsamoro Transition
Commission, an independent body created by Executive Order
No. 120, Series of 2012, as amended by Executive Order No. 08,
Series of 2016, shall act as caretakers of the administration of
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region until the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority is constituted.

Sec. 6. Transition Plan. ~ Within the first sixty (60)
days of the transition period, the interim Chief Minister shall
submit to the Bangsamoro Transition Authority a transition plan
that shall contain the proposed organizational plan, as well as,
the schedule for implementation therefor. The Bangsamoro
Transition Authority shall, by a majority vote of all its members,
approve or otherwise act on the proposed transition plan within
ten (10) days upon submission by the interim Chief Minister.
If the transition plan is not acted upon within sixty (60) days,
it shall be deemed approved. The transition plan shall be
implemented within fifteen (15) days from its approval.

SEC. 7. Interim Officers. — The interim Chief Minister
shall organize the interim Cabinet and shall appoint two (2) interim
Deputy Chief Ministers, who shall also be members of the
Bangsamoro Transition Authority. The interim Chief Minister

shall also appoint such other ministers as may be necessary to
perform the functions of government during the transition period,
a majority of whom shall be from among the members of the
Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

/ Members of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority who are
appointed to cabinet positions shall serve their offices concurrently:
Provided, That no member of the Bangsamoro Transition

Authority may be appointed, elected or otherwise hold more than two (2) positions at the same time.

SEC. 8. Interim Cabinet. — The Interim Cabinet shall be
composed of fifteen (15) primary ministries with suboffices, namely:
(a) Finance. and Budget and Management; ‘
) Social Services;
©) Trade, Investments, and Tourism;
@) Labor and Employment;
e) Transportation and Communications:
() Basic, Higher and Technical Education:
(g) Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs:
th) Health;
i) Public Works;
G) Local Government;
(k) Environment, Natural Resources, and Energy;

J
@) Human Settlements and Developmént:

(m) Science and Technology;

(a) Agriculture, Fisheries, and Agrarian Reform; and
(0) Public Order and Safety.

Other offices on youth, women, settler communities, disaster
risk reduction and management, and planning and development,
among others, may be created by the Bangsamoro Transition
Authority.

The Atiorney General’s Office, under the Office of the
Chief Minister, shall likewise be created by the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority.

SEC. 9. Interim Bureaucracy. — The authority of the
Bangsamoro Transition Authority to create offices and organize
the bureaucracy during the transition period is without prejudice
to the authority of the Bangsamoro Government to reorganize
the bureaucracy upon its constitution, or any time thereafter.
In the exercise of this authority, the Bangsamoro Transition
Authority shall ensure the least possible disruption to the
functioning of government and the delivery of services in the
region.

All offices and institutions of the Autonomous Regional
Government in Muslim Mindanao shall be subject to the
phase-out plan that shall be adopted by the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority.

SEC. 10. Transfer of Powers and Properties, and
Disposition of Personnel. - All powers, functions, assets, capital,
records, funds, receivables, equipment, and facilities of the
Autonomous Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao at the
time of the ratification of this Organic Law shall be transferred
to the Bangsamoro Government, except those properties, land,
and structures which are located outside of the Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao and subject to the conditions as
providéd in paragraph (d), Section 4 of this Article.

; The Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall schedule the
gradual phasing out of offices of the Autonomous Regional
Government in Muslim Mindanao, which are deemed abolished
upon the ratification of this Organic Law.

In consideration of public interest and the delivery of
services, officials holding appointive positions shall continue to
perform theix functions in accordance with the phase-out schedule.
Employees in the sectors of health, education, and social welfare
shall be absorbed and transferred to the Bangsamoro Government.
The Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall conduct a human
yesource audit and shall subject all transferred and new employees
to qualification standards as provided in the laws, rules, and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission and those that
may be set by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

The National Government shall provide the necessary funds
for the benefits and entitlements of the affected employees of
the Autonomous Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao
during the transition period.

An inter-agency committee headed by the Office of the
President, and composed of the Department of Budget and
Management, Commission on Audit, and Civil Service
Commission, shall conduct the requisite inventory to ensure that
the liabilities of the Autonomous Regional Government in Muslim
Mindanao under law, contracts, or obligations shall be assumed
by the National Government prior to the transfer of powers,
functions, assets, capital. records, funds, receivables, equipment,
and facilities of the Autonomons Regional Government in Muslin
Mindenao to the Bangsamoro Transition Authority.

For this purpose, the Office of the Regional Governor of the
Autonomous Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao shall
turn over to the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, upon the
latter's constitution, a summary report on the status of the
Autonomous Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao as of
the date of the ratification of this Organic Law, including
information on the status of devolution, personnel, properties,
and assets and liabilities of the Autonomous Regional
Government in Muslim Mindanao.

The creation of the different offices andj their respective
staffing complement shall be consistent with dkisting budgeting,
organization, staffing, position classification and compensation
policies, guidelines, and standards of the National Government.

The affected personnel who will not be absorbed in the
positions of the new staffing pattern of the different offices in the
Bangsamoro Government, whether hired on a permanent.
temporary, casual or contractual basis and with appointments
attested by the Civil Service Commission, shall be entitled to
applicable retirement or separation benefits as provided in this
Organic Law.

The affected personnel who opt to retire or be separated
shall be entitled to any of the following applicable incentives:

(a) One hundred percent (100%) of the monthly basic
salary for every year of government service computed starting
from the first year for those who have rendered one (1) year to
less than five (5) years of service;

(b) One hundred fifty percent (150%) of the actual monthly
salary for every year of government service computed starting
from the first year for those who have rendered five (5) years of
service but less than ten (10) years: or

(c) Two (2) months of actual monthly basic salary for every
year of government service computed starting from the first year
for those who have rendered ten (10) years or more of service.

Affected personnel who are retired or are separated from
the service shall not be re-employed in any agency of the
Bangsamoro Government or the National Government, including
government-owned or controlled corporations for a period of five
(5) years. The retired or separated personnel who are re-employed
during the prohibited period shall refund, on a prorated basis,
the separation incentives they received under this section.

The Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall institute an
independent, strictly merit-based, and credible placement and
hiring process for all offices, agencies, and institutions in the
Bangsamoro Government, and shall consider gender and
ethnic balance.

SEC. 11. Disposition of Personnel and Assets of National
Government Offices and Agencies. — The National Government
shall provide for the disposition of personnel of the National
Government or national government-owned or controlled
corporations whose mandate and functions are transferred to or
now vested in the Bangsamoro Government by virtue of this
Organic Law. Properties and assets shall be transferred to the
Bangsamoro Government within three (3) months from the
organization of the Bangsamoro Transition Authority, except
those properties, land, and structures located outside of the
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. The transfer of
properties and assets is without prejudice to the power of the
Bangsamoro Transition Authority to organize the bureaucracy
during the transition period. ;

SEC. 12. Disselution of the Bangsamoro Transition
Auihorily. — Immediately upon the election and qualification of
the Chief Minister under the first Parliament, the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority shall be deemed dissolved.

Within sixty (60) days from the assumption into office of
all members of the first Parliament, the Bangsamoro Transition
Authority shall submit its final report and recommendations on
the status of government during the transition period to the
Parliament, as well as to the House of Representatives, the Senate
of the Philippines, and the Office of the President.

SEC. 13. First Regular Election. ~ The first regular election
for the Bangsamoro Government under this Organic Law shall
be held and synchronized with the 2022 national elections. The
Cominission on Elections, through the Bangsamoro Electoral
Office, shall promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct of
the elections, enforce and administer them pursuant to national
laws, this Organic Law and the Bangsamoro Electoral Code.

SEC. 14. Initial Funding for Transition. - The amount
necessary to carry out the requirements of transition, including
the organizational activities of the Bangsamqro Transition
Authority, organization of the bureaucracy, hirhig of personnel,
and the exercise of functions and powers of the Bangsamoro
Transition Authority as provided in this Organic Law, shall

be charged against available funds in the current General
Appropriations Act. In addition, the current year's
appropriations for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
shall also be transferred to the Bangsamoro Transition Authority
for this purpose.

The initial funding shall be without prejudice to any
supplemental budget that may be appropriated by the Congress
of the Philippines to support the transition.

Government functions falling within the reserved powers
of the National Government in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall continue to be financed by the National Government
funds.

ARTICLE XVII
AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, REPEAL

Sec. 1. Amendments and Revisions. — Any amendment
tw, revision, or repeal of this Organic Law shall be made by law
enacted by the Congress of the Philippines.

ARTICLE XVIf1
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 1. Subsisting Regional Laws. — All subsisting laws
enacted by the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao Regional
Legislative Assembly by virtue of authorities provided under
Republic Act No. 6734, as amended by Republic Act No. 9054,
shall be deemed valid and in effect, unless inconsistent with this
Organic Law or repealed by laws passed by the Parliament.

SEC. 2. Existing Local Government Units. -
Notwithstanding the provisions of Republic Act No. 7160, as
amended, the existing municipalities of Al-Barka, Hadji
Mohammad Ajul, Akbar and Hadji Muhtamad in the Province of
Basilan: and the municipalities of Datu Blah T. Sinsuat, Pandag,

Mangudadatu, Northern Kabuntalan, Datu Anggal Midtimbang,
Datu Hoffer, and Datu Salibo in the Province of Maguindanao
are hereby converted into regular municipalities.

SEC. 8. Separability Clause. — The provisions of this
Organic Law are deemed separate. If, for any reason, any section
or provision of this Organic Law is declared unconstitutional,
other sections or provisions, which are not affected by such
declaration, shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 4. Amendatory Clause. — Upon the ratification of
this Organic Law, the pertinent provisions of the following
laws which are inconsistent with this Organic Law are hereby
amended accordingly:

(a) Sections 25, 129, 289, 290, 297, and 442 of Republic
Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the “Local Government Code
of 1991,” as amended;

) Section 4 of Republic Act No. 6758, otherwise known as
the “Compensation and Position Classification Act of 1989, as
amended:

© Section 30 of Republic Act No. 8371, otherwise known
as “The Indigenous Peoples Rights Aci of 1997’;

@ Articles 140, 143. 152, 153, 154, 164, 165, 166, 167 and
163 of Presidential Decree No. 1083, otherwise known as the
“Code of Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines”;

() Section 9 of Republic Act No. 9996, otherwise known as
the “Mindanao Developmeni Authority (MinDA) Act of 2010”;

( Section 1 of Executive Order No. 115, Series of 1986,
otherwise known as “Reorganizing the National Security Council
and Defining lis Membership, Function, and Authority and
Other Purposes”; ¥

(g) Section 5, Chapter 2, Subtitle (c), Title II, Book V of
Executive Order No. 292, Series of 1987, otherwise known as the
“Administrative Code of the Philippines”:

(hb) Section 8 of Republic Act No. 9997, otherwise known as
the “National Commission on Muslim Filipinos Act of 2009”;

@) Sections 7, 12-18, 19-23, 24-27, 37-45, and 46-48 of
Republic Act No. 8651, otherwise known as the “Charter of the
Adiong Memorial Polytechnic State College”;

(j) Section 4 of Republic Act No. 1387, otherwise known as
the “Charter of the Mindanao State University’, as amended by
Republic Act Nos. 1893, 3791 and 3868;

(k) Section 6 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 208, otherwise known
as the “Charter of Sulu State College”;

@) Section 5 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 384, otherwise
known as the “Charter of Tawi-Tawi Regional Agricultural
College”;

(m) Section 6 of Presidential Decree No. 1943, otherwise
known as the “Charter of Basilan State College”;

(a) Sections 15 and 30 of Republic Act No. 6975, otherwise
known as the “Department of the Interior and Local Government
Act of 1990,” as amended by Republic Act No. 8551;

(0) Section 3 of Republic Act No. 9263, otherwise known
as the “Bureau of Fire Protection and Bureau of Jail Management
and Penology Professionalization Act of 2004’;

(p) Section 5 of Republic Act No. 9514, otherwise known
as the “Fire Code of the Philippines of 2008’;

@ Sections 6, 21, 23, and 119 of Republic Act No. 8424,
otherwise known as the “Tax Reform Act of 1997,” as amended
by Republic Act No. 9337;

(x) Sections 59, 60, 61, and 62 of Republic Act No. 9593,
| otherwise ktfown as “The Tourism Act of 2009”; and

(8) Sections 2, 6, and 37 of Republic Act No. 9136, otherwise
known as the “Electric Power Industry Reform Act of 2001.”

All other laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations, and
other issuances or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this
Organic Law, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Src. 4. Repealing Clause. — Upon ratification of this
Organic Law, Republic Act No. 6734, otherwise known as the
“Organic Act for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao,”
as amended by Republic Act No. 9054 is hereby repealed.

SEc. 5. Effectivity. — This Organic Law shall take effect
fifteen (15) days following its complete publication in the Official
Gazette and in at least two (2) national newspapers of general
circulation and one (1) local newspaper of general circulation in
the autonomous region.

proved,
<
‘ s
_
VICENTE C\SOTTO III GLORIAMACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President ofthe Senate Speaker of the House

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 6475
and Senate Bill No. 1717 was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate on July 24, 2018 and

July 23, 2018, respectively. UP

MYRA Wea D. VILLARICA CESAR STRAIT PAREJA
House of Representatives

oI
‘IC OF THE PHILIPPINES
" PRRD 2016 - 007064