H. No. 6221
S. No. 1738

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Seventeenth Congress

Second Regular Session
_—_-—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand seventeen.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 110595]

AN ACTESTABLISHING THE PHILIPPINE IDENTIFICATION
SYSTEM

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. ~ This Act shall be known as
the “Philippine Identification System Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policies. ~-It is hereby declared
the policy of the State to establish a single national identification.
system referred to as the “Philippine Identification System” or
the “PhilSys’ for all citizens and resident aliens of the Republic
of the Philippines to promote seamless delivery of service, to
improve the efficiency, transparency, and targeted delivery of
public and social services, to enhance administrative
governance, to reduce corruption and curtail bureaucratic red

tape, to avert fraudulent transactions and misrepresentations,
to strengthen financial inclusion, and to promote ease of doing

business. Towards this end, a resilient digital system shall be
deployed to secure the data collected and ensure that the people’s
right to privacy, confidentiality and other basic rights are at
all times upheld and protected.

Itis also the declared policy of the State to recognize the
indispensable role of the private sector as the main engine of
national growth and development, and to provide the most
appropriate incentives to mobilize private resources for the
purpose of promoting the use and ensuring maximum efficiency
of the PhilSys as envisioned in this Act.

SEC. 3. Objectives. — The PhilSys shall primarily be
established to provide a valid proof of identity for all citizens
and resident aliens as a means of simplifying public and private
transactions. The PhilSys aims to eliminate the need to present
other forms of identification when transacting with the
government and the private sector, subject to appropriate
authentication measures based on a biometric identification
system.

Furthermore, the PhilSys shall be a social and economic
platform through which all transactions including public and
private services can be availed of and shall serve as the link in
the promotion of seamless service delivery, enhancing
administrative governance, reducing corruption, strengthening
financial inclusion, and promoting ease of doing business.

SEC. 4. Scope and Application. — This Act shall apply to
all natural persons in all transactions where the PhilSys
Number, Philippine Identification (PhilID), or biometric
information is required, presented, or used, whether legally or
illegally, within or outside the Republic of the Philippines.

SEC. 5. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Authentication refers to the process of verifying,
whether online or cffline, the identity of an individual against
the registry information in the PhilSys or PhillD.

(b) Biometric exceptions refer to instances whereby a
citizen or résident alien is not able to give complete set of
biometrics as required by PhilSys but is nevertheless admitted
into the PhilSys.

(c) Biometric information refers to front facing
photograph, fingerprint, iris scan and/or such other identifiable
features of an individual.

@ Cardholder refers to a citizen or resident alien who
has been registered under the PhilSys and who has been issued
and thus, in possession of the Philippine Identification Card.

(e) Citizen refers to a Filipino citizen, as defined in the
Constitution, including those with dual or multiple citizenships,
in accordance with Republic Act No. 9225, otherwise known as
the “Citizenship Retention and Re-acquisition Act of 2003”.

(f) Mobile Registration refers to transportable
registration centers.

(g) Personal information refers to any information
whether recorded in a material form or not, from which the
identity of an individual is apparent or can be reasonably and
directly ascertained by the entity holding the information, or
when put together with other information would directly and
certainly identify an individual as defined in Republic Act
No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy Act of 2012”.

(h) Philippine Embassy or Philippine Foreign Service
post refers to a diplomatic mission or consular office of the
Republic of the Philippines in a foreign country, including the
economic and cultural office of the Philippines, or the like, ina
foreign territory.

(i) Record history refers to an entry in the PhilSys
consisting of the information regarding a registered person in

connection with his or her entries in the system and his or her
PhillD, as follows:

(1) Date of filing of the application for registration and
the particulars thereof;

(2) Date of filing of every application for modification
and the particulars thereof;

(3) Modification of entry made, the date such
modification was made, and the document/s or other proof
submitted in support thereof;

 

(4) Reason for the omission of any entry;

; (5) Dates of issuance, reissuance, and cancellation of the
PhillD, and including the reasons therefor;

/ ©) Details of authentication requests processed by the
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), including the date the
request was made and processed, the requesting entity, and
the response provided by PhilSys;

(7) Disclosure, conveyance, dissemination, publication
and use of information by third parties; and

(8) Other relevant information regarding the
registration, modification, and authentication of personal
information of a citizen or resident alien under this Act.

(j) Registered information refers to any personal
information regarding a citizen or resident alien recorded in
the PhilSys, including biometric information and information
about a citizen or resident alien required under this Act to be
recorded under the PhilSys.

/ (k) Registered person refers to a person who has been
registered under the PhilSys.

@ Registration refers to the process of entering
demographic and biometric information of citizens or resident
aliens in the Philippines to the system.

(m) Registration centers refer to necessary facilities to
capture both demographic and biometrics information required
for PhilSys as enumerated in Section 9 of this Act.

(a) Resident alien refers to an individual who is not a
citizen of the Philippines but has established residence in the

Philippines for an aggregate period of more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.

SEC. 6. The Philippine Identification System (PhilSys).
The PhilSys is the government’s central identification
platform for all citizens and resident aliens of the Philippines.
An individual's record in the PhilSys shall be considered as an
official and sufficient proof of identity.

SEC. 7. Philippine Identification System Components.
— The PhilSys shall have the following key components:

(a) PhilSys Number (PSN). — The PSN is a randomly
generated, unique, and permanent identification number that
will be assigned to every citizen or resident alien upon birth or
registration by the PSA. All government agencies, including
government-owned or -controlled corporations (GOCCs) shall
incorporate in their identification systems and databases the
PSN of covered individuals which shall be the standard number
for the individual across all agencies of the government. The
PSN, in print, electronic or any other form, subject to
authentication, shall be accepted as sufficient proof of identity.

(b) The PhilSys Registry. — The PSA, as repository
and custodian of all data, shall create and maintain a PhilSys
Registry that will contain the PSN, registered records, and
information of all persons registered in the PhilSys. The
information in the PhilSys Registry shall be classified in a
manner that allows safeguards for data privacy and security,
access controls, and change management.

(c) The PhilID. — A nontransferable card shall preferably
be issued to all citizens or resident aliens registered under the
PhilSys subject to the guidelines to be issued by the PSA:

(1) Features. — The PhilID shall be the physical medium
issued to convey essential information about the person’s
identity containing on its face the PSN, full name, sex, blood
type, marital status (optional), place of birth, a front facing
photograph, date of birth, and address of the individual in whose
favor it was issued. All information appearing in the PhilID
should match with the registered information in the PhilSys.
The PhilID shall contain QR Code which contains some
fingerprint information and other security features as
safeguards for data privacy and security, and prevention
against the proliferation of fraudulent or falsified identification
cards. The PSA in consideration of advances in technology,
utility, security and confidentiality may, subject to appropriate
guidelines that shall be issued on the matter, provide citizens
or resident aliens with mobile PhilID.

(2) Purpose. — The PhillD shall serve as the official
government-issued identification document of cardholders in
dealing with all national government agencies, local
government units (LGUs), GOCCs, government financial
institutions (GFIs), and all private sector entities.

 

(8) Fees. — The initial application and issuance as well
as the renewal of the PhillD for citizens shall be free of charge.
A standard fee shall be collected by the issuing agency from
resident aliens and on the reissuance of a replacement card:
Provided, That the PSA may identify instances wherein fees
on replacement card may be waived.

Sec. 8. PhilSys Registry Data. — Information to be
collected and stored under the PhilSys shall be limited to the
following:

(a) Demographic Data

(@) Full Name;

(2) Sex;

(3) Date of Birth;

(4) Place of Birth;

(5) Blood Type;

(6) Address;

(7) Filipino or Resident Alien;
(8) Marital Status (optional);
(9) Mobile Number (optional); and
(10) E-mail address (optional).
(b) Biometrics Information

(1) Front Facing Photograph;
(2) Full set of fingerprints;

(8) Iris scan; and

(4) If necessary, other identifiable features of an
individual as may be determined in the implementing rules
and regulations (IRR).

In case of visual or physical impairment that renders
the capturing of the biometric information of the person
applying for registration impossible, biometric exceptions shall
be employed and allowed by the PSA. The PSA shall issue

guidelines for the appropriate age for capturing the biometrics
information of minors.

SEC. 9. Regisiration. — One (1) year after the effectivity
of this Act, every citizen or resident alien shall register
personally with the following registration centers that have
the necessary facilities to capture the information required to
be contained in the Registry:

(a) PSA Regional and Provincial Offices;

(b) Local Civil Registry Offices (LCROs);

(©) Government Service Insurance System (GSIS);

(d) Social Security System (SSS);

(©) Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth);
® Home Development Mutual Fund (HDMEF);

(g) Commission on Elections (COMELEC);

(h) Philippine Postal Corporation (PHLPost); and

@) Other government agencies and GOCCs as may be
assigned by the PSA.

In the case of Filipino citizens residing abroad, the
registration shall be made in the nearest Philippine Embassy
or Philippine Foreign Service post, or other registration centers
that may be designated by the Department of Foreign Affairs
(DFA) in coordination with the PSA.

Special arrangements shall be made for the registration
of the following:

(1) Minors;

(2) Senior Citizens;

(3) Persons with disability;

(4) Indigenous Persons; and

(5) Persons in Institutional Households.

The PSA shall also initiate mobile registrations to cater
to citizens and resident aliens in remote areas.

 

Registration in the PhilSys is deemed successful and

complete upon the issuance of the PSN and confirmation of
registration by the PSA.

SEC. 10. Basic Documentary Requirements. — The
registration centers shall require the presentation of the
applicant’s birth certificate as a basic documentary
requirement for identification of citizens seeking to register
with the PhilSys: Provided, That for resident aliens, proof of
his or her residence in the Philippines shall be required:
Provided, further, That in order to ensure easier verification,
citizens and resident aliens may be allowed to submit an
alternative or additional document/s to prove his or her identity.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, appropriate guidelines shall
be issued to ensure that the registration is not prohibitive and
restrictive as to unduly defeat the purpose of this Act.

SEC. 11. Change of Eniries. — In case of change in any
of the entries in the information collected and stored under the
PhilSys, citizens or resident aliens shall update their
registration information in the manner to be specified by the
PSA. ,

SEC. 12. Authentication. — For purposes of establishing
proof of identity for transacting business with any government
agency, the presentation of the PhilID or PSN shall constitute
sufficient proof thereof, subject to proper authentication.
Private entities are likewise mandated to accept the PhillD or
PSN as valid proof of identity under the same terms and
conditions as above: Provided, That when authentication
cannot be performed, without any fault on the part of the
cardholder or holder of a PSN, the PSA shall ensure that he or
she will not be disadvantaged or prejudiced thereby.

The PSA shall perform authentication of the PSN of an
individual submitted by any requesting entity, in relation to
his or her biometric information or demographic information.

Any requesting entity shall obtain the consent of an
individual before collecting his or her identity information for
the purposes of authentication. It shall inform the individual
submitting his or her identity information the following details,
namely: (a) the nature of the information that may be shared
upon authentication, and (b) the uses to which the information

received during authentication may be put by the requesting
entity: Provided, That the information requested shall only
be used for the purpose for which it was requested.

SEC. 13. Use of the PhilID/PSN. — The PhillD shall be
honored and accepted, subject to authentication, in all
transactions requiring proof or verification of citizens or
resident aliens’ identity, such as, but not limited to:

(a) Application for eligibility and access to social welfare
and benefits granted by the government;

(b) Application for services and benefits offered by GSIS,
SSS, PhilHealth, HDMF, and other government agencies;

(c) Applications for passports and driver's license;
(a) Tax-related transactions;
(e) Registration and voting identification purposes;

(f) Admission to any government hospital, health center
or similar institution;

(g) All other government transactions;

(bh) Application for admission in schools, colleges,
learning institutions and universities, whether public or
private;

(i) Application and transaction for employment
purposes;

G) Opening of bank accounts and other transactions
with banks and other financial institutions;

(k) Verification of cardholder's criminal records and
clearances;

() Such other transactions, uses or purposes, as may
be defined in the IRR.

The PSN and biometrics of an individual, as
authenticated through the PhilSys, shall be honored and
accepted, notwithstanding the absence or non-presentation of
a PhilID.

 


Src. 14. Limitations. — Proof of identity shall not
necessarily be construed as proof of eligibility to avail of certain
benefits and services which shall be determined based on
applicable rules and regulations of the government
authorities/agencies concerned. Issuance of the PSN and/or
PhilID shall not likewise be construed as incontrovertible proof
of citizenship.

SEc. 15. Philippine Statistics Authority. - The PSA shall
be the primary implementing agency to carry out the provisions
of this Act. Overall planning, management, and administration
of the PhilSys shall be the responsibility of the PSA. It shall
issue rules in the implementation and enhancement of the
PhilSys, including, but not limited to, registration,
authentication and data governance. It shall ensure the
integrity and security of the same, in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, including all other applicable laws and
policies. The PSA shall issue guidelines and undertake
measures to ensure secure, reliable and efficient authentication
of PhilSys record upon the request of authorized government
and private entities. Pursuant thereto, the State shall provide
for the installation of state-of-the-art biometric maghines in

all relevant agencies for authentication of data and identity
holders.

The PSA shall collaborate with LGUs, other government
agencies, and GOCCs in order to ensure the registration and
enrolment of all citizens and resident aliens into the PhilSys
including the indigenous cultural communities/indigenous
peoples (ICCs/IPs) and those located in remote localities.

The PhilSys shall be managed, maintained, and
administered by the PSA with the technical assistance of the
Department of Information and Communications Technology
(DICT). Nothing in this Act prevents the PSA from adopting
new but more effective technology, including for registration,
authentication and data security, taking into consideration the
declared principles and objectives of this Act.

For the abovementioned purposes, there shall be
establishedavithin the PSA and directly under the Office of the
National Statistician, a separate office to be headed by a Deputy
National Statistician, which shall perform the functions
provided for under this Act.

il

SEC. 16. Creation of the PhilSys Policy and Coordination
Council (PSPCC). — The PhilSys Policy and Coordination
Council (PSPCC) is organized to formulate policies and
guidelines to ensure effective coordination and implementation
of the PhilSys. The PSPCC shall be composed of the following:

(a) Secretary, National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA) — Chairperson

(b) National Statistician and Civil Registrar General,
PSA — Co-Chairperson

() Undersecretary, Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) - Vice Chairperson

Members:

(a) Undersecretary, DFA

(e) Undersecretary, DICT

() Undersecretary, Department of Finance (DOF)

(g) Undersecretary, Department of Social Welfare and
Development (DSWD)

(h) Undersecretary, Department of the Interior and Local
Government (DILG)

G) Chairman, National Privacy Commission (NPC)

(j) Deputy Governor, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)
(k) President and General Manager, GSIS

@) President and Chief Executive Officer, PhilHealth
(m) President and Chief Executive Officer, SSS

(n) Postmaster General, PHLPost.

The PSPCC shall ensure the compatibility of the
respective technology infrastructure of different government
agencies in order to comply with the requirements of PhilSys.

SEC. 17. Protection Against Unlawful Disclosure of
Information/Records. — No person may disclose, collect,
record, convey, disseminate, publish, or use any information
of registered persons with the PhilSys, give access thereto or

 


give copies thereof to third parties or entities, including law
enforcement agencies, national security agencies, or units of
the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), except in the
following circumstances:

(a) When the registered person has given his or her
consent, specific to the purpose prior to the processing; and

(b) When the compelling interest of public health or safety
so requires, relevant information may be disclosed upon order
of a competent court, provided that the risk of significant harm
to the public is established and the owner of the information is
notified within seventy-two (72) hours of the fact of such
disclosure.

Information disclosed shall not be used except for the
specific purpose for which it was authorized and shall not be
divulged by any person to any third party other than the person
so authorized.

PSA must ensure that information in the PhilSys is used
only in accordance with its intended purpose as set forth in
this Act. :

Any information obtained as a result of unlawful
disclosure under this Act shall be inadmissible in any judicial,
quasi-judicial or administrative proceedings.

Registered persons may request the PSA to provide access
to his or her registered information and record history subject
to the guidelines and regulations to be issued by the PSA.

Suc. 18. Safeguards on the Philippine Identification
System (PhilSys). — The PSA with the technical assistance of
the DICT shall implement reasonable and appropriate
organizational, technical, and physical security measures to
ensure that the information gathered for the PhilSys, including
information stored in the PhilSys Registry, is protected from
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, and against accidental
or intentional loss, destruction, or damage. Moreover, PSA
shall ensure that individuals are adequately informed upon
registration for PhilSys on how their data will be used and
how they can access their registered information and record
history.

While upholding the confidentiality provisions under
Republic Act No. 10625, otherwise known as the “Philippine
Statistical Act of 2013”, all data collated by the PSA under the
PhilSys may be used to generate aggregate data or statistical
summaries without reference to or identification of any specific
individual: Provided, That nothing in this Act shall be
construed as prohibiting or limiting the sharing or transfer of
any personal data that is already authorized or required by
law.

Sec. 19. Penal Provision. — Any person or entity who,
without just and sufficient cause, shall refuse to accept,
acknowledge and/or recognize the PhilID or PSN, subject
to authentication, as the only official identification of the
holder/possessor thereof shall be fined in the amount of Five
hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00).

Any person who utilizes the PhilID or PSN in an unlawful
manner or use the same to commit any fraudulent act or for
other unlawful purpose/s shall be punished with imprisonment
of not less than six (6) months but not more than two (2) years
or a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) but
not more than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00), or
both, at the discretion of the court.

The penalty of three (3) years to six (6) years
imprisonment and a fine of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00)
to Three million pesos (P3,000,000.00) shall be imposed upon

any offender found guilty of any of the following acts or
omissions:

(a) The willful submission of or causing to be submitted
a fictitious name or false information in the application,
renewal, or updating in the PhilSys by any person;

(b) The unauthorized printing, preparation, or issuance
of a PhilID by any person;

(c) Willfui falsification, mutilation, alteration, or
tampering of the PhillID by any person;

(d) The use of the PhilI[D/PSN or unauthorized possession
of a PhilID, without any reasonable excuse by any person other

than the one to whom it was issued or the possession of a fake,
falsified, or altered PhilID; or

 

 


(e) The willful transfer of the PhilID or the PSN to any
other person.

The penalty of six (6) years to ten (10) years imprisonment
and a fine of Three million pesos (P3,000,000.00) to Five million
pesos (P5,000,000.00) shall be imposed upon any offender found
guilty of any of the following acts or omissions:

(1) Any person who shall collect or use personal data in
violation of Section 12 of this Act;

(2) Any person who shall willfully use or disclose data or
information in violation of Section 17 of this Act; or

(3) Any person, not covered by the succeeding paragraphs,
who shall access the PhilSys or process data or information
contained therein without any authority.

If financial profit resulted from accessing, disclosing, or
using the data or information, the guilty person shall, in
addition, pay twice the amount gained from such act.

Malicious disclosure of data or information by officials,
employees or agents who have the custody or responsibility of
maintaining the PhilSys shall be penalized with ten (10) years
to fifteen (15) years imprisonment and a fine of Five million
pesos (P5,000,000.00) to Ten million pesos (P10,600,000.00).
If financial profit resulted from such disclosure or processing
of the data or information, the guilty person shall, in addition,
pay twice the amount gained from such act.

Officials, employees or agents who have the custody or
responsibility of managing or maintaining the PhilSys shall
be penalized with three (3) years to six (6) years imprisonment
anda fine of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) to Three million
pesos (P3,000,000.00) if by their own negligence, the PhilSys
is accessed by unauthorized persons, or the data or information
contained therein is processed without any authority from this
Act or any existing law.

In all instances, if the violation was committed by a
government. official or employee, the penalty shall include
perpetual absolute disqualification from holding any public office
or employment in the government, including any GOCCs, and
their subsidiaries.

The penalties imposed in this section shall be in addition
to those imposed on acts or omissions punishable by existing
penal and other laws.

SEC. 20. Transitory Provisions. — The PSA shall carry
out the implementation of the PhilSys in such manner that
the operations of card-issuing government agencies shall not
be impeded so as not to unduly delay delivery of public service:
Provided, That the PSA shall gradually synchronize and
consolidate all existing government-initiated identification
systems into one integrated and interconnected identification
system that will ensure an easier, faster, more reliable and
more secure access to information and services.

SEC. 21. Information Campaign. - Within three (3)
months from the effectivity of this Act, the PSA, together with
the DFA and other government agencies, shall undertake an
extensive information campaign to promote the PhilSys to all
citizens and resident aliens.

SEC. 22. Funding. — The amount necessary to
implement the provisions of this Act shall be included in the
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 23. Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR). —
Within sixty (60) days upon approval of this Act, the PSA, in
coordination with the members of PSPCC, shall promulgate
rules and regulations and exchange existing technologies
and best practices on the issuance of the PhillD/PSN,

authentication and data security to effectively implement the
provisions of this Act.

Sec. 24. Separability Clause. — If any provision,
section, or part of this Act shall be declared unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, invalidate, or impair
any other provisions, sections, or parts hereof.

SEC. 25. Repealing Clause. — Alllaws, except Republic
Act No. 10173, decrees, orders, rules, and regulations, which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

 

 

Lott MEARE BC RE NS LOR ANTENA TOR A EAN ET Ee

Suc. 26. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

   

  
   

VICENTE q. SOTTO III PANTALEON D.
he Senate Speaker of the
of Represent

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 6221
and Senate Bill No. 1738 was passed by the House
of Representatives and the Senate on May 30, 2018 and
May 29, 2018, respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA CESAR Salg

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved: AUG 9 6 2818

~

noone DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

 

oO =

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 007150

    

   
 

  

Office of the President’
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

“He eERTE
CERE: i