perenne eee nner iinet NN tT AC A nS

eT ee

H. No. 10701
S.No. 2421

Republic af the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Alletro Manila
Righteenth Congress
Thich Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No.11712]

AN ACT GRANTING MANDATORY CONTINUING BENEFITS
AND ALLOWANCES TO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
HEALTH CARE WORKERS DURING THE COVID-19
PANDEMIC AND OTHER FUTURE PUBLIC HEALTH
EMERGENCIES, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR ~

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Public Health Emergency Benefits and Allowances for
Health Care Workers Act”.

SEc. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~The State recognizes the
critical role of health care workers in providing quality health
care to and ensuring disease prevention in the general population,

 

especially in times of national public health emergencies. To this
end, the State shall reciprocate by promoting their welfare
through the grant of mandatory benefits and allowances with
utmost efficiency.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — For purposes of this Act:

(a) Health facilities shall refer to any public or private
institution with health care as their core service, function
or business. Health care pertains to the maintenance or
improvement of the health of individuals or populations
through the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, rehabilitation
and chronic management of disease, illness, injury and other
physical and mental ailments or impairments. For purposes
of this Act, health facilities and other health related
establishments sfiall refer to those duly licensed or designated
by the Department of Health (DOH), including the
DOH-Central Office, Centers for Health Development (CHD),
Provincial/City/Municipal Health Offices, and Local
Government Health Offices, for Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) and future public health emergency response in
accordance with the Department’s national action plan and
strategies.

(b) Health care and non-health care workers shall refer
to all public and private medical, allied medical, administrative,
technical, support and other necessary personnel employed
by, and assigned in hospitals, health facilities, laboratories,
medical or temporary treatment and monitoring facilities,
or vaccination sites. For COVID-19 pandemic, it also includes
those who are involved in COVID-19 response to mitigate
transmission and prevent further loss of lives in line with
the National Action Plan Against COVID-19 strategy of
prevention, detection, isolation, treatment, rehabilitation, and
vaccination (PDITR+ Strategy).

Outsourced personnel hired under institutional or
individual contract of service or job order basis who are
similarly exposed to COVID-19, or other threats in times of
public health emergencies, are included as non-health care
workers under this Act.

eermiatcreccnintinemnsoentadiennannedersenanaseniencr een rye yn rarepnannsanyetantih eat /mIRACNNeENRRENTeemaeaseteeamtaenn > Lanner Rest t seme

Barangay Health Workers (BHWs) who are part of the
DOH National BHW registry system assigned in health
facilities including swabbing and vaccination sites and those
administering medical assistance, as well as those assigned
in barangay health emergency response teams or their
successor entities, are included as health care workers for
puxposes of this Act.

(©) Public health emergency shall refer to an occurrence
or imminent threat of an illness or health condition of
national scale, that:

(1) Is caused by any of the following:

@) Bioterrorism;

Gi) Appearance of a novel or previously controlled or
eradicated infectioug agent or biological toxin;

(ai) A natural disaster;
(iv) Achemical attack or accidental release;
(v) Anuclear attack or accident; or

(vi) An attack or accidental release of radioactive
materials; and

(2) Poses a high probability of any of the following:
@ Alarge number of deaths in the affected population;

Gi) A large number of serious injuries or long-term
disabilities in the affected population;

Gii) Widespread exposure to an infectious or toxic agent
that poses a significant risk of substantial harm to a large
number of people in the affected population;

(iv) International exposure to an infectious or toxic
agent that poses a significant risk to the health of citizens of
other countries; or

(v) Trade and travel restrictions;

(a) Risk exposure categorization shall refer to the following
levels of exposure:

(1) Low risk exposure — health workers performing
administrative duties in non-public areas of health facilities,
away from other staff members or away from patients,
otherwise known as “clean areas”;

(2) Medium risk exposure — health workers within the
health facility that are providing direct physical care to the
general public who are not known or suspected COVID-19
patients and working at busy staff work areas within a health
facility; and

(3) High risk exposure — health workers entering a
COVID-19 patient’s room to directly provide care for patients
involving aerosol-generating procedures such as intubation,
cough induction procedures, bronchoscopies, dental procedures
and exams, or invasive specimen collection, as well as those
collecting or handling specimens from known or suspected
COVID-19 patients.

Provided, That for purposes of future public health
emergencies, the DOH may formulate a new risk exposure
categorization.

SEc. 4. Coverage. — This Act shall apply to all health
care and non-health care workers, regardless of employment
status, during the COVID-19 or other public health
emergencies of national scale that may be declared in the
future, from the time of the declaration of the public health
emergency until lifted by the President.

ob

wh.

Sec. 5. Grant of Health Emergency Allowance,
Compensation Package and Other Benefits. - The national
government shall grant the following benefits to covered
individuals under Section 4 hereof:

(a) Health emergency allowance (HEA) for every month
of service during the state of public health emergency based
on the risk exposure categorization as defined in this Act, as
follows:

(1) Those deployed in “low risk areas” shall be given at
least Three thousand pesos (P3,000.00);

(2) Those deployed in “medium risk areas” shall be given
at least Six thousand pesos (P6,000.00); and

(3) Those deployed in “high risk areas” shall be given at
least Nine thousand, pesos (P9,000.00).

Provided, That the HEA shall be released monthly in
addition to the existing benefits that the health care and
non-health care workers receive: Provided, further, That the
HEA shall be released in full if a health care worker or
non-health care worker physically renders services for at least
ninety-six (96) hours in a month; otherwise, the benefit shall
be prorated.

Subject to the approval of the President, and in
consultation with the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), the DOH may increase the amounts of the HEA,
taking into consideration the cost of necessary expenses
incurred by health care and non-health care workers in
rendering services at the time of public health emergency.

(b) Compensation to those who have contracted COVID-19
in the line of duty, as follows:

(1) Incase of death of the covered individual, One million
pesos (P1,000,000.00) shall be provided to the heirs of the
covered individuals;

(2) In case of sickness, for a severe or critical case, One
hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) shall be provided to
the covered individuals; and

(3) In case of sickness, for a mild or moderate case,
Fifteen thousand pesos (P15,000.00) shall be provided to the
covered individuals.

The compensation provided herein shall be given to
the beneficiaries not later than three (3) months after the date
of confinement or death and upon submission of complete and
compliant documentary requirements.

For purposes of future public health emergencies, the
DOH and the DBM, subject to the approval of the President,
may modify the cf’se categorization and compensation.

, (© Full PhilHealth coverage for direct health care costs
of hospitalized health care and non-health care workers due
to COVID-19. :

For future national public health emergencies, PhilHealth
coverage for direct health care costs of hospitalized health
care and non-health care workers shall be subject to fund
availability and the Health Technology Assessment Council
(HTAC) assessment and recommendation.

. @ Regular testing of health care and non-health care
workers, as often as necessary, to be determined by the DOH
which shall be fully covered by the PhilHealth.

SEc. 6. Retroactivity. - The benefits under this Act
shall have retroactive application from July 1, 2021 and shall
remain in full force and effect during the state of national
public health emergency as declared by the President.

Src. 7. Non-Diminution of Benefits. — Nothing in this
Act shall be construed to reduce any existing allowance and
benefit under Republic Act No. 7305 or the “Magna Carta of

Pe

to

Public Health Workers” and other existing laws, decrees and
issuances, executive orders, and contracts or agreements
between health care and non-health care workers and employers.

SEC. 8. Establishment of a Grievance Mechanism. ~ The
DOH shall issue guidelines on the creation of an ad hoc
grievance board which shall be composed of three (3) members
that will receive, investigate, adjudicate, and recommend
actions to arrive at settlement of complaints related to the
failure of granting the benefits.

The grievance board shall be composed of the following:
(a) One (1) grievance officer appointed by the DOH;

(b) One (1) representative from the health professional
organizations; and

(©) One (1) Arbitration officer from the Department of
Labor and Employment (DOLE) exercising jurisdiction where
the hospital concerned is located.

The DOH shall also create regional ad hoc grievance boards
in the DOH regional offices.

SEC. 9. Appropriations. — The amount necessary for the
implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
available appropriations of the DOH and any sources available
as may be identified by the DBM. Thereafter, the amount
necessary for its continuous implementation during the state
of national public health emergency, including any deficiency
in the funding of the COVID-19 benefits and allowances for
the years 2021 and 2022 shall be included in the General
Appropriations Act (GAA) subject to existing budgeting,
accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Notwithstanding the provisions under Section 69 of
Republic Act No. 11518, or the Fiscal Year (FY) 2021 GAA,
as amended by Republic Act No. 11640, and Section 75 of
Republic Act No. 11639, or the FY 2022 GAA, the President is

hereby authorized to exercise powers that are necessary and
proper to undertake and implement the grant of COVID-19
benefits and allowances under this Act, and reprogram,
reallocate, and realign unreleased appropriations and
unobligated allotment under the executive department,
including government-owned or -controlled corporations, in
the FYs 2021 and 2022 GAAs as may be necessary to augment
the available appropriations for the grant of COVID-19
benefits and allowances under this Act: Provided, That
unreleased appropriations and unobligated allotments for
infrastructure and social assistance projects shall not be
discontinued, reprogrammed, reallocated, or realigned for the
above purpose. Any programs, activities or projects (P/A/P)
declared as savings for this purpose may be revived and
proposed for funding in the subsequent GAAs, as necessary.

The DBM sill release the funds for the payment of the
benefits and allowances consistent with this Act.

SEC. 10. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days after the effectivity of:this Act, the DOH, the
DBM and the Department of Finance shall, in consultation

with other government agencies and concerned stakeholders, -

promulgate the implementing rules and regulations to carry out
the provisions of this Act: Provided, That the non-promulgation
of the rules and regulations shall not prevent the immediate
implementation of this Act upon effectivity.

SEC. 11. Separability Clause. — If any part or parts of
this Act shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid, other
sections or provisions hereof not affected thereby shall
continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 12. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, executive issuances or letters of instruction, rules and
regulations or any part thereof inconsistent with or contrary
to the provisions of this Act are hereby deemed repealed,
amended or modified accordingly.

we nen

 

SEC. 13. Effectivity. ~ This Act shall take effect

immediately after its publication in the Official Gazette or in

a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 
  
  

      
 

CENTE G. SOTTO I] LORD-ATLA' Q. VELASCO
President & the Senate Speaker wf gre House
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill
No. 10701 and Senate Bill No. 2421 was passed by the House
of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines
on February 2, 2022.

WMG
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MAR
Secretary of the Senate

    
 

RO L. MENDOZA
xf tar\General
fie of Repjesentatives

  

Approved: APR 27 2022

oe DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

 

PRRD 2016 - 021799