_nopestesinenc Serbs tnnsnecnaner inne ner ermine cine eee ener anne nnn ene nen en

S.No. 1363
HL No. 7402

Rovubite of tire Witlippines
Gongress of the Philippines

Meteo Manila
Seventeenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

{ RepusuicAcrNo. 11165]

AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING TELECOMMUTING AS
AN ALTERNATIVE WORK ARRANGEMENT FOR
EMPLOYEES IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “Telecommuting Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared
the policy of the State to affirm labor as a primary social
economic force. To this end, it shall protect the rights of
workers and promote their welfare, especially in the light of
technological development that has opened up new and
alternative avenues for employees to carry out their work
such as telecommuting, and other flexible work arrangements.

SEC. 3. Telecommuting Defined. — As used in this Act,
the term “telecommuting” refers to a work arrangement that
allows an employee in the private sector to work from an

alternative workplace with the use of telecommunication and/or
computer technologies.

SEC. 4. Telecommuiing Program. — An employer in the
private sector may offer a telecommuting program to its
employees on a voluntary basis, and upon such terms and
conditions as they may mutually agree upon: Provided, That
such terms and conditions shall not be less than the
minimum labor standards set by law, and shall include
compensable work hours, minimum number of work hours,
overtime, rest days, and entitlement to leave benefits. In all
cases, the employer shall provide the telecommuting employee
with relevant written information in order to adequately
apprise the individual of the terms and conditions of the

telecommutine program, and the resvonsibilities of the
telecommuting program, and the responsibilities of the
employee.

SEC. 5. Fair Treatment. — The employer shall ensure
that the telecommuting employees are given the same
treatment as that of comparable employees working at the
employer's premises. All telecommuting employees shall:

(a) Receive a rate of pay, including overtime and night
shift differential, and other similar monetary benefits no
lower than those provided in applicable laws, and collective
bargaining agreements.

(b) Have the right to rest periods, regular holidays, an
special nonworking days.

(©) Have the same or equivalent workload an
performance standards as those of comparable workers at the
employer’s premises.

(d) Have the same access to training and career
development opportunities as those of comparable workers a
the employer’s premises, and be subject to the same appraisa
policies covering these workers.

(e) Receive appropriate training on the technica
equipment at their disposal, and the characteristics and
conditions of telecommuting.

 

@ Have the same collective rights as the workers at
the employer’s premises, and shall not be barred from

communicating with workers’ representatives.

The employer shall also ensure that measures are taken
to prevent the telecommuting employee from being isolated
from the rest of the working community in the company by
giving the telecommuting employee the opportunity to meet
with colleagues on a regular basis, and allowing access to
company information.

SEC. 6. Data Protection. — The employer shall be responsible
for taking the appropriate measures to ensure the protection of
data used and processed by the telecommuting employee for
professional purposes. The employer shall inform the
telecommuting employee of all relevant laws, and company
rules concerning data protection. The telecommuting employee
shall ensure that confidential and proprietary information are
protected at all times.

For this purpose, the provisions of the Data Privacy Act
of 2012 shall have suppletory effect.

SEC. 7. Administration. — The parties to a telecommuting
work arrangement shall be primarily responsible for its
administration. In case of differences in interpretation, the
following guidelines shall be observed:

(a) The differences shall be treated as grievances under
the applicable grievance mechanism of the company.

(b) If there is no grievance mechanism or if the
mechanism is inadequate, the grievance shall be referred to
the regional office of the Department of Labor and
Employment (DOLE) which has jurisdiction over the
workplace for conciliation.

(c) To facilitate the resolution of grievances, employers
shall keep and maintain, as part of their records, the
documents proving that the telecommuting work arrangement
was voluntarily adopted.

 

uting Pilot Program. — The Dé
shall establish and 1 maintain a telecommuting pilot program

x od of not more
aid agency shali be responsible for
baselining:, 2 scoping and profiling research work prior to
implementation, “regular quarterly monitoring, and evaluation.
At the end of the program, the DOLE shall submit a report
to Congress on its findings.

     
 

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules. — Within sixty (60) days
from the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary of Labor and
Employment shali, in consultation with the Nationai
Tripartite Industrial Peace Council, and relevant stakeholders,
issue the appropriate implementing rules and regulations of

« Apt
this Act.

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the
remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full
force and effect.

SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are
hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 12. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in
any newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

/

(dua flew

GLORIA MAC GAL-ARROYO VICENTE C/ SOTTO Ill
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

 

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1363
and House Bill No. 7402 was passed by the Senate and the
House of Representatives on October 3, 2018

   
  

j DANTE RQBER P. MALING (|, MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
: ing Secretary General . Secretary of the Senate
} ‘Hous¢ of Representative.

saree y

 

{fee
RODRIG! ale DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 008671

 

|