H. No. 9607

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Mletes Mavila
Righteenth Congress
Chick Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11772]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE. BILIRAN CULTURAL
CENTER AND MUSEUM IN THE PROVINCE OF
BILIRAN, DEFINING ITS PURPOSES AND
OBJECTIVES, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR ~

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There is hereby established a cultural center
and museum in the Province of Biliran, to be known as the Biliran
Cultural Center and Museum to promote culture and the arts. It
shall serve as the institutional medium for the protection,
preservation, presentation and promotion of the cultural, artistic,
archaeological, social, historical, religious and philosophical
heritage of the Biliran Island and its people in view of the richness
of their legacies and of their relevance to their contemporary and
future aspirations.

SEc. 2. The Biliran Cultural Center and Museum shall be
acollaboration between the Provincial Government of Biliran and
the National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) with
its concerned affiliated cultural agencies and pertinent academic
and private sector partners, and members of the community,
with its site, structures, governance, organization, operations,
and development to be provided for by mutual agreement between
the parties, to be executed and published within one (1) year from
the effectivity of this Act.

SEc. 3. To fulfill its purposes and achieve its objectives,
the Biliran Cultural Center and Museum shall:

(a) Compile the musical notes and lyrics of Biliran
traditional songs, ballads, and contemporary music compositions,
and collect samples of musical instruments of Biliran origin,
design and creation;

(b) Acquire and display a varied range of Biliran arts and
artifacts;

(©) Publish and disseminate Biliran literary works, epics,
stories and historical accounts;

@) Compile Biliran literature, film, or audio-visual
recordings of cultural performances in music, dances, oral
literature, and festival celebrations;

) Compile Biliran works, names of barangays, towns and
other places of interests and their respective history;

() Gather and document Biliran religious practices and
traditions, and the background and origin of Biliran fiestas and
festivals;

(g) Compile photographs of and showcase by appropriate
exhibits, Biliran landmarks, historical sites and scenic views;

(h) Gather specimens of archaeological findings, and collect
major minerals present in Biliran, namely, gypsum, sulfur, and
white clay and such other geological materials unique to Biliran;

e+—— bh

@) Preserve by appropriate methods samples of flora and
fauna indigenous to the-Province of Biliran;

G) Conduct performances on local music, dances, arts,
literary works, epics, stories, historical accounts and legends;
and

(&) Carry out any other relevant and appropriate activities.

SEc. 4. The Provincial Government of Biliran shall provide
the land necessary for the construction or establishment, or
both, of the main venue and ancillary offices and facilities of the
Biliran Cultural Center and Museum.

Sc. 5. The amount necessary for the implementation of
this Act shall be charged against the current year’s budget of the
NCCA (Proper). Thereafter, such amount as may be necessary
for its continued implementation shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 6. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the NCCA, in coordination with the Provincial Government
of Biliran, other concerned agencies of the government, and private
stakeholders, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations
for the effective implementation of this Act.

Src. 7. Notwithstanding the non-issuance of the
implementing rules and regulations, this Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in
anewspaper of general circulation.

  

‘ of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on August 25, 2021,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 2, 2022.

  

 

 

- 2
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA )
Secretary of the Senate
Approved: MAY 2 4 2022
RODRI OA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines
oO

¥

PRRD 2016 - 022279 }

te ecsaentmen ane 2A AML RNC A