H. No, 5644

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Kighteenth Cougress
Thirk Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

_[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11644)

AN ACT DECLARING THE CITY OF CARCAR IN THE
PROVINCE OF CEBU A HERITAGE ZONE

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “Carcar City
Heritage Zone Act”.

Src. 2. The Constitution mandates the State to conserve,
develop, promote, and popularize the nation’s historical and
cultural heritage and resources, as well as its artistic creations.
It further provides that all the country’s artistic and historic
wealth constitute the cultural treasure of the nation and shall be
protected by the State, which may regulate its disposition.

Towards this end, the promotion and preservation of the
cultural and historical landmarks that highlight the uniqueness
and beauty of Carcar City, including all century-old architecturally
significant and historic houses thereat, shall be pursued in the
development and management of its tourism industry, cultural
heritage and resources.

SEc. 3.'The City of Carcar in the Province of Cebu is
hereby declared a heritage zone as defined in Article II,
Section 3(q) of Republic Act No. 10066, otherwise known as
the “National Cultural Heritage Act of 2009”. As such, it
shall be accorded priority development by the Department
of Tourism (DOT), in coordination with the Provincial
Government of Cebu, the City Government of Carcar, the
National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) and
its affiliated cultural agencies, and other concerned agencies
of the government, and shall be subject to the rules and
regulations governing the conservation and preservation of
heritage zones.

SEc. 4. The DOT, in coordination with the Provincial
Government of Cebu, the City Government of Carcar, the
NCCA and its affiliated cultural agencies, and the
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR),
shall immediately prepare the development plan involving
the preservation, conservation, restoration, and maintenance
of cultural and historical sites and structures for the
enhancement and sustainability of tourism in Carcar City:
Provided, That the NCCA shall approve only those methods
and materials that strictly adhere to the accepted
international standards of conservation in undertaking
conservation and restoration works, as provided for in
Section 15 of Republic Act No. 10066: Provided, further,
That the applicable provisions of Republic Act No. 7586 or
the “National Integrated Protected Areas System Act of
1992”, as amended by Republic Act No. 11038, shall be
applied in the management of the protected areas within
the City of Carcar in coordination with the DENR.

 

SEc. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of
this Act, the DOT, in coordination with the Provincial
Government of Cebu, the City Government of Carcar, the NCCA
and its affiliated cultural agencies, and the DENR, shall
promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the effective
implementation of this Act.

SEc. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Appyoved,

  
  

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on December 17, 2019,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 27, 2021,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on November 23, 2021.

>in Vf )

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA nl
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: JAN 1 4 2022

com itt Wor

President of the Philippines. > of the President |

MALACARIANG RECORDS OFFICE

0 Pod a
CERTIFIED COPY

ATTY. CORCHTZCA &. FERS
a 3 wa DIRECTOR DY Vv

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 019733