H. No. 3222

Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Ghicd Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11358]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL VISION SCREENING
PROGRAM FOR KINDERGARTEN PUPILS AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “National Vision Screening Act”.

Sc. 2. Declaration of Policy. — Pursuant to Article II,
Section 15 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution, itis hereby declared
the policy of the State to protect and promote the right to health
of the people and instill health consciousness among them. In
line with this policy, the State shall endeavor to promote every
Filipino’s full potential through good vision by creating ways and
means to address vision problems, including blindness, among
children.

Towards this end, the State shall institute a program that
will help screen the school children for visual problems.

Src. 8. Establishment of a National Vision Screening
Program. — A National Vision Screening Program (NVSP) is
hereby established under the Department of Education (DepHid)
which is primarily intended to screen the eye vision of
kindergarten pupils.

Sec. 4. Program Objectives. — The objectives of the
NVSP are:

(a) To conduct a simple vision screening test on
kindergarten pupils through trained teachers and health
personnel and identify pupils with possible visual problems;

(b) To identify early childhood visual problems;

(c) To provide immediate attention to visually impaired
kindergarten pupils and create a referral system so that they
may be checked and treated by eye care practitioners;

(d) To develop a vision screening results database for all
kindergarten pupils; and

© To conduct continuing research on the state of visual
impairment among kindergarten pupils.

Sec. 5. Program Implementation. — The DepEd shall lead
the implementation of the NVSP, in coordination with the
Department of Health (DOH) and the Philippine Eye Research
Institute (PERI), which is under the National Institutes of Health
of the University of the Philippines (UP).

In the implementation of the NVSP, the DepEd shall:

(a) In coordination with the DOH and the PERI, administer
the vision screening program to all public kindergarten pupils
using a Vision Screening Kit which includes charts with symbols
or numbers, occluders, and transparent response key: Provided,

That the DOH and the PERI may recommend to adopt new modes
or methods of vision screening based on the latest trends and
developments;

(b) In coordination with the DOH and the PERI, train and
certify teachers in conducting the vision screening program:

© Inconsultation with the DOH and the PERI, develop a
system of referral and corrective measures for kindergarten
pupils who are suspected or diagnosed to have possible eye
ailments;

@) Create a vision screening database containing the
results of the screening per child and visual conditions diagnoses
by the eye care practitioners; and

(©) Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the NVSP.

Private schools shall be encouraged to adopt their own
system of vision screening for kindergarten pupils enrolled in
their respective schools, subject to standards under the NVSP.

SEC. 6. PhilHealth’s Benefit Package. - The Philippine
Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) shall develop a
benefit package for the consultation and treatment of eye diseases
of children.

.

Suc. 7. Vision Screening Training. — The PERI shall be
mainly responsible for the training of Vision Screening Trainers
for purposes of quality assurance. It shall likewise recommend
the appropriate Vision Screening material to be used.

SEC. 8. Research.—The DOH and the PERI shall conduct
research and provide evidence-based recommendations to the
DepEd on matters pertaining to the NVSP. Furthermore, the
PERI shall perform continuing research on childhood related
eye vision ailments.

SEC. 9. Vision Screening Results Database Sharing. ~
The vision screening database containing the results of the

screening per child and visual conditions diagnosed by the eye
care practitioner and other data gathered shall be shared by and
among the DepEd, the DOH, and the PERI and other concerned
agencies of government.

SEC. 10. The Vision Screening Continuing Research Fund.
~ There is hereby created a Vision Screening Continuing Research
(VSCR) Fund to be sourced from any donation or bequest made to
the DepEd, the DOH or the PERI in favor of the NVSP which
shall be subject to existing budgeting, accounting and auditing
rules and regulations. The VSCR Fund shall be used to fund the
PERI for its continuing research program in connection with
childhood related eye vision ailments.

SEC. 11. Tax Exemption. — All grants, bequests,
endowments, donations and contributions made to the DepEd,
the DOH, or the PERI for the NVSP and for the VSCR Fund to be
used actually, directly and exclusively by the DepEd, the DOH,
or the PERI for the NVSP and for the VSCR Fund shall be exempt
from donor’s tax and the same shall be allowed as allowable
deduction from the gross income of the donor for purposes of
computing the taxable income of the donor in accordance with
the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as
amended.

SEC. 12. Appropriations. — The amount of Ten million
pesos (P10,000,000.00) shall be included in the budget of the
PERI of the University of the Philippines - Manila to cover the
implementation of this Act for public kindergarten pupils.
Thereafter, such sum as may be needed for the continued
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

However, for kindergarten pupils enrolled in private
schools, the funding for the implementation of their respective
school’s vision screening program shall be assumed by the private
schools concerned.

SEC. 13. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the approval of this Act, the DepEd, the
DOH, and the PERI shall formulate the implementing rules and
regulations of this Act.

SEC. 14. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not
so declared shall remain in force and effect.

 

 

 

 

SEC. 15. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

4 SEC. 16. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
} (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the

   
   

ata

on
g

SS
g
=
g
&

 

BIE of the President |

President of sie P. ERA ARIANG RECORDS OFFICE

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES | ATTY. COMCE
PRRD 2016 - 011635

 
   
 

a
aie
‘ag
say
o
=.

 

UWEENY 2 SCRROLING CHA
Se6-7-25- —dDIRECTOR WV