ra da a SECRET

te ora ERD ESB

Republic of the Lhilippines

MMotra Manila

Chied Requiar Session

day of July, two thousand eighteen.

{ Repusiic Act No. 11166 ]

AN ACT STRENGTHENING THE PHILIPPINE
COMPREHENSIVE POLICY ON HUMAN
IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV) AND ACQUIRED
IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME (AIDS)
PREVENTION. TREATMENT, CARE, AND SUPPORT,
AND RECONSTITUTING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL
AIDS COUNCIL (PNAC). REPEALING FOR THE
PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8504, OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS THE “PHILIPPINE AIDS PREVENTION
AND CONTROL ACT OF 1998”. AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be il enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled.

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Philippine HIV and AIDS Policy Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policies. — The Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) are public health concerns that
have wide-ranging social, political, and economic repercussions.
Responding to the country’s HIV and AIDS situation is
therefore imbued with public interest and shall be anchored
on the principles of human rights upholding human dignity.

Policies and practices that discriminate on the basis of
perceived or actual HIV status, sex. gender, sexual orientation,
gender identity and expression, age, economic status, disability.
and ethnicity hamper the enjoyment of basic human rights
and freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution and are deemed
inimical to national interest.

The State shall respect, protect, and promote human
rights as the cornerstones of an effective response to the
country’s HIV and AIDS situation. Hence, HIV and AIDS
education and information dissemination should form part of
the right to health.

The meaningful inclusion and participation of persons
directly and indirectly affected by the HIV and AIDS situation.
especially persons living with HIV, are crucial in eliminating
the virus. Thus, unless otherwise provided in this Act, the
confidentiality and non-compulsory nature of HIV testing and
HIV-related testing shall always be guaranteed and protected
by the State.

Towards this end, the State shall ensure the delivery of
non-discriminatory HIV and AIDS services by government and
private HIV and AIDS service providers, and develop redress
mechanisms for persons living with HIV to ensure that their
civil, political, economic, and social rights are protected.

Accordingly, the State shall:

(a) Establish policies and programs to prevent the spread
of HIV and deliver treatment, care, and support services to
Filipinos living with HIV in accordance with evidence-based
strategies and approaches that uphold the principles of human
rights, gender-responsiveness, and age-appropriateness,
including meaningful participation of communities affected by
the country’s HIV and AIDS situation: .

(b) Adopt a multi-sectoral approach in responding to the
country’s HIV and AIDS situation by ensuring that the whole
of government approach, local communities, civil society
organizations (CSOs), and persons living with HIV are at the
center of the process:

(c) Ensure access to HIV- and AIDS-related services by
eliminating the climate of stigma and discrimination that
surrounds the country’s HIV and AIDS uation, and the
people directly and indirectly affected by it; and

(d) Positively address and seek to eradicate conditions that
aggravate the spread of HIV infection, which include poverty,
gender inequality, marginalization, and ignorance.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — For the purposes of this
Act, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

(a) Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) refers
to a health condition where there is a deficiency of the
immune system that stems from infection with the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus or HIV, making an individual
susceptible to opportunistic infections:

(b) Anti-retroviral Therapy (ART) refers to the treatment
that stops or suppresses viral replication or replications of a
retrovirus like HIV, thereby slowing down the progression of
infection;

(c) Bullying

wo
ct

refers to any severe or repeated use by one
or more persons of a written, verbal or electronic expression,
or a physical act or gesture, or any combination thereof.
directed at another person that has the effect of actually
causing or placing the latter in reasonable fear of physical or
emotional harm or damage to one’s property; creating a hostile
environment for the other person; infringing on the rights of
another person; or materially and substantially disrupting the
processes or orderly operation of an institution or organization:

(d) Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) refer to groups of
nongovernmental and noncommercial individuals or legal!
entities that are engaged in non-coerced collective action around
shared interests, purpose and values;

(e) Community-Based Research refers to studies
undertaken in community settings, which involve community
members in the design and implementation of research
projects:

(f) Comprehensive Health Intervention for Key
Populations vefers to evidence-based policies, programs, and
approaches that aim to reduce transmission of HIV and its
harmful consequences on health, social relations and economic
conditions:

(g) Compulsory HIV Testing refers to HIV testing
imposed upon an individual characterized by lack of consent,
use of force or intimidation, the use of testing as a prerequisite
for employment or other purposes, and other cireu

: ‘ e stances
when informed choice is absent:

(h) Discrimination refers to unfair or unjust treatment
that distinguishes, excludes, restricts, or shows preferences
based on any ground such as sex gender, age, sexual
orientation, gender identity and expression, economic status,
disability, ethnicity, and HIV status, whether actual or
perceived, and which has the purpose or effect of nullifying
or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by all
persons similarly situated, of all their rights and freedoms:

@ Evolving Capacities of the Child vefer to the concept
enshrined in Article 5 of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child recognizing the developmental changes and the
corresponding progress in cognitive abilities and capacity for
self-determination undergone by children as they grow up, thus
requiring parents and others charged with the responsibility
for the child to provide varying degrees of protection, and to
allow their participation in opportunities for autonomous
decision-making in different contexts and across different areas
of decision-making:

G) Gender Expression refers to the way a person
communicates gender identity to others through behavior,
clothing, hairstyles, communication or speech pattern, or body
characteristics;

(k) Gender Identity refers to the personal sense of identity
as characterized. among others, by manner of clothing,

inclinations, and behavior in relation to masculine or feminine
conventions. A person may have a male or female identity
with the physiological characteristics of the opposite sex:

(l) Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO) refer to
Juridical entities legally organized to provide or arrange for the
provision of pre-agreed or designated health care services to
its enrolled members for a fixed pre-paid fee for a specified
period of time:

(m) High-risk Behavior refers to a person’s involvement
in certain activities that increase the risk of transmitting or
acquiring HIV;

(n) Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) reters to the
virus, of the type called retrovirus, which infects cells of the
human immune system, and destroys or impairs the cells’
function. Infection with HIV results in the progressive
deterioration of the immune system, leading to immune
deficiency;

(o) HIV Counseling refers to the interpersonal and
dynamic communication process between a client and a
trained counselor. who is bound by a code of ethics and
practice to resolve personal. social, or psychological problems
and difficulties, and whose objective in counseling in the
context of an HIV diagnosis is to encourage the client to
explore important personal issues, identify ways of coping with
anxiety and stress, plan for the future (keeping healthy,
adhering to treatment, and preventing transmission) and in
the context of a negative HIV test result, to encourage
the client to explore motivations, options, and skills to
stay HIV-negative;

(p) HIV and AIDS Counselor refers to any individual
trained by an institution or organization accredited by the
Department of Health (DOH) to provide counseling services on
HIV and AIDS with emphasis on behavior modification;

(q) HIV and AIDS Monitoring refers to the documentation
and analysis of the number of HIV and AIDS infections and
the pattern of its spread:

j

sadintbtchnscuacanabiaadinistsant amen adiaanraliaeyaAsciesnaiEac ss

(v) HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control refers to
measures aimed at protecting non-infected persons from
contracting HIV and minimizing the impact of the condition
on persons living with HIV:

(s) HIV-Negative veters to the absence of HIV or HIV
antibodies upon HIV testing:

(t) HIV-Positive refers to the presence of HIV infection
as documented by the presence of HIV or HIV antibodies in
the sample being tested:

(u) HIV Testing refers to any facility-based, mobile
medical procedure, or community-based screening modalities
that are conducted to determine the presence or absence of
HIV in a person's body. HIV testing is confidential, voluntary
in nature and must be accompanied by counseling prior to,
and after the testing, and conducted only with the informed
consent of the person:

(v) HIV-related Testing refers to any laboratory testing
or procedure done on an individual in relation to a person's
HIV condition;

(w) HIV Testing Facility refers to any DOH accredited
on-site ov mobile testing center, hospital, clinic, laboratory, and
other facility that has the capacity to conduct voluntary HIV
counseling and HIV testing:

(x) HIV Transmission refers to the transfer of HLV trom
one infected person to an uninfected individual, through
unprotected sexual intercourse, blood transfusion, sharing of
contaminated intravenous needles, or which may occur during
pregnancy, delivery, and breastfeeding:

(y) Informed Consent refers to the voluntary agreement
of a person to undergo or be subjected to a procedure based
on full information, whether such permission is written or
conveyed verbally;

{z) Key Affected Populations refer to those groups or
persons at higher risk of HIV exposure, or affected populations
whose behavior make them more likely to be exposed to HIV
or to transmit the virus:

(aa) Laboratory refers to an area or place, including
community-based settings. where research studies are being
undertaken to develop local evidence for effective HIV response;

(bb) Mature Minor Doctrine refers to the legal principle
that recognizes the capacity of some minors to consent
independently to medical procedures, if they have been assessed
by qualified health professionals to understand the nature of
procedures and their consequences to make a decision on their
own:

(ec) Medical Confidentiality vefers to the core duty of
medical practice where the information provided by the patient
to health practitioners and his/her health status is kept
private and is not divulged to third parties. The patient’s
health status can, however, be shared with other medical
practitioners involved in the professional care of the patient,
who will also be bound by medical confidentiality. Medical
confidentiality applies to the attending physician, consulting
medical specialist, nurse, medical technologist and all other
health workers or personnel involved in any counseling, testing
or professional care of the patient. It also applies to any person
who, in any official capacity, has acquired or may have
acquired such confidential information:

(dd) Opportunistic infections refer to illnesses caused by
various organisms, many of which do not cause diseases in
persons with healthy immune system:

fee) Partner Notification refers to the process by w
the “index client”, “source”, or “patient” who has a sexually
transmitted infection (STI) including HIV, is given support in
order to notify and advise the partners that have been exposed
to infection. Support includes giving the index client a
mechanism to encourage the client’s partner to attend
counseling, testing and other prevention and treatment
services. Confidentiality shall be observed in the entire process:

(f) Person Living with HIV (PLHIV) refers to any
individual diagnosed to be infected with HIV;

(gg) Pre-exposure Prophylaxis refers to the use of
prescription drugs as a strategy for the prevention of HIV
infection by people who do not have HIV and AIDS. It is an

optional treatment, which may be taken by people who are
HIV-negative but who have substantial, higher-than-average
risk of contracting an HIV infection:

(bh) Pre-test Counseling refers to the process of providing
an individual with information on the biomedical aspects of
HIV and AIDS, and emotional support to any psychological
implications of undergoing HIV testing and the test result itself
before the individual is subjected to the test:

(ii) Post-exposure Prophylaxis refers to a preventive
medical treatment started immediately after exposure to a
pathogen (HIV) in order to prevent infection by the pathogen
and the development of the disease:

Gi) Post-test Counseling refers to the process of providing
risk-reduction information and emotional support to a person
who submitted to HIV testing at the time the result is
released:

(kk) Prophylactic refers to any agent or device used to
prevent the transmission of an infection:

() Provider-initiated Counseling and Testing refers to
a health care provider initiating HIV testing to a person
practicing high-risk behavior or vulnerable to HIV after
conducting HIV pre-test counseling. A person may elect to
decline or defer testing such that consent is conditional;

(mm) Redress refers to an act of compensation for
unfairness, grievance, and reparation:

(an) Safer Sex Practices refer to choices made and
behaviors adopted by a person to reduce or minimize the risk
of HIV transmission. These may include postponing sexual
debut, non-penetrative sex, correct and consistent use of male
or female condoms. and reducing the number of sexual
partners:

(co) Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) yefer to
infections that are spread through the transfer of organisms
from one person to another as a result of sexual contact:

(ep) Sexual Orientation refers to the direction of
emotional, sexual attraction. or conduct towards people of the
same sex (homosexual orientation) or towards people of both
sexes (bisexual orientation) or towards people of the opposite
sex (heterosexual orientation) or to the absence of sexual
attraction (asexual orientation)

(aq) Social Protection refers to a set of policies and
programs designed to reduce poverty and vulnerability by
promoting efficient labor markets, diminishing people’s exposure
to risks, and enhancing their capacity to protect themselves
against hazards, and interruptions on, or loss of income:

(rr) Stigma refers to the dynamic devaluation and
dehumanization of an individual in the eyes of others, which
may be based on attributes that are arbitrarily defined by
others as discreditable or unworthy. and which results in
discrimination when acted upon:

(ss) Treatment hubs refer to private and public hospitals
or medical establishments accredited by the DOH to have the
capacity and facility to provide treatment and care services
to PLHIV:

(tt) Voluntary HIV testing vefers to HIV testing done on
an individual who, after having undergone pre-test counseling.
willingly submits to such test:

(uu) Vuinerable communities vefer to communities and
groups suffering from vulnerabilities such as unequal
opportunities, social exclusion, poverty, unemployment, and
other similar social, economic, cultural and political conditions,
making them more susceptible to HIV infection and to
developing AIDS: and

(vv) Workplace refers to the office, premise or work site
where workers are habitually employed and shall include the
office or place where workers, with no fixed or definite work
site, regularly report for assignment in the course of their
employment.

ARTICLE I
THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL AIDS CoUNCIL

SEC. 4. Philippine National AIDS Council (PNAC). —
The PNAC, established under Section 43 of Republic Act
No. 8504, otherwise known as the “Philippine AIDS Prevention
and Control Act of 1998”, shall be reconstituted and
streamlined to ensure the implementation of the country’s
response to the HIV and AIDS situation.

The PNAC shall be an agency attached to the DOH with
a separate budget under the General Appropriations Act (GAA).
Tt shall have its own secretariat and staffing pattern that shall
be headed by an executive director.

SEC. 5. Functions. ~ The PNAC shall perform the
following functions:

(a) Develop the AIDS Medium Term Plan (AMTP) in
collaboration with relevant government agencies, CSOs, the
PLHIV community. and other stakeholders;

(b) Ensure the operationalization and implementation of
the AMTP;

(c) Stvengthen the collaboration between government
agencies and CSOs involved in the implementation of the
national HIV and AIDS response, including the delivery of HIV

and AIDS related services:

(d) Develop and ensure the implementation of the
guidelines and policies provided in this Act, including other
policies that may be necessary to implement the AMTP;

(e) Monitor the progress of the response to the country’s
HIV and AIDS situation;

(f) Monitor the implementation of the AMTP, undertake
mid-term assessments and evaluate its impact:

(g) Mobilize sources of funds for the AMTP:
(h) Mobilize its members to conduct monitoring and

evaluation of HIV-related programs. policies, and services
within their mandate:

fl

(i) Coordinate, organize, and work in partnership with
foreign and international organizations regarding funding. data
collection, research. and prevention and treatment modalities
on HIV and AIDS, and ensure foreign funded programs are
aligned to the national response;

G) Advocate for policy reforms to Congress and other
government agencies to strengthen the country’s response to
the HIV and AIDS situation:

(k) Submit an annual report to the Office of the
President, Congress. and the members of the Council:

() Identify gaps in the national response on the part
of government agencies and its partners from civil society and
international organizations, in order to develop and implement
the initial interventions required in these situations: and

(m) Recommend policies and programs that will
institutionalize or continue the interventions required in
addressing the gaps identified in the national response to the
HIV and AIDS situation of the country.

In addition to the powers and functions enumerated under
the preceding paragraph, the members of the PNAC shall also
develop and implement individual action plans, which shall be
anchored to and integrated in the AMTP. Such action plans
shall be based on the duties, powers, and functions of the
individual agencies as identified in Articles II] to VII of this
Act.

SEC. 6. Membership and Composition. — Selection of the
members of PNAC shall be based on the following criteria:

(a) Government agencies or CSOs with direct
contribution to the performance of the core functions of the
Council (oversight, direction setting and policy making);

(b) Government agencies or CSOs with existing
programs, services and activities that directly contribute to the
achievement of the AMTP; and

(c) Government agencies or CSOs with existing
constituencies that are targeted by the AMTP’s objectives and
activities.

Ld

The following agencies and CSOs shall be represented in
the PNAC:

(1) Department of Health (DOH):
(2) Department of Education (DepEd);
(3) Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE):

ee Department of Social Welfare and Development
( De

(5) Department of the Interior and Local Government

(DILG);

(6) Civil Service Commission (CSC):

(7) Commission on Higher Education (CHED):

(8) National Youth Commission (NYC);

(9) Philippine Information Agency (PIA):

(10) Department of Budget and Management;

(11) The Chairperson of the Committee on Health and
Demography of the Senate of the Philippines or his

representative:

Committee on Health of the

representative:

(18-14) Two (2) representatives from organizations of
persons living with HIV and AIDS:

__ (15) One (1) representative from a private organization
with expertise in standard setting and service delivery; and

(16-21) Six (6) representatives from NGOs working for the
welfare of identified key populations.

Except for members from government agencies, the
members of the PNAC shall be appointed by the President of
the Philippines. The heads of government agencies may be

represented by an official whose rank shall not be lower than
an Assistant Secretary or its equivalent.

The members of the PNAC shall be appointed not later
than thirty (30) days after the date of the enactment of this
Act.

The PNAC shall meet at least once every quarter. The
presence of the Chairperson or the Vice Chairperson of the
PNAC. and at least ten (10) other PNAC members and/or
permanent representatives shall constitute a quorum to do
business, and a majority vote of those present shall be
sufficient to pass resolutions or render decisions.

The Secretary of Health shall be the permanent
Chairperson of the PNAC. However, the Vice Chairperson
shall be elected from the government agency members, and
shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Members representing
CSOs shall serve for a term of three (3) years, renewable upon
recommendation of the Council for a maximum of two (2)
consecutive terms.

SEC. 7. Secretariat. - The PNAC shall be supported by
a secretariat consisting of personnel with the necessary
technical expertise and capability that shall be conferred
permanent appointments, subject to Civil Service rules and
regulations. The Secretariat shall be headed by an Executive
Director, who shall be under the direct supervision of the
Chairperson of the PNAC.

The Secretariat shall perform the following functions:

(a) Coordinate and manage the day-to-day affairs of the
PNAC;

(b) Assist in the formulation. monitoring, and evaluation
of policies and the AMTP:

(c) Provide technical assistance, support, and advisory
services to the PNAC and its external partners:

(a) Assist the PNAC in identifying and building internal
and external networks and partnerships:

/
ld

(e) Coordinate and support the efforts of the PNAC and
its members to mobilize resources:

@ Serve as the repository of HIV and AIDS-related
information;

(g) Disseminate updated. accurate, relevant, and
comprehensive information about the country’s HIV and AIDS
situation to PNAC members. policy makers. and the media:

(h) Provide administrative support to the PNAC: and

@) Coordinate, fund and implement, as directed by the
PNAC, the interventions identified by the Council as gaps in
the AMTP implementation. in cooperation with CSOs and the
PLHIV community.

SEC. 8. AIDS Medium Term Plan (AMTP). — The PNAC
shall formulate and periodically update the six (6)-year AMTP,
a national multi-sectoral strategic plan to prevent and control
the spread of HIV and AIDs in the country. The AMTP shall
include the following:

(a) The country’s targets and strategies in addressing
the HIV and AIDS situation:

(b) The prevention, treatment, care and support, and
other components of the country’s response:

(c) The operationalizat

The operati n of the

nalization o ac program and
identification of the government agencies that Shalt ignglement
the program, including the designated office within each
agency responsible for overseeing, coordinating, facilitating, and
monitoring the implementation of its AIDS program from the
national to the local levels; and

(d) The budgetary requirements and a corollary
investment plan of each government agency specified in the
AMTP, and shall identify the sources of funds for its
implementation.

SEC. 9. The Role of DOH. — The National HIV and AIDS
and STI Prevention and Control Program (NASPCP) of the
DOH. which shall be composed of qualified medical specialists
and support personnel with permanent appointments, and with

adequate yearly budget. shall coordinate with the PNAC for
the implementation of the health sector's HIV and AIDS and
STI response, as identified in the AMTP.

The Epidemiology Bureau shall maintain a comprehensive
HIV and AIDS monitoring and evaluation program that shall
serve the following purposes:

(a) Determine and monitor the magnitude and
progression of HIV and AIDS in the Philippines and regularly
provide a list of priority areas with high magnitude of HIV
and AIDS cases and co-infections to help the PNAC evaluate
the adequacy and efficacy of HTV prevention and treatment
programs being employed:

(b) Receive, collate, process, and evaluate all HIV- and
AIDS-related medical reports from all hospitals. clinics,
laboratories and testing centers, including HIV-related deat
and relevant data from public and private hospitals. various
databanks or information systems: Provided, That it shall
adopt a coding system that ensures anonymity and
confidentiality; and

(c) Submit, through its Secretariat, quarterly and
annual reports to the PNAC containing the findings of i
monitoring and evaluation activities in compliance with this
mandate.

SEC. 10. Protection of Human Righis. — The country’s
response to the HIV and AIDS situation shall be anchored on
the principles of human rights and human dignity. Public
health concerns shall be aligned with internationally-recognized

human rights instruments and standards.

Towards this end, the members of the PNAC, in
cooperation with CSOs, and in collaboration with the
Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Commission on Human
Rights (CHR), shall ensure the delivery of non-discriminatory
HIV and AIDS services by government and private HIV and
AIDS service providers. Further. the DOJ and CHR, in
coordination with the PNAC, shall take the lead in developing
redress mechanisms for PLHIV and key affected populations
to ensure that their civil, political, economic, and social rights
are protected. The PNAC shall cooperate with local government

units (LGUs) to strengthen existing mediation and
reconciliation mechanisms at the local level.

ARTICLE I
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION

SEC. 11. Prevention Program. — There shall be an HIV
and AIDS prevention program that will educate the public on
HIV and AIDS and other STIs. with the goal of reducing risky
behavior. lowering vulnerabilities, and promoting the human
rights of PLHIV.

The PNAC shall promote and adopt a range of measures
and interventions, in partnership with CSOs that aim to
prevent. halt, or control the spread of HIV in the general
population, especially among the key populations and
vulnerable communities. These measures shall likewise promote
the rights, welfare, and participation of PLHIV and the affected
children, young people. families, and partners of PLHIV.

The HIV and AIDS education and prevention programs
shall be age-appropriate and based on up-to-date evidence and
scientific strategies, and shall actively promote:

(a) Safer sex practices among the general population,
including sexual abstinence, sexual fidelity, and consistent and
correct condom use especially among key populations;

i Dibew wynativew dhoe anders. tele ae ae
(ob) Other practices that reduce risk of HIV infection:

(c) Universal awareness of and access to evidence-based
and relevant information and education, and medically safe,
legally affordable, effective, and quality treatment; and

(d) Knowledge of the health, civil, political, economic.
and social rights of PLHIV and their families.

SEC. 12. Education in Learning Institutions. — Using
standardized information and data from the PNAC, the DepEd.
CHED, and the Technical Education and Skills Development
Authority (TESDA), shall integrate basic and age-appropriate
instruction on the causes, modes of transmission, and ways
of preventing the spread of HIV and AIDS and other STIs in
their respective curricula taught in public and private learning

re

institutions, including alternative and indigenous learning
systems. The learning modules shall include human
rights-based principles and information on treatment. care,
and support to promote stigma reduction.

The learning modules that shall be developed to
implement this provision shall be done in coordination with
the PNAC and stakeholders in the education sector. Referral
mechanisms, including but not limited to, the DSWD Referral
System, shall be included in the modules for key populations
and vulnerable communities.

The DepEd, CHED, and TESDA shall ensure the
development and provision of psychosocial support and
counseling in learning institutions, for the development of
positive health, and promotion of values and behavior pertaining
to reproductive health, in coordination with the DOH. For
this purpose, funds shall be allocated for the training and
certification of teachers and school counselors.

SEC. 13. Education for Parents and Guardians. — The
DepEd in coordination with parent-teacher organizations in
schools and communities shall conduct awareness-building
seminars in order to provide parents and guardians with a
gender-responsive and age-sensitive HIV and AIDS education.

SEC. 14. Education as a Right to Health and Information.
~— HIV and AIDS education and information dissemination shall
form part of the constitutional right to health.

SEC. 15. HIV and AIDS Information as a Health
Service. — HIV and AIDS education and information
dissemination shall form part of the delivery of health services
by health practitioners, workers, and personnel. The knowledge
and capabilities of all public health workers shall be enhanced
to include skills for proper information dissemination and
education on HIV and AIDS. It shall likewise be considered
a civic duty of health care providers in the private sector to
make available to the public such information necessary to
prevent and control the spread of HIV and AIDS, and to
correct common misconceptions about this disease. The
training of health workers shall include discussions on
HIV-related ethical issues such as confidentiality, informed
consent, and the duty to provide treatment.

SEC. 16. Education in the Workplace. ~ All public and
private employers and employees, including members of the
Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and the Philippine
National Police (PNP), shall be regularly provided with
standardized basic information and instruction on HIV and
AIDS, including topics on confidentiality in the workplace an
reduction. or elimination of stigma and discrimination.

The PNAC shall develop the standardized and key
messages on the prevention and control of HIV and AIDS based
on current and updated information on the disease.

The DOLE for the private sector, the CSC for the public
sector, and the AFP and PNP for the uniformed service shal
implement this provision: Provided, That the standardized
basic information and instruction shall be conducted by DOLE
for the private sector at no cost to the employers and
employees.

SEC. 17. Education for Filipinos Going Abroad. -- The
State shall ensure that all overseas Filipino workers and
diplomatic, military, trade, and labor officials and personne
to be assigned overseas shall attend a seminar on the causes.
manner of prevention, and impact of HIV and AIDS. before
being granted a certification for overseas assignment: Provided,
That the seminar shall be conducted at no cost to overseas
Filipino workers or to the officials concerned.

The DOLE, the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), the
Commission on Filipino Over

s (CFO). and other vant
government agencies in collaboration with the DOH. shall
ensure the implementation of this section.

SEC. 18. Information for Tourists and Transients. —
Educational materials on the causes, modes of transmission,
prevention, and consequences of HIV infection and list of HIV
counseling testing facilities shall be adequately provided at all
international and local ports of entry and exit. The PLA.
together with other relevant government agencies, in
coordination with the PNAC and stakeholders in the tourism
industry, shall lead the implementation of this section.

SEC. 19. Education in Communities. - The DILG. the
Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines (ULAP). the
League of Provinces. the League of Cities, and the League of

Municipalities. through the local HIV and AIDS Councils (LAC)
or the local health boards and, in coordination with the
PNAC, shall implement a locally-based, multi-sectoral
community response to HIV and AIDS through various
channels on evidence-based, gender-responsive, age-appropriate,
and human rights-oriented prevention tools to stop the spread
of HIV. Gender and Development (GAD) funds and other
sources may be utilized for these purposes.

Indigenous peoples communities and geographically
isolated and disadvantaged areas (GIDA) shall also be given
due focus in the implementation of this section.

The DILG, in coordination with the DSWD and the NYC,
shall also conduct age-appropriate HIV and AIDS education for
out-of-school youth.

SEC. 20. Education for Key Populations and Vulnerable
Communities. ~ To ensure that HIV services reach key
populations at higher risk, the PNAC, in collaboration with
the LGUs and CSOs engaged in HIV and AIDS programs and
projects, shall support and provide funding for HIV and AIDS
education programs, such as peer education, support groups,
outreach activities, and community-based research that target
these populations and other vulnerable communities. The DOH
shall, in coordination with appropriate agencies and the PNAC
craft the guidelines, and standardized information messages for
peer education, support group, and outreach activities.

SEC. 21. Information on Prophylactics. — Appropriate
information shall be attached to, or provided with every
prophylactic offered for sale or given as donation. Such
information shall be legibly printed in English and Filipino,
and contain literature on the proper use of the prophylactic
device or agent. and its efficacy against HIV and STI

SEC. 22. Misinformation on HIV and AIDS. -
Misinformation on HIV and AIDS, which includes false and
misleading advertising and claims in any form of media,
including traditional media. internet and social platforms, and
mobile applications, of the promotional marketing of drugs,
devices, agents or procedures without prior approval from the
DOH through the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and
without the requisite medical and scientific basis. including
markings and indications in drugs and devices or agents

claiming to be a cure or a fail-safe prophylactic for HIV
infection shall be prohibited.

ARTICLE [fH

PREVENTIVE MEASURES, SAFE PRACTICES AND
PROCEDURES

SEC. 23. HIV Prevention Measures. - The PNAC, in
coordination with the DOH, LGUs, and other relevant
government agencies. private sector, CSOs, faith-based
organizations, and PLHIVs, shall implement preventive
measures, including but not limited, to the following:

@ Creation of rights-based and community-led behavior
modification programs that seek to encourage HIV risk
veduction behavior among PLHIVs:

(b) Establishment and enforcement of rights-based
mechanisms to strongly encourage newly tested HIV-positive
individuals to conduct partner notification and to promote HIV
status disclosure to partners:

(c) Establishment of standard precautionary measures in
public and private health facilities:

(d) Accessibility of ART and management of opportunistic
infections;

fe) Mobilization of communities of PLHTV for public
awareness campaigns and stigma reduction activities: and

() Establish comprehensive human rights and
evidence-based policies, programs, and approaches that aim
to reduce transmission of HIV and its harmful consequences
to members of key affected populations.

The enforcement of this section shall not lead to, or result
in the discrimination or violation of the rights of PLHIV and
the service provider implementing the program, including peer
educators and community-based testing providers. -

SEC. 24. Comprehensive Health Intervention for Key
Populations. - The DILG and DOH. in partnership with the
key populations, shall establish a human rights and

2l

evidence-based HIV prevention policy and program for people
who have higher risk of HIV infection and other key
populations.

The presence of used or unused prophylactics shall
not be used as basis to conduct raids or similar police
operations in sites and venues of HIV prevention interventions.
The DILG and DOH, in coordination with LGUs, shall
establish a national policy to guarantee the implementation of
this provision.

SEC. 25. Preventing Mother-to-Child HIV Transmission.
—The DOH shall establish a program to prevent mother-
to-child HIV transmission that shall be integrated in its
maternal and child health services.

SEC. 26. Standard Precaution on the Donation of Blood,
Tissue, or Organ. ~ The DOH shall enforce the following
guidelines on the donation of blood, tissue, or organ:

(a) Donation of tissue or organ, whether gratuitous or
onerous, shall be accepted by a laboratory or institution only
after a sample from the donor has been tested negative for

HIV;
(b) All donated blood shall also be subjected to HIV testing:

(c) All donors whose blood, organ ov tissue has been tested
positive shall be deferred from donation, notified of their HIV
status. counselled. and referred for care and clinical
management as soon as possible:

(d) Donations of blood, tissue, or organ testing positive
for HIV may be accepted for research purposes only. and shall
be subject to strict sanitary disposal requirements: and

(e) A second testing may be demanded as a matter of
right by the blood, tissue, or organ recipient or his/her
immediate relatives before transfusion or transplant, except
during emergency cases.

SEC. 27. Testing of Organ Donation. ~ Lawful consent
to HIV testing of a donated human body, organ, tissue. or
blood shall be considered as having been given when:

(a) A person volunteers or freely agrees to donate one’s
blood, organ. or tissue for transfusion, transplantation, or
research: and

(b) A legacy and a donation are executed in accordance
with Sections 3 and 4 respectively, of Republic Act No. 7170.
otherwise known as the “Organ Donation Act of 1991”.

SEC. 28. Guidelines on Medical Management, Surgicel,
and Other Related Procedures. — The DOH ghall. in
consultation with concerned professional organizations and
hospital associations, issue guidelines on medical management
of PLHIV and protocol on precautions against HIV
transmission during surgical, dental, embalming, body
painting, or tattooing that require the use of needles or similar
procedures. The necessary protective equipment such as gloves,
goggles, and gowns shall be prescribed and required, and made
available to all physicians and health care providers, tattoo
artists, and similarly exposed personnel at all times. The DOH
shall likewise issue guidelines on the handling and disposal
of cadavers, body fluids, or wastes of persons known or
believed to be HIV-positive.

ARTICLE IV
SCREENING. TESTING AND COUNSELING
SEC. 29. HIV Testing. - As a policy, the State shall

encourage voluntary HIV testing. Written consent from the
person taking the te t be obtained before HEV testing.

HIV testing shall be made available under the following
circumstances:

(a) In keeping with the principle of the evolving
capacities of the child as defined in Section 34) of this Act,
if the person is fifteen (15) to below eighteen (18) years of age,
consent to voluntary HIV testing shall be obtained from the
child without the need of consent from a parent or guardian:

(b) In keeping with the mature minor doctrine as
defined in Section 3(bb) of this Act, any young person aged
below fifteen (15) who is pregnant or engaged in high-risk
behavior shall be eligible for HIV testing and counseling, with

the assistance of a licensed social worker or health worker.
Consent to voluntary HIV testing shall be obtained from the
child without the need of consent from a parent or guardian:
and

) Im all other cases not covered by (b) of this section,
consent to voluntary HIV testing shall be obtained from the
child’s parents or legal guardian if the person is below fifteen
(15) years of age or is mentally incapacitated. In cases when
the child’s parents or legal guardian cannot be located despite
reasonable efforts, or if the child’s parents or legal guardian
refused to give consent, it shall be obtained from the licensed
social worker or health worker. To protect the best interest
of the child, the assent of the minor shall also be required
prior to the testing.

In every circumstance, proper counseling shall be
conducted by a social worker, a health care provider, or other
health care professional accredited by the DOH or the DSWD.

HIV testing guidelines issued by the DOH shall include
guidance for testing minors and for the involvement of parents
or guardians in HIV testing of minors.

The State shall continually review and revise. as
appropriate, the HIV diagnostic algorithm based on current
available laboratory technology and evidence.

SEC. 30. Compulsory HIV Testing. — Compulsory HIV
testing shali be allowed oniy in the following instances:

(a) When it is necessary to test a person who is charged
with any of the offenses punishable under Articles 264 and
266 on serious and slight physical injuries, and Articles 335
and 338 on rape and simple seduction, both of Act No. 3815,
or the “The Revised Penal Code”, as amended, and as also
amended by Republic Act No. 8353, otherwise known as “The
Anti-Rape Law of 1997”:

(b) When it is necessary to resolve relevant issues under
Executive Order No. 209, otherwise known as “The Family
Code of the Philippines”; and

() As a prerequisite in the donation of blood in
compliance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 7170

otherwise known as the “Organ Donation Act of 1991”, and
Republic Act No. 7719, otherwise known as the “National
Blood Services Act of 1994”.

SEC. 31. Mechanisms and Standards on Routine
Provider-Initiated and Client-Initiated HIV Counseling and
Testing. — To implement this section, the DOH shall:

(a) Accredit public and private HIV testing facilities
based on capacity to deliver testing services including HIV
counseling: Provided, That only DOH-accredited HIV testing
facilities shall be allowed to conduct HIV testing:

(b) Develop the guidelines for HIV counseling and
testing, including mobile HIV counseling and testing. and
voutine provider-initiated HIV counseling and testing that shall
ensure, among others, that HIV testing is based on informed
consent, is voluntary and confidential, is available at all times
and provided by qualified persons and DOH-aceredited
providers:

(c) Accredit institutions or organizations that train HIV
and AIDS counselors in coordination with DSWD:

(d) Aceredit competent HIV and AIDS counselors for
persons with disability, including but not limited to. translator
for the hearing-impaired and Braille for the visually-impaired
clients, in coordination with the National Council for Disability
Ag YCDA);

fe) Set the standards for HIV counseling and shall work
closely with HIV and AIDS CSOs that train HIV and AIDS
counselors and peer educators, in coordination and participation
of NGOs, government organizations (GOs), and Civil Society
Organizations of PLHIV (CSO-PLHIV): and

(f) Ensure access to routine provider-initiated counseling
and testing as part of clinical care in all health care settings
for the public.

All HIV testing facilities shall provide free pre-test and
post-test HIV counseling to individuals who wish to avail of
HIV testing. which shall likewise be confidential. No HIV
testing shall be conducted without informed consent. The State
shall ensure that specific approaches to HIV counseling and

Bes oF
testing are adopted based on the nature and extent of HIV
and AIDS incidence in the country.

Pre-test counseling and post-test counseling shall be done
by the HIV and AIDS counselor, licensed social worker,
licensed health service provider, or a DOH-accredited health
service provider: Provided, That for the government HIV
testing facilities, pre-test and post-test counseling shall be
provided for free. :

SEC. 32. HIV Testing for Pregnant Women. — A health
care provider who offers pre-natal medical care shall offer
provider-initiated HIV testing for pregnant women. The DOH
shall provide the necessary guidelines for healthcare providers
in the conduct of the screening procedure.

ARTICLE V
HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES

SEC. 33. Treatment of Persons Living with HIV and
AIDS. — The DOH shall establish a program that will provide
free and accessible ART and medication for opportunistic
infections to all PLHIVs who are enrolled in the program. It
shall likewise designate public and private hospitals to become
treatment hubs. A manual of procedures for management of
PLHIV shall be developed by the DOH.

SEC. 34. Access
indigent persons g with [TV shall not be deprived of
access to medical services. The DOH and DSWD shall
establish a program that will support better access to ART
and medication for opportunistic infections to all indigent
PLHIV, which includes financial support for necessary medical
services related to the person’s HIV condition.

to Medical Services by Indigents. —
“a Tater

SEC. 35. Economic Empowerment and Support. ~
PLHIV shall not be deprived of any employment, livelihood.
micro-finance, self-help, and cooperative programs by reason
of their HIV status. The DSWD. in coordination with the
DILG, DOLE, and TESDA, shall develop enabling policies and
guidelines to ensure economic empowerment and independence
designed for PLHIV

SEC. 86. Care and Support for Persons Living with HIV.
~ The DSWD, in coordination with the DOH, shall develop
care and support programs for PLHIV, which shall include
peer-led counseling and support, social protection, welfare
assistance, and mechanisms for case management. These
programs shall include care and support for the affected
children, families. partners. and support groups of PLHIV

SEC. 37. Care and Support for Overseas Workers Living
with HIV. — The Overseas Workers Welfare Administration
(OWWA), in coordination with the DOH, DSWD, DFA, CFO,
and the Bureau of Quarantine and International Health
Surveillance, shall develop a program to provide a stigma-free
comprehensive reintegration, care, and support program.
including economic. social, and medical support for overseas
workers, regardless of employment status and stage in the
migration process.

SEC. 38. Care and Support for Affected Families,
Intimate Partners, Significant Others and Children of People
Living with HIV. - The DSWD, DOH, and LGUs. in
consultation with CSOs and affected families of PLHIV shall
develop care and support programs for affected families,
intimate partners, significant others, and children of PLHIV,
which shall include the following:

(a) Education programs that reduce HIV-related stigma,
including counseling to prevent HIV-related discrimination
within the family:

(b) Educational assistance for children infected with HIV
and children orphaned by HIV and AIDS: and

(c) HIV treatment and management of opportunistic
infections for minors living HIV who are not eligible under
the Outpatient HIV and AIDS Treatment (OHAT) Package of
the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth).

SEC. 39. Care and Support Program in Prisons and
Others Closed-Setting Institutions. ~ All prisons, rehabilitation
centers, and other closed-setting institutions shall have
comprehensive STI, HIV and AIDS prevention and control
program that includes HIV education and information. HIV
counseling and testing. and access to HIV treatment and care
services. The DOH, in coordination with DILG. DOJ, and

a7
DSWD, shall develop HIV and AIDS comprehensive programs
and policies, which include the HIV counseling and testing
procedures in prisons, rehabilitation centers, and other
closed-setting institutions.

PLHIV in prisons, rehabilitation centers, and other
closed-setting institutions shall be provided HIV treatment,
which includes anti-retroviral drugs, care. and support in
accordance with the national guidelines. Efforts should be
undertaken to ensure the continuity of care at all stages, from
admission or imprisonment to release. The provision on
informed consent and confidentiality shall also apply in
closed-setting institutions.

SEC. 40. Non-diseriminatory HIV and AIDS
The members of the PNAC, in cooperation with CSOs, and
in collaboration with DOJ and CHR, shall ensure the delivery
of non-discriminatory HIV and AIDS services by government
and private HIV and AIDS service providers.

SEC. 41. Protection of HIV Educators, Licensed Social
Workers, Health Workers, and Other HIV and AIDS Service
Providers from Harassment. — Any person involved in the
provision of HIV and AIDS services, including peer educators.
shall be protected from suit, arrest or prosecution, and from
civil, criminal or administrative liability, on the basis of their
delivery of such services in HIV prevention. This protection
does not cover acts which are committed in violation of this
Act.

SEC. 42. Health Insurance and Similar Health Services.
~ The PhilHealth shall:

/ (a) Develop a benefit package for PLHIV that shall
include coverage for in-patient and out-patient medical and
diagnostic services, including medication and treatment:

(b) Develop a benefit package for the unborn and the
newborn child from infected mothers:

(c) Set a reference price for HIV services in government
hospitals:

(d) Conduct programs to educate the human resource
units of companies on the PhilHealth package on HIV and
AIDS: and

(e) Develop a mechanism for orphans living with HIV
to access HIV benefit package.

The PhilHealth shall enforce confidentiality in the
provision of these packages to PLHIV. No PLHIV shall be
denied or deprived of private health insurance under a Health
Maintenance Organization (HMO) and private life insurance
coverage under a life insurance company on the basis of the
person's HIV status. Furthermore, no person shall be denied
of his life insurance claims if he dies of HIV or AIDS under
a valid and subsisting life insurance policy.

The Insurance Commission (IC) shall implement this
provision and shall develop the necessary policies to ensure
compliance.

SEC. 43. HIV and AIDS Monitoring and Evaluation. —
The DOH shall maintain a comprehensive HIV and AIDS
monitoring and evaluation program that shall serve the
following purposes:

(a) Determine and monitor the magnitude and progression
of HIV and AIDS in the Philippines to help the national
government evaluate the adequacy and efficacy of HIV
prevention and treatment programs being employed:

(b) Receive. collate, process, and evaluate all HIV and
AIDS-related medical reports from all hospitals, clinics,
laboratories and testing centers, including HIV-related deaths
and relevant data from public and private hospitals. various
databanks or information systems: Provided, That it shall
adopt a coding system that ensures anonymity and
confidentiality: and

(c) Submit, through its Secretariat, an annual report to
the PNAC containing the findings of its monitoring and
evaluation activities in compliance with this mandate.

ARTICLE VI
CONFIDENTIALITY
SEC. 44. Confidentiality. ~ The confidentiality and

privacy of any individual who has been tested for HIV. has
been exposed to HIV. has HIV infection or HIV- and

AIDS-related illnesses, or was treated for HIV-related illnesses
shall be guaranteed. The following acts violate confidentiality
and privacy:

(a) Disclosure of Confidential HIV and AIDS Information.
~ Unless otherwise provided in Section 45 of this Act, it shall
be unlawful to disclose, without written consent, information
that a person has AIDS, has undergone HIV-related test. has
HIV infection or HIV-related illnesses. or has been exposed to

HIV.

The prohibition shall apply to any person, natural ov
juridical, whose work or function involves the implementation
of this Act, or the delivery of HIV-related services, including
those who handle or have access to personal data or
information in the workplace, and who, pursuant to the receipt
of the required written consent from the subject of confidential
HIV and AIDS information, have subsequently been granted
access to the same confidential information.

(b) Media Disclosure. ~ It shall be unlawful for any
editor, publisher, reporter or columnist. in case of printed
materials, or any announcer or producer in case of television
and radio broadcasting, or any producer or director of films
in case of the movie industry, or any other individual or
organization in case of social media, to disclose the name,
picture, or any information that would reasonably identify
persons living with HIV and AIDS, or any confidential HIV
and AIDS information, without the prior written consent of
their subjects except when the persous waive said
confidentiality through their own acts and omissions under
Section 4(a) of Republic Act No. 10175, otherwise known as
the “Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012” and Section 25 of
Republic Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy
Act of 2012”,

SEC. 45. Exceptions. — Confidential HIV and AIDS
information may be released by HIV testing facilities without
consent in the following instances:

(a) When complying with reportorial requirements of the
national active and passive surveillance system of the DOH:
Provided, That the information related to a person's identity
shall remain confidential:

i

(b) When informing other health workers directly
involved in the treatment or cave of a PLHIV: Provided, That
such worker shall be required to perform the duty of shared
medical confidentiality; and

(c) When responding to a subpoena duces tecum and
subpoena ad testificandum issued by a court with jurisdiction
over a legal proceeding where the main issue is the HIV status
of an individual: Provided, That the confidential medical
record, after having been verified for accuracy by the head of
the office or department, shall remain anonymous and unlinked
and shall be properly sealed by its lawful custodian, hand
delivered to the court. and personally opened by the judge:
Provided, further, That the judicial proceedings be held in
executive session.

SEC. 46. Disclosure of HIV-Related Test Results. — The
result of any test related to HIV shall be disclosed by the
trained service provider who conducts pre-test and post-test
counseling only to the individual who submitted to the test.
If the patient is below fifteen (15) years old, an orphan, or
is mentally incapacitated. the result may be disclosed to either
of the patient’s parents, legal guardian. or a duly assigned
licensed social worker or health worker, whichever is
applicable: Provided, That when a person below fifteen (15)
years of age and not suffering from any mental incapacity,
has given voluntary and informed consent to the procedure in
accordance with Section 29(b) of this Act, the result of the
test shall be disclosed to the child: Provided, further, That
the child should be given age-appropriate counseling and access
to necessary health care and sufficient support services.

It may also be disclosed to a person authorized to receive
such results in conjunction with the DOH Monitoring Body
as provided in Section 43 of this Act.

SEC. 47. Disclosure to Persons with Potential Exposure
to HIV. - Any person who, after having been tested, is found
to be infected with HIV is strongly encouraged to disclose this
health condition to the spouse, sexual partners, and/or any
person prior to engaging in penetrative sex or any potential
exposure to HIV. A person living with HIV may seek help
from qualified professionals including medical professionals,
health workers, peer educators, or social workers to support
him in disclosing this health condition to one’s partner or

ot

spouse. Confidentiality shall likewise be observed. Further, the
DOH, through the PNAC, shall establish an enabling
environment to encourage newly tested HIV-positive individuals
to disclose their status to partners.

SEC. 48. Duty of Employers, Heads of Government
Offices, Heads of Public and Private Schools or Training
Institutions, and Local Chief Executives. - It shall be the duty
of private employers, heads of government offices. heads of
public and private schools and training institutions. and local
chief executives over all private establishments within their
territorial jurisdiction, to prevent or deter acts of discrimination
against PLHIV, and to provide procedures for the resolution,
settlement, or prosecution of acts of discrimination. Towards
this end, the private employer, head of office, or local chief
executive shall:

(a) Promulgate rules and regulations prescribing the
procedure for the investigation of discrimination cases and the
administrative sanctions thereof: and

(b) Create an ad hoc committee on the investigation of
discrimination cases.

The Committee shall conduct meetings to increase the
members’ knowledge and understanding of HIV and AIDS, and
to prevent incidents of discrimination. It shall also conduct the
administrative investigation of alleged cases of discrimination.

ARTICLE VIE
DISCRIMINATORY ACTS AND PRACTICES AND
CORRESPONDING PENALTIES

SEC. 49. Discriminatory Acts and Practices. - The
following discriminatory acts and practices shall be prohibited:

(a) Discrimination in the Workplace. — The rejection of
job application, termination of employment, or other
discriminatory policies in hiring, provision of employment and
other related benefits, promotion or assignment of an individual
solely or partially on the basis of actual. perceived, or
suspected HIV status:

(b) Discrimination in Learning Institutions. — Refusal of
admission, expulsion, segregation. imposition of harsher
disciplinary actions, or denial of benefits or services of a
student or a prospective student solely or partially on the
basis of actual, perceived. or suspected HIV status;

(c) Restriction on Travel and Habitation. — Restrictions
on travel within the Philippines, refusal of lawful entry to
Philippine territory, deportation from the Philippines, or the
quarantine or enforced isolation of travelers solely or partially
on account of actual. perceived, or suspected HIV status is
discriminatory. The same standard of protection shall be
accorded to migrants, visitors, and residents who are not
Filipino citizens:

(d) Restrictions on Shelter. — Restrictions on housing or
lodging, whether permanent or temporary. solely or partially
on the basis of actual, perceived. or suspected HIV status:

(e) Prohibition from Seeking or Holding Public Office.
~ Prohibition on the right to seek an elective or appointive
public office solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived,
or suspected HIV status:

(f) Exclusion from Credit and Insurance Services. —
Exclusion from health, accident or life insurance, or credit and
loan services, including the extension of such loan or
insurance facilities, of an individual solely or partially on the
basis of actual, perceived, or suspected HIV status: Provided,
That the PLHIV has not concealed or misrepresented the fact.
to the insurance company or loan or credit service provider
upon application:

(g) Discrimination in Hospitals and Health Institutions.
~ Denial of health services, or being charged with a higher
fee, on the basis of actual, perceived, or suspected HIV status
is a discriminatory act and is prohibited:

(h) Denial of Burial Services. - Denial of embalming and
buvial services for a deceased person who had HIV and AIDS
or who was known, suspected, or perceived to be HIV-positive:

(i) Act of Bullying. - Bullying in all forms, including
name-calling, upon a person based on actual. perceived. or

suspected HIV status, including bullying in social media and
other online portals; and

Q) Other similar or analogous discriminatory acts.
SEC. 50. Penalties. —

(a) Any person who commits the prohibited act under
Section 22 of this Act on misinformation on HIV and AIDS
shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment
ranging from one (1) yeax but not more than ten (10) years,
a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00), but
not more than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00), or
both, at the discretion of the court: Provided, That if the
offender is a manufacturer. importer or distributor of any
drugs, devices, agents, and other health products, the penalty
of at least five (5) years imprisonment, but not more than ten
(10) years, and a fine of at least Five hundved thousand pesos
(P500,000.00), but not more than Five million pesos
(P5,000,000.00) shall be imposed: Provided, further, That
drugs, devices, agents, and other health products found in
violation of Section 21 of this Act may be seized and held in
custody when the FDA Director-General has reasonable cause
to believe facts found by him/her or an authorized officer or
employee of the FDA that such health products may cause
injury or prejudice to the consuming public:

ZS

(b) Any person who violates the second sentence of Section
24 of this Act on police operations vis-d-vis comprehensive
health intervention for key populations shall, upon conviction,
suffer the penalty of imprisonment of one (1) year to five (5)
years, and a fine of not less than One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00), but not more than Five hundred thousand pesos
(P500,000.00): Provided, That the law enforcement agents
found guilty shall be removed from public service:

(ce) Any person who knowingly or negligently causes
another to get infected with HIV in the course of the practice
of profession through unsafe and unsanitary practice and
procedure, or who compelled any person to undergo HIV testing
without his or her consent shall, upon conviction, suffer the
penalty of imprisonment of six (6) years to twelve (12) years,
without prejudice to the imposition of fines and administrative
sanctions. such as suspension or revocation of professional
license;

ce

te URRRNERNcReeaaaaron

The permit or license of the business entity and the
accreditation of the HIV testing centers may be cancelled or
withdrawn if these establishments fail to maintain safe
practices and procedures as may be required by the guidelines
formulated in compliance with Section 26, on blood, tissue. or
organ donation, and Section 28, on medical management,
surgical, and othe: related procedures:

(d) Any person who violates Section 41 of this Act. on
the protection of HIV educators, licensed social workers, health
workers, and other HIV and AIDS service providers from
harassment shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalty of
imprisonment of six (6) months to five (5) years, and a fine
of not less than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00).
but not more than Five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00):
Provided, That if the person who violates this provision is a
law enforcement agent or a public official. administrative
sanctions may be imposed in addition to imprisonment and/
or fine, at the discretion of the court:

(e) Any person, natural or juridical, who violates the
provisions of Section 42 of this Act on health insurance and
similar services shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalty of
imprisonment of six (6) months to five (5) years, and/or a fine
of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00), at the
discretion of the court, and without prejudice to the imposition
of administrative sanctions such as fines, suspensions or
revocation of business permit. business license or accreditation,
and professional license:

(f) Any person who violates the provisions of Section 44
of this Act on confidentiality shall. upon conviction. suffer the
following penalties:

(1) Six (6) months to two (2) years of imprisonment for
any person who breaches confidentiality, and/or a fine of not
less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00), but not more than
One hundred fifty thousand pesos (P150,000.00), at the
discretion of the court:

(2) Two (2) years and one (1) day to five (5) years of
imprisonment for any person who causes the mass
dissemination of the HIV status of a person, including
spreading the information online or making statements to the
media, and/or a fine of not less than One hundred fifty

>

thousand pesos (P150,000.00), but not more than Three
hundred fifty thousand pesos (P350,000.00), at the discretion
of the court; and

(3) Five (5) years and one (1) day to seven (7) years of
imprisonment for any health professional, medical instructor,
worker. employer, recruitment agency, insurance company,
data encoder, and other custodian of any medical record. file.
data, or test result who breaches confidentiality, and/or a fine
of not less than Three hundred fifty thousand pesos
(P350,000.00). but not more than Five hundred thousand pesos
(P500,000.00), at the discretion of the court.

These penalties are without prejudice to any
administrative sanction or civil suit that may be brought
against persons who violate confidentiality under this Act.

(g) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
in Section 49 on discriminatory acts and practices shall, upon
conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment of six (6) months
to five (5) years. and/or a fine of not less than F ifty thousand
pesos (P50,000.00), but not more than Five hundred thousand
pesos (P500,000.00), at the discretion of the court, and without
prejudice to the imposition of administrative sanctions such
as fines, suspension or revocation of business permit, business
license or accreditation. and professional license: and

(h) Any person who has obtained knowledge of confidential
HIV and AIDS information and uses such information to
malign or cause damage, injury. or loss to another person
shall face liability under Articles 19, 20, 21, and 26 of the
new Civil Code of the Philippines and relevant provisions of
Republic Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy
Act of 2012”.

If the offender is a corporation, association, partnership
or any other juridical person, the penalty of imprisonment
shall be imposed upon the responsible officers and employees,
as the case may be, who participated in, or allowed by their
gross negligence, the commission of the crime, and the fine
shall be imposed jointly and severally on the juridical person
and the responsible officers and/or employees. Furthermore. the
court may suspend or revoke its license or business permit.

If the offender is an alien, he/she shall, in addition to
the penalties prescribed herein, be deported without further
proceedings after serving penalties herein prescribed.

If the offender is a public official or employee, he/she
shall, in addition to the penalties herein, suffer perpetual or
temporary absolute disqualification from office, as the case may
be.

SEC. 51. Penalties Collected. — The penalties collected
pursuant to this section shall be put into a special fund to
be administered by the PNAC, and shall be used for initial
interventions required to address gaps in the national response
on the part of government agencies and its partners from civil
society and international e-ganizations in acec-dance with
Section 54) of this Act.

ARTICLE VIII
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 52. Appropriations. — The amount needed for the
initial implementation of this Act shall be charged against the
appropriations for the DOH. Thereafter, such sums as may
be necessary for the continued implementation of this Act shall
be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

The DBM, in coordination with the Department of
Finance (DOF) and the DOH, and other relevant government
agencies, shall consider the incidence of HIV and AIDS. in
the riations for the implementation

the annual a)
of this Act in accordance with the AMTP. A separate budget
item in the annual appropriations of LGUs shall be allocated
for their action plans specified in this Act.

The funding requirement needed to provide for the health
insurance package and other services for PLHIV as stated in
Section 42 hereof shall be charged against the PhilHealth’s
corporate funds.

The funding needed to upgrade or construct government
administered HIV testing and treatment centers shall be
funded from the revenues of the sin tax under Republic Act

3h

No. 8424, otherwise known as the “National Internal Revenue
Code”, as amended by Republic Act No. 10351 and shall be
prioritized under the Health Facilities Enhancement Program

of the DOH.

The funds to be appropriated for the operations of the
PNAC shall be a distinct and separate budget item from the
vegular appropriation for the DOH, and shall be administered
by the Secretary of Health. In no circumstance shall the
appropriations, savings, and other resources of the PNAC be
realigned to the programs and projects of the DOH or any
other government agency, unless such program or project is
related to the implementation of the provisions under this Act.

SEC. 53. Transilory Provision. — The personnel designated
by the DOH as Secretariat of the PNAC under Section 7 of
this Act shall be absorbed as permanent personnel to fill the
positions of the Secretariat as provided in this Act.

SEC. 54. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
PNAC within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act
shall promulgate the necessary implementing rules and
regulations for the effective implementation of the provisions
of this Act.

SEC. 55. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No. 8504,
otherwise known as the “Philippine AIDS Prevention and
Control Act of 1998”, is hereby repealed.

Ali decrees. executive orders, prociamations, and
administrative regulations or parts thereof, particularly in Act
No. 3815, otherwise known as the “Revised Penal Code”, as
amended, Republic Act No. 8353, otherwise known as the
“Anti-Rape Law of 1997", Executive Order No. 209, otherwise
known as the “Family Code of the Philippines”, Republic Act
No. 7719, otherwise known as the “National Blood Services
Act of 1994”, and Republic Act No. 7170, otherwise known as
the “Organ Donation Act of 1991”, inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed. amended or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 56. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
of this Act is declared unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

re

Soa NRAaRIRRa aa:

oy

SEC. 57. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette
or in a national newspaper of general circulation.

Approved.
f
—
GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO VICENTE €. SOTTO III
Speaker of the House Presidént of the Senate

of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1390
and House Bill No. 6617 was passed by the Senate and the
House of Representatives on October 10. 2018.

rE ~()
es. OA Athen tea =
DANTE ROBERTO P. MALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
ActingSecreigpry General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

é

Approved: DEC 2 0 2018

_—

(

RODRI OA DUTERTE

President of the Philippines
oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 ~ 008691

This appears to be an incomplete input. Please provide the full text of the paragraphs to be translated.

Office of the President

This also appears to be an incomplete input. Please provide the full text of the paragraphs to be translated.

geo = ~es gERR RRC RSET