H. No. 8837
S. No. 2159

Republir of the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippines
Metra Manila

Seventeenth Congress
Chirk Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No, 41350]

AN ACT CREATING THE NATIONAL COMMISSION OF
SENIOR CITIZENS, PROVIDING FOR ITS FUNCTIONS,
ABOLISHING THE NATIONAL COORDINATING
COUNCIL AND MONITORING BOARD, AMENDING
FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7432,
AS AMENDED, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

 

 

 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “National Commission of Senior Citizens Act”.

Sec. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ It is the policy of the
State to adopt measures whereby our senior citizens are assisted
and appreciated by the community as a whole, provide services
and activities beneficial to senior citizens, their families and the

communities they serve, and establish community-based health
and rehabilitation, educational, and socioeconomic programs for
all senior citizens.

Consistent with this policy, the State shall promote the
advocacy of and collaboration between different stakeholders and
senior citizens to ensure the effective implementation of various
programs and services, particularly on the development of senior
citizens and advancing their health and well-being, and ensuring
asupportive and enabling environment for the elderly.

SEC. 3. Creation of the National Commission of Senior
Citizens. — There is hereby created the National Commission of
Senior Citizens, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, and
which shall be under the Office of the President. The Commission
shall establish its principal office in the National Capital Region
and it may set up field offices in coordination with appropriate
government agencies.

SEC. 4. Composition. - The Commission shall be
composed of a Chairperson and six (6) Commissioners and shall
act.as a collegial body. The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive
Officer of the Commission. The six (6) Commissioners shall
represent different geographical regions of the Philippines and
shall hold office in their respective regions: Provided, That the
full Commission shall meet at least once every month.

SEC. 5. Term of Office. — The Chairperson and
Commissioners shall have a term of office of six (6) years, without
prejudice to reappointment by the President. Of those
first appointed, the Chairperson and two (2) Commissioners shall
hold office for six (6) years, two (2) Commissioners shall hold
office for four (4) years, and two (2) Commissioners shall hold
office for two (2) years. Appointment to any vacancy shall only be
for the unexpired term of the predecessor.

SEC. 6. Qualifications. ~ The members of the Commission
must be citizens and residents of the Philippines; at least
sixty (60) years old at the time of their appointment; of good moral
character; bona fide members of senior citizens associations;
holders of a college degree or have relevant experience in the affairs
of senior citizens; of good health and sound mind: have not been

convicted by a final judgment of a crime involving moral turpitude;
and recommended by a general assembly of senior citizens
organizations: Provided, That at least two (2) Commissioners
shall be women.

Src. 7. Functions. — The Commission shall:

(a) Ensure the full implementation of laws, policies, and
programs of the government pertaining to senior citizens; review
and conduct studies on the same; and recommend appropriate
actions thereon to Congress and the President;

(b) Formulate policies for the promotion and protection of
the rights and well-being of senior citizens;

(ec) Conduct information, education, and communication
campaigns to raise awareness on the rights of senior citizens;

(@) Establish and maintain cooperation and consultations
with local government units and national government agencies
onall matters pertaining to the general welfare of senior citizens;

(@) Represent the Philippines in international functions,
fora, or conferences on senior citizens and establish and
maintain linkages with the international senior citizen or senior
citizen-serving institutions or organizations and counterpart
government agencies of other states;

@ Constitute and convene when necessary, an advisory
body to be composed of such representatives from the government,
nongovernnent organizations, civil society, and the private sector,
as the Commission may deem appropriate, to assist in the
performance of its functions;

@) Develop appropriate mechanisms and procedures for
the selection and nomination of the members of the Commission
for appointment by the President; and

(h) Perform such other actions and functions for the
promotion of the welfare of senior citizens, as may be directed by
the President.

SEC. 8. Organizational Structure. — Subject to the
approval of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM),
the Commission shall determine its organizational structure and
staffing pattern, create offices, divisions, or units as it may deem
necessary, and appoint its officers and employees in accordance
with civil service laws, rules and regulations. The remuneration
structure for the positions in the staffing pattern shall strictly
conform to Republic Act No. 6758, otherwise known as the
“Compensation and Position Classification Act of 1989”.

 

SEC. 9. Executive Director. — The Commission shall
appoint an Executive Director who shall be responsible for
implementing the policies, rules, regulations and directives of
the Commission; the management of the Commission’s daily
operations; and for coordinating and supervising the activities of
the different offices, divisions, and units of the Commission.

The Executive Director shall be a Career Executive Service
Officer and shall have at least five (5) years of relevant experience
in any of the following fields: law; economics; commerce:
management; social services; or finance.

SEC. 10. Abolition of the National Coordinating and
Monitoring Board. - The National Coordinating and Monitoring
Board created by virtue of Republic Act No. 9994, otherwise
known as the “Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010”, is hereby
abolished.

SEO. 11. Transfer of Functions from the Department of
Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) to the National
Commission of Senior Citizens (NCSC). — All functions,
programs, projects and activities which are being undertaken by
the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) for
the formulation, implementation, and coordination of social
welfare and development (SWD) policies and programs for the
poor, vulnerable and disadvantaged senior citizens shall be
transferred to the National Commission of Senior Citizens

(NCSC).

SEC. 12. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to fund
the implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 13. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Commission, after due consultation with the DBM. DSWD,
Department of the Interior and Local Government, League of
Cities of the Philippines, League of Municipalities of the
Philippines, and other stakeholders, shall promulgate the rules
and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act, within
one hundred eighty (180) days from its effectivity.

SEC. 14. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
section or provision of this Act is held unconstitutional or
invalid, the other sections or provisions hereof shall not be affected
thereby.

SEC. 15. Repealing Clause. — Section 11 of Republic Act
No. 7482, as amended by Republic Act No. 9257 and further
amended by Republic Act No. 9994, is hereby repealed. All
laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, and
other issuances or parts thereof, that are inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 16. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

pproved.
a :
x
vicente C.SOTTOIN GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

_ - nce ror ince ere cM EN TEV na ME SAR

This Act was passed by the House of Representatives as
House Bill No. 8837 on January 29, 2019 and adopted by the Senate
of the Philippines as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 2159 on
May 20, 2019.

   
   
 

 

§ APA Ne

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA DANTE
Secretary of the Senate Acting Secretary General

  

Approved: JUL 25 2019

PRRD 2016 - 011573

 

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

sneer scemanmaeninc omnia,

#