H. No. 8833

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines

Metra Manila
Seventeenth Congress

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC ACT No. 11372]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING AND CONSTRUCTING A HOSPITAL
FOR THE PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD, ITS
PERSONNEL, EMPLOYEES, THEIR DEPENDENTS
AND THE RETIRED UNIFORMED PERSONNEL TO
BE KNOWN AS THE PHILIPPINE COAST GUARD
GENERAL HOSPITAL AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. This Act shall be known as the
“Philippine Coast Guard General Hospital Act”.

Suc. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to
health development which shall endeavor to make essential goods,

health and other social services available to all people at affordable
cost. Towards this end, and in order to adequately respond to
emergencies, disasters and emerging diseases, the State shall
protect the interest and promote the well-being and the medical
needs of the Coast Guard personnel, their dependents and retired
uniformed personnel.

SEC. 3. Philippine Coast Guard General Hospital. — To
carry out the above policy, a hospital for the personnel and
employees of the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), their dependents
and the retired uniformed personnel is hereby established
to be known as the Philippine Coast Guard General Hospital.
The hospital shall be located in the Coast Guard Base, Taguig,
Lower Bicutan, Taguig City.

Sec. 4. Objectives. — To ensure the availability,
accessibility and affordability of quality health care, the
Philippine Coast Guard General Hospital shall have the
following objectives:

(a) To provide a comprehensive and total health care
services to all personnel and employees of the PCG, their
dependents and the retired uniform personnel;

(b) To complement the existing package of services under
the health care program so as to include preventive, promotive,
diagnostic, curative and rehabilitative programs;

(©) To conduct medical examination of all the trainees of
the PCG to ensure their physical and mental capability; and

(d) To monitor the condition of patients and to generate
relevant information and data in aid of policy information.

As used in this Act, dependents refer to: (1) the legitimate
spouse dependent for support upon the concerned PCG personnel:
(2) the legitimate, illegitimate, or legally adopted children,
primarily dependent upon and living with the Coast Guard
personnel if such child is not more than twenty-one (21) years of
age, unmarried and not gainfully employed, or is over the age of
majority but incapacitated and incapable of self-support due to a

, mental or physical defect; and (3) the parents dependent upon the
, PCG personnel for support.

SEC. 5. Administration. — Upon the effectivity of this
Act, the Philippine Coast Guard General Hospital shall be
administered by a board of directors consisting of:

(@) Commandant of the PCG, as Chairperson;

(b) Deputy Commandant of the PCG, as Vice Chairperson;
and

(© Command Surgeon of the Philippine Coast Guard
Medical Service as member;

(@ Commander of the Philippine Coast Guard Medical
Service, as member;

) Commander of the Philippine Coast Guard Nurse Corps,
as member;

@® Commander of the Philippine Coast Guard Legal
Service, as member; and

(g) Deputy Chief of Coast Guard Staff for Human Resource
and Management, as member.

SEC. 6. Powers and Responsibilities of the Board of
Directors. — The board of directors of the Philippine Coast Guard
General Hospital shall have the following powers and
responsibilities:

(a) Develop a program of patient care and hospital
administration that includes the establishment, management,
operation, and maintenance of a hospital organization with clearly
defined lines of administration, operational and professional
authority and responsibility, functional relationships, and lines
of communication and coordination among its various
administrative and operational units:

(6) Organize the structure of the Philippine Coast Guard
General Hospital in accordance with the staffing pattern approved
by the Department of Budget and Management, appoint the
officials and employees of the hospital, subject to civil service
law, rules and regulations, prescribe their duties and fix their
gompensation and position classification system and salary
standardization in the government;

© Provide training for all hospital personnel so that the
highest professional level of patient care may be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the Department of Health;

@ Formulate and implement programs and measures to
attain the objectives of the Philippine Coast Guard General
Hospital;

(©) Enter into agreements and contracts in connection with
its establishment, maintenance, operations, and objectives;

@® Issue rules and regulations to carry out the objectives
of this Act; and

(g) Perform such other duties and functions as may be
provided by law.

SEC. 7. Appropriations. — The Secretary of Transportation
shall immediately include in the Department’s programs the
construction and operationalization of the Philippine Coast Guard
General Hospital, the funding of which shall be included in the
annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEc. 9. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

Aoods.

VICENTEC. SOTTOUL GLORIA APAGAL ARROYO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

ose

weet

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the
Philippines on January 29, 2019 and June 3, 20 19, respectively.

VO.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA DAN
Secretary of the Senate

   
 

Approved: AUG 0 8 atig

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 011910

 

 

, fe Fi

Se 19-2005