H. No. 5777
S. No, 2232

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manils
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—_f—_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC Act No11590}

AN ACT TAXING PHILIPPINE OFFSHORE GAMING
OPERATIONS, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
SECTIONS 22, 25, 27, 28, 106, 108, AND ADDING NEW
SECTIONS 125-A AND 288(G) OF THE NATIONAL
INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1997, AS AMENDED,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby
declared the policy of the State to promote a just and dynamic
social order that will ensure the prosperity and independence
of the nation and free the people from poverty through policies
that provide adequate social services, promote full
employment, a rising standard of living, and an improved
quality of life for all. Towards this end, the State shall strictly

regulate all forms of legal gambling and prohibit all forms of
illegal gambling. While doing so, the State recognizes that
revenues generated from legal gambling are not a sustainable
source of income. The State further recognizes that all forms
of gambling have consequences to Philippine society in general,
and to Filipino families, in particular. The State further
reiterates that the recognition of legal forms of gambling,
including offshore online gaming, shall not be construed as a
favorable state endorsement of such activity.

SE€. 2. Section 22 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to
read as follows:

“Sc. 22. Definitions. — When used in this
Title:

“XXX

“() The term ‘offshore gaming licensee’
shall refer to the offshore gaming operator,
whether organized abroad or in the Philippines,
duly licensed and authorized, through a gaming
license, by the Philippine Amusement and Gaming
Corporation or any special economic zone authority
or tourism zone authority or freeport authority
to conduct offshore gaming operations, including
the acceptance of bets from offshore customers,
as provided for in their respective charters.

“Notwithstanding any law to the contrary,
no.offshore gaming license shall hereinafter be
issued by the Aurora Pacific Economic Zone and
Freeport Authority. All offshore gaming
licensees whose license was issued by the Aurora
Pacific Economic Zone and Freeport Authority
shall be transferred, regulated, and monitored
by the Philippine Amusement and Gaming
Corporation.

j
:
i
a

 

“For purposes of this Section, an offshore
gaming licensee shall be considered engaged in
doing business in the Philippines.

“(JJ) The term ‘offshore gaming licensee-
gaming agent’ shall refer to the representative
in the Philippines of an offshore-based operator
who shall act as a resident agent for the mere
purpose of receiving summons, notices and
other legal processes for the offshore gaming
licensee and to comply with disclosure
‘requirements of the Securities and Exchange
Commission. The offshore gaming licensee-
gaming agent shall not be involved with the
business operations of the offshore gaming
licensee and shall derive no income therefrom.”

SEC. 3. Section 25 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to
read as follows:

“Sec, 25. Tax on Nonresident Alien
Individual, —

“A) xxx
“(B) xxx
“C) xxx
“(D) xxx
“E) xxx
“@) xxx

“(G) Alien Individuals Employed by an
Offshore Gaming Licensee and Service
Providers. — Alien individuals regardless of
residency and who are employed and assigned

in the Philippines, regardless of term and class
of working or employment permit or visa, by an
offshore gaming licensee or its service provider
as defined in Section 22(II) and Section 27(G)
of this Code, shall pay a final withholding tax of
twenty-five percent (25%) on their gross income
as computed in the succeeding paragraph:
Provided, however, That the minimum final
withholding tax due for any taxable month from
sqid persons shall not be lower than Twelve
thousand five hundred pesos (P12,500.00).

“In computing the tax provided in this
Section, gross income shall include, whether in
cash or in kind, basic salary/wages, annuities,
compensation, remuneration and other
emoluments, such as honoraria and allowances,
received from such service provider or offshore
gaming licensee: Provided, That all offshore
gaming licensees and service providers shall
submit to the Bureau of Internal Revenue the
original copy of notarized contract of
employment clearly stating therein the annual
salary and other benefits and entitlements of
the concerned alien.

“The tax imposed herein shall be withheld
and remitted in accordance with the provision
of this Code and failure to do so shall be governed
by this Code. In addition, the alien concerned
may be subject to deportation and may be barred
from reentering the Philippines, or blacklisted
as a foreign employee by the Department of
Labor and Employment, Bureau of Immigration,
and other relevant agencies.

“For the efficient assessment, verification,
and administration of taxes imposed in this
Section, the Bureau of Immigration, the
Department of Labor and Employment, the
Bureau of Internal Revenue, the Securities and

 

i
‘
|

om sa eae ORR sume te A REINER 5 Ea LAE apse RN AES ee a

Exchange Commission, the Philippine
Amusement and Gaming Corporation, and any
special economic zone authority, tourism zone
authority, freeport authority, as provided for
in their respective charters, shall issue joint and
consolidated rules and regulations, including the
issuance of a gaming employment license by the
concerned agency, for the implementation of
free and efficient exchange of information among
the said agencies in relation to the proper
payment of taxes by persons covered under this
Section. For this purpose, the data sharing and

* reporting system as well as the joint inspection

team created under Joint Memorandum Circular
No. 1, Series of 2019, entitled, ‘Rules and
Procedures Governing Foreign Nationals
Intending to Work in the Philippines’ shall be
institutionalized.

“All foreign employees of offshore gaming
licensees and their service providers, regardless
of nature of employment, shall have a tax
identification number. All offshore gaming
licensees and service providers that employ or
engage a foreign national without the foregoing
shall be liable for a fine of Twenty thousand
pesos (P20,000.00) for every foreign national
without such tax identification number and, in
proper instances, revocation of their primary
and other licenses obtained from government
agencies and/or perpetual or temporary ban in
employing or engaging foreign nationals for
their operations: Provided, That the foreign
national concerned shall still pay, and the
employer shall remit, any corresponding taxes,
penalties, interests, and surcharges due in
accordance with this Code.

“Any income earned from all other sources
within the Philippines by the alien employee
referred to under this Subsection shall be

in Section 27(A) of this Code, and shall be subject

bject to th inent i tax imposed : .
subject to the pertinent income ta P to all other applicable local and national taxes.

under this Code.”

Src. 4. Section 27 of the National Internal Revenue Code “For purposes of this Section, an accredited
of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as service provider to an offshore gaming licensee
follows: (‘service provider’) shall be a juridical person that

is duly created or organized within or outside the

“Sec. 27. Rates of Income Tax on Domestic Philippines or a natural person, regardless of
Corporations. — ; citizenship or residence, which provides ancillary
i services to an offshore gaming licensee as defined

“(AY xxx ! by Section 22(I) of this Code or to any gaming
licensee or operator with licenses from other
jurisdictions. Such ancillary services may include,

“B) xxx
but shall not be limited to, customer and technical
“C) xxx relations and support, information technology,
gaming software, data provision, payment
“D) xxx solutions, and live studio and streaming services.”
Sec. 5. Section 28 of the National Internal Revenue Code
“E) xxx of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as

follows:

“(F) Offshore Gaming Licensees. — The
provisions of existing special or general laws to
the contrary notwithstanding, the non-gaming
revenues of Philippine-based offshore gaming
licensees as duly licensed by the Philippine
Amusement and Gaming Corporation or any
special economic zone authority or tourism zone
authority or freeport authority shall be subject
to an income tax equivalent to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the taxable income derived
during each taxable year from all sources within
and without the Philippines.

“(G) Accredited Service Providers to
Offshore Gaming Licensees. — Unless otherwise
provided in this Code, accredited service
providers to offshore gaming licensees shall not
be subject to the gaming tax imposed by Section
125-A but shall pay such rate of tax as imposed

“Sec. 28. Rates of Income Tax on Foreign
Corporations. —

“(A) Tax on Resident Foreign
Corporations. —

“xxx
XXX

“(7) Offshore Gaming Licensees. — The
provisions of existing special or general laws to
the contrary notwithstanding, the non-gaming
revenues derived within the Philippines of
foreign-based offshore gaming licensees as
defined and duly licensed by the Philippine
Amusement and Gaming Corporation or any

special economic zone authority or tourism zone
authority or freeport authority shall be subject
to an income tax equivalent to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the taxable income derived
during each taxable year.”

Sec. 6. Section 106 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby amended to read as
follows:

a, “Sec. 106. Value-Added Tax on Sale of
Goods or Properties. —

“(A) XxX
“) xxx

“(2) The following sales by VAT-registered

“XxX

“(B) Transactions Subject to Zero Percent
(0%) Rate. ~ The following services performed
in the Philippines by VAT-registered persons
shall be subject to zero percent (0%) rate:

“xxx

“

XXX

“(9) Services rendered to offshore gaming
licensees subject to gaming tax under Section
125-A of this Code by service providers,
including accredited service providers as
defined in Section 27(G) of this Code.”

persons shall be subject to zero percent (0%)
rate:

Sec. 8. A new section designated as Section 125-A of the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby
added to read as follows:

“a) xxx
“(b) xxx

“(c) Sales to offshore gaming licensees
subject to gaming tax under Section 125-A of
this Code.

SEC. 7. Section 108 of the National Internal Revenue
Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby amended to read as
follows:

“Src. 108. Value-Added Tax on Sale of
Services and Use or Lease of Properties. —

“A) XXX

“Suc. 125-A. Gaming Tax on Services
Rendered by Offshore Gaming Licensees. — Any
provision of existing laws, rules or regulations
to the contrary notwithstanding, the entire gross
gaming revenue or receipts or the agreed
predetermined minimum monthly revenue or
receipts from gaming, whichever is higher, shall
be levied, assessed, and collected a gaming tax
equivalent to five percent (5%), in lieu of all other
direct and indirect internal revenue taxes and
local taxes, with respect to gaming income:
Provided, That the gaming tax shall be directly
remitted to the Bureau of Internal Revenue not
later than the 20" day following the end of each
month: Provided, further, That the Philippine
Amusement and Gaming Corporation or any
special economic zone authority or tourism zone
authority or freeport authority may impose
regulatory fees on offshore gaming licensees
which shall not cumulatively exceed two percent

” uW

(2%) of the gross gaming revenue or receipts
derived from gaming operations and similar
related activities of all offshore gaming licensees

Sec. 9. A new Subsection designated as Section 288(G)
of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended,
is hereby added to read as follows:

or a predetermined minimum guaranteed fee,
whichever is higher: Provided, furthermore,
That for purposes of this Section, gross gaming
revenue or receipts shall mean gross wagers less
payouts: Provided, finally, That the taking of
wagers made in the Philippines and the grave
failure to cooperate with the third-party auditor
shall result in the revocation of the license of
the offshore gaming licensee.

“The Philippine Amusement and Gaming
Corporation or any special economic zone
authority or tourism zone authority or freeport
authority shall engage the services of a
third-party audit platform that would determine
the gross gaming revenues or receipts of
offshore gaming licensees. To ensure that the
proper taxes and regulatory fees are levied,
periodic reports about. the results of the
operation showing, among others, the gross
gaming revenue or receipts of each offshore
gaming licensee shall be submitted to the
Bureau of Internal Revenue by the Philippine
Amusement and Gaming Corporation or any
special economic zone authority or tourism zone
authority or freeport authority as certified by
their third-party auditor: Provided, That the
third-party auditor shall be independent,
reputable, internationally-known, and duly
accredited as such by an accrediting or similar
agency recognized by industry experts:
Provided, finally, That nothing herein shall
prevent the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the
Commission on Audit from undertaking a
post-audit or independent verification of the

“Sec. 288. Disposition of Incremental
Revenues. —

“A) XK XX

«,

XXX

“(G) Disposition of Revenues from
Gaming Tax on Offshore Gaming Licensees, —
The provisions of existing law to the contrary
notwithstanding, sixty percent (60%) of the total
revenue collected from the gaming tax imposed
on offshore gaming licensees shall be allocated
and used exclusively in the following manner:

“(1) Sixty percent (60%) for the
implementation of Republic Act No. 11223,
otherwise known as the ‘Universal Health Care
Act’;

“(2) Twenty percent (20%) shall be
allocated to the Health Facilities Enhancement
Program (HFEP), the annual requirements of
which shall be determined by the Department
of Health; and

“(3) Twenty percent (20%) shall be
allocated for the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs): Provided, That
the specific SDG targets shall be determined
by the National Economic and Development
Authority.”

gross gaming revenues determined by the

és . 10. i iew. — Within th 3
third-party auditor.” SEC. 10. Oversight and Review Within three (3)

months from the effectivity of this Act and every three (3)
months thereafter, the Bureau of Internal Revenue shall


submit a report to Congress, containing all pertinent
information, including but not limited to, reports by the
third-party auditors and collection performance data of all
offshore gaming licensees, for review of the same for possible
adjustment of rates or any other matter pertinent to the
taxation of Philippine Offshore Gaming Operations.

SEC. 11. Implementing Rules and Regulations. - Within
ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Act, the Secretary
of Finance shall, upon the recommendation of the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, promulgate the necessary
rules 4nd regulations for its implementation.

SEC. 12. Separability Clause. - If any provision of this
Act shali be held unconstitutional or invalid, the other
provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

SEC. 18. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees,
executive orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof,
including Republic Act No. 9487, otherwise known as “PAGCOR,
Charter”, Section 12(f) of Republic Act No. 9490 as amended
by Republic Act No. 10083, otherwise known as the “Aurora
Special Economic Zone Act of 2007”, and Republic Act No.
11494, otherwise known as the “Bayanihan to Recover As
One Act”, which are contrary to or inconsistent with this Act
are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Sec. 14. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

   

‘ of: ‘Represen tatives

 

This Act was passed by the House of Representatives
as House Bill No. 5777 on February 8, 2021, passed by the
Senate of the Philippines as Senate Bill No. 2232 on June 2
2021, and adopted by the House of Representatives as an

  

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA shhi , MENDOZA
Secretary of the Senate

  
  

bry Gd
ka bf Represe tatives

Approved: SEP 2 2 2021 ©

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 018689

     

   
 

¥ CORCOCOATE