RDM BO RDC SAP COEF SR ene ER

 

H. No. 6572
S. No. 1456

Republic of the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippines

Metra Manila
Seventeenth Cangress

Second Regular Sessinn

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand seventeen.

AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING THE PHILIPPINE
QUALIFICATIONS FRAMEWORK (PQF), ESTABLISHING
THE PQF-NATIONAL COORDINATING COUNCIL (NCC)
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known
as the “PQF Act”.

Src. 2. Declaration of Policy. — Pursuant to the
constitutional guarantee for the State to promote the right
of all citizens to quality and accessible education at all
levels, the State shall establish, maintain, and support a
complete, adequate and integrated system of education
relevant to the needs of the people and society.

 

In recognition of the important role of edu ation and
training in national development, it is hereby declared the
policy of the State to institutionalize the P ilippine
Qualifications Framework (PQF) to encourage lifelong learning
of individuals, provide employees specific training standards
and qualifications aligned with industry standards, ensure that
training and educational institutions comply with specific
standards and are accountable for achieving corresponding
learning outcomes, and provide government with a common
taxonomy and qualifications typology as bases for r cognizing
education and training programs as well as the qualifications
formally awarded and their equivalents. |

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Basic Education refers to that part of the
educational system intended to meet basic learning needs and
provides the foundation on which subsequent learning can be
based. It encompasses kindergarten, elementary and secondary
education as well as alternative learning systems for
out-of-school youth and those with special needs;

b) Higher Education refers to post-secondary education
offered usually by universities, colleges, academies, or
professional/technical institutions with programs leading to
academic degrees at the baccalaureate level and cademic
degrees, diplomas or certificates at the post-baccalaureate
levels;

©) Qualification refers to a formal certifica ion that
a person has successfully achieved specific learning outcomes
relevant to the identified academic, industry or co munity
requirements. A qualification confers official re ognition
of value in the labor market and in further education
and training;

 

@ Technical Vocational Education and Traini g refers
to the education involving the study of technology-related
sciences, in addition to general education, as well as the
acquisition of practical skills relating to occupations in
various sectors of economic life and social life, and which

 

comprises formal (organized programs as part of the
school system) and non-formal (organized classes outside
the school system) approaches; and

© Trifocalized Education and Training refers to the
shared administration of the education system by the
three (3) agencies responsible for each education level:
the Department of Education (DepED) for basic education;
the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
(TESDA) for technical-vocational education and training;

and the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for higher
education.

SEC. 4. Philippine Qualifications Framework (PQF). -
A P@QF shall be established which shall describe the levels of
educational qualifications and sets the standards for
qualification outcomes. It is a quality assured national system
for the development, recognition and award of qualifications
based on standards of knowledge, skills and values acquired

in different ways and methods by learners and workers
of the country.

The PQF shall have the following objectives:

(a) To adopt national standards and levels of
learning outcomes of education;

(b) To support the development and maintenance
of pathways and equivalencies that enable access to
qualifications and to assist individuals to move easily and
readily between the different education and training sectors
and between these sectors and the labor market; and

/ (©) To align domestic qualification standards with the
international qualifications framework thereby enhancing
recognition of the value and comparability of Philippine

qualifications and supporting the mobility of Filipino students
and workers.

SEC. 5. Philippine Qualifications Framework-National
Coordinating Council (PQF-NCC). — In order to harmonize
and promote a seamless education and trainin system,
the PQF-NCC is hereby established. It shall be composed
of the following:

(a) The Secretary, DepED, as Chairperson;

(b) The Secretary, Department of Labor and
Employment (DOLE), as member;

(© The Chairperson, CHED, as member;
@ The Director General, TESDA, as member;

@) The Chairperson, Professional Regulation
Commission (PRC), as member;

@ One (1) representative of the economic sector,
as member; and

(g) One (1) representative of the industry sector,
as member.

The PQF-NCC shall be chaired by the DepED Secretary
and shall have the following powers and functions:

(1) To harmonize qualification levels across basic,
technical-vocational and higher education;

(2) To align education standards and learning outcomes
with the level descriptors contained in the PQF;

(8) To promote the PQF and its elements, including
the principles, key features, definitions or termi: ologies,
structure, and governance arrangements, and provide
information and guidelines in the implementation of the POF;

 

(4) To rationalize the quality assurance mechanisms in
Philippine education;

(5) To develop and recognize pathways and equivalencies;
(©) To maintain the national registry of qualifications;

(7) To ensure the international alignment of the PQF
with the qualification frameworks of other countries
or regions;

(8) To create technical working groups in support of
the development and implementation of the PQF;

®) To represent the country in international fora or
negotiations in line with qualifications agreements or
arrangements;

(10) To review and update the PQF;

(11) To submit to the Office of the President, the
Senate of the Philippines, and the House of Representatives

an updated report on the progress and accomplishments in
relation to the PQF; and

(12) To perform such other functions that may be
related to the implementation of the PQF.

SEC. 6. Establishment of the PQF-NCC Working
Groups. — To pursue the implementation of the PQF,
working groups shall be established, especially in the areas
of qualifications register, quality assurance, pathways
and equivalencies, information and guidelines, and
international alignment.

Each working group shall be chaired by a
member-agency as may be designated by the PQF-NCC.


SEC. 7. Participation of the Industry Sector, ~ Industry
sector representatives shall be consulted and tapped in the
development and implementation of the PQF to ensure
the alignment of educational outcomes with industry
requirements and add to the value of qualifications
within the workplace.

SEC. 8. Framework and Level Descriptors. — The PQF
shall incorporate the qualifications level deseriptors
defined in terms of knowledge, skills and values, application,
and degree of independence,

The PQF-NCC shall make detailed descriptors for
each qualification level following the principles of lifelong
learning and the recognition of prior learning from previous
informal experiences, while incorporating th. learning
standards in basic education, competency standards of
training regulations, and the policies and standards of
higher education academic programs.

The PQF-NCC members shall jointly implement
national pilot programs to determine their relevance and
applicability in all levels of education. The DOLE shall
provide the necessary and updated labor market information
regarding the demand for specific qualifications and
emerging occupations as bases for the prioritization of
learning standards development.

SEC. 9. Review of Assessment System. ~ The PRC
and the CHED shall review the system of assessment of
learning outcomes and align them with those of the PQF.

SEC. 10. Permanent Secretariat. — The PQF-NCC
shall organize a permanent technical secretariat. The
Secretariat may contract the services of technical experts
and authorities on relevant areas of concern such as
equivalencies, accreditation, curriculum development,
educational measurement and testing.

 

The PQF-NCC shall determine the structure,
composition, staff qualifications and the location of the
permanent secretariat.

SEC. 11. Identification of Priority Sectors. — As a
preliminary approach to the implementation of the
PQF and to ensure its more focused implementation,
the CHED, the TESDA and the DepED, in consultation
with the industry, the DOLE, the PRC, the Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI), the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA), the Department of Science
and Technology (DOST), and other related agencies, are
directed to identify priority sectors and programs for the
PQF, taking into account labor market realities.

SEC. 12. Support from Other Government Agencies. —
The DOST, the NEDA, the Department of Budget and
Management (DBM), and other related agencies are hereby
mandated to extend the necessary support and provide

relevant inputs towards the effective implementation
of the PQF.

SEC. 13. Appropriations. — The amount necessary
for the initial implementation of this Act shall be sourced
from the current budgets and development funds of
the CHED, TESDA and DepED. Thereafter, the funds
necessary for the continuous implementation of this Act
in the ensuing years shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEc. 14, Implementing Rules and Regulations. ~
Within ninety (90) days after the effectivity of this Act, the DepED,
CHED, TESDA, DOLE and PRC, in consultation with
relevant stakeholders, shall issue the necessary rules and
regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 15. Separability Clause. — If any part or
provision of this Act shall be held unconstitutional or
invalid, the other parts or provisions hereof that are not
affected, shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 16. Repealing Clause. — Alllaws, rules, regulations,
proclamations, executive orders or parts thereof inconsistent

with the provisions of this Act are hereby modified or
amended accordingly.

SEC. 17. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
national newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,
ErxNisebs KOKO cd ae Il PANTALEON D.
Pre dGhE OF thesenate Speaker of th

 

 

of Representghves

This Act was passed by the House of Representatives
as House Bill No. 6572 on November 21, 2017 and adopted

by the Senate as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 1456 on
December 13, 2017.

 

LUTGARDO B. BARBO CESAR STRKAIT/PAREJA.
Secretary of the Senate Secretary General

House of Representatives

Approved: 'JAN 1 6 2018

 

oO

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 005047

   
 
 
       

 
  

~ “Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

|
CERTIFIED COPY
ae
itv. concencfan zit Mee eoLINO-ENAD
Fx ayo DIRECTOR TM = ACTINGHEAD /-2a-7odl