__l

H. No. 9150

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Aletes Manila
Highteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11857]

t

AN ACT CONVERTING THE BALAMBAN EXTENSION
CAMPUS OF THE CEBU TECHNOLOGICAL
UNIVERSITY (CTU) IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF
BALAMBAN, PROVINCE OF CEBU, INTO A REGULAR
CAMPUS OF THE CTU, TO BE KNOWN AS THE
CTU-BALAMBAN CAMPUS, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “Cebu
Technological University (CTU) Balamban Campus Act”.

SEc. 2. The Balamban Extension Campus of the CTU
located in the Municipality of Balamban, Province of Cebu,

is hereby converted into a regular campus, to be known as the
CTU-Balamban Campus.

SEc. 3. The CTU-Balamban Campus shall primarily
provide short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate, and
graduate courses within its areas of competency and specialization,
pursuant to the mandate of the CTU, and according to its
capability as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, may deem necessary to respond to the human resources
development needs of the Province of Cebu and Region VII. Itis
also mandated to undertake research and extension services and
to provide progressive leadership in these areas.

Skc. 4. The CTU-Balamban Campus shall be headed by a
Campus Administrator who shall be appointed by the Board,
subject to its guidelines on qualifications and standards, and based
on the recommendation of a search committee duly constituted
for the purpose of selecting the Campus Administrator.

Sec. 5. The CTU shall ensure that the minimum
requirements of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED)
for the operation of the CTU-Balamban Campus, including those
related to its course offerings, are fully complied with.

Sec. 6. Allassets, both real and personal, personnel, and
records of the Balamban Extension Campus of the CTU, as well
as liabilities or obligations, shall be transferred to the CTU. The
positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members and
personnel therein employed under existing laws prior to its
conversion into a regular campus shall be respected. '

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the Balamban Extension Campus of the CTU shall be
transferred to the CTU: Provided, That should the campus or
the CTU cease to exist or be abolished or should such
aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the CTU,
the same shall revert to the local government unit concerned or
to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEc. 7. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997”, shall
form part of this Act.

SEc. 8. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations
Act (GAA).

The Municipality of Balamban shall provide the same
assistance until such time that the amount necessary for the
continued operation and maintenance of the CTW-Balamban
Campus shall be included in the annual GAA.

SEC. 9. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Board shall, in consultation with the CHED, issue the
implementing rules and regulations to fully implement the
provisions of this Act.

SEc. 10. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEc. 11. All other laws, presidential decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 12. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation.

Approved,

  

of Representatives


This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on May 25, 2021 and Ja nuary 31, 2022,
respectively.

  
      

MYRA MAREE D. VILLARICA AR RAT. IZA
Secretary of the Senate crftary Geral
ofise ‘of Represdntatives
Approved:

ow pr€d wo 12% On JUN 4 8 2022
out the nature of the Presi
, in accordance with Article VI

setica 27 (1) of the Constitution
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

     
 

 

t oO