—aiSSCARAAAAAARARN ANTEC EAN ELECT ESN EAL LENE TT CC CLL

H. No. 6714
S. No. 1269

Republic of the Philippines
Gangress of the Philippines
Metea Manila

Seuenteenth Cangress
Seroud Regular Sessiow

aoa

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand seventeen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11052]

AN ACT REGULATING THE PRACTICE OF FOOD
TECHNOLOGY IN THE PHILIPPINES, CREATING
FOR THE PURPOSE THE BOARD OF FOOD
TECHNOLOGY, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:
ARTICLE I

TirLe, STATEMENT OF POLICY, AND
DEFINITION OF TERMS

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Philippine Food Technology Act”.

bo

SEc. 2. Statement of Policy. — The State recognizes
the importance of professional food technologists in
nation-building and development. Hence, it shall develop
and nurture competent, virtuous, productive, and
well-rounded professional food technologists whose
standards of practice and service shall be excellent, world
class, and globally competitive through honest, effective,
yelevant, and credible licensure examinations and through
regulatory programs, measures, and activities that
foster their professional growth, social responsibility, and
development.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Food refers to any substance or product whether
processed, partially processed or unprocessed that is
intended for human consumption. It includes drinks,
chewing gum, water and other substances, which are
intentionally incorporated into such substances or
products during the process of manufacturing, preparation,
and treatment;

(bt) Food technology refers to the application of the
physical, biological, and behavioral sciences to the conversion
of raw materials into safe, stable, palatable, and nutritious
foods. It includes the processes of handling, storage,
processing, packaging, distribution, and utilization of food;

(©) Food technologist refers to a person qualified to
practice food technology as provided in this Act and
who is a holder of a valid certificate of registration
and a valid professional license to practice issued by the
Professional Regulatory Board of Food Technology and the
Professional Regulation Commission (PRC); and

@ Microbiological certification refers to a certification
of the microbiological, physical, chemical, sensory, and
functional properties of food.

Src. 4. The Scope of the Practice of Food Technology. —
The practice of Food Technology shall include the following:

(a) Identification of the appropriate specifications of
yaw materials and supervision over their procurement;

(b) Supervision of food processing operations;

(®) Evaluation of the microbiological, physical,
chemical, sensory, and functional properties of food;

@ Certification of the analysis of microbiological,
physical, chemical, sensory, and functional properties
of food;

(e) Technical transactions (e.g. sale, trading) of food,
food ingredients and additives, and machineries, equipment,
and implements used in safe and quality food production
and distribution;

(f) Conduct of basic and applied research towards
development and/or improvement of the safety and quality
of food products;

(g) Teaching, lecturing, and reviewing of a
professional subject in the curriculum of the Bachelor of
Science in Food Technology degree or subject in the food
technology licensure examination given in any college,
university, or training or review center, or any other
educational institution or certification body;

(h) Compliance with food laws and regulations in
manufacturing and distribution of foods in the local and
international markets;

Gi) Implementation of quality management systems
(food safety, laboratory management, quality requirements,
and quality audit);

G) Provision of assistance in waste management for
environmental safety;

«&k) Consultation work related to any or all of the
above functions; and

@ Procurement of chemicals, reagents, equipment,
apparatus, and other materials for the conduct of food
analysis, research and development.

ARTICLE IT

THE PROFESSIONAL REGULATORY BOARD
oF Foop TECHNOLOGY

SEc. 5. Creation of the Professional Regulatory Board of
Food Technology. — There is hereby created a Professional
Regulatory Board of Food Technology, hereinafter called
the Board, under the administrative supervision of the PRC.
The Board shall be composed of a Chairperson and two (2)
members who shall be appointed by the President of the
Republic of the Philippines from a list submitted by the
PRC of three (3) nominees for each position from a list of
five (5) nominees for each position, chosen and ranked by the
integrated and accredited professional organization (APO)
of food technologists. The Board shall be organized not
jater than six (6) months after the effectivity of this Act.

SEc. 6. Powers and Functions of the Board. -— The

Board shall exercise the following powers and functions:
(a) Promulgate, administer, and enforce rules and

regulations necessary for carrying out the provisions of
this Act;

(b) Supervise and regulate the registration, licensure,
and practice of food technology in the Philippines;

(Q Issue special permits to persons admitted to the
practice of food technology for a specific duration of time,
and certificates of recognition for advanced studies,
vesearches and accomplishments that contribute to the
enrichment of the profession;

(@ Issue, reinstate, suspend, or revoke the certificate
of registration and/or professional license or cancel special
permits for the practice of food technology;

(©) Ensure, in coordination with the Commission on
Higher Education (CHED), that all educational institutions
offering food technology education comply with the policies,
standards, and requirements of the course prescribed
by the CHED in the areas of curriculum, faculty, library
and facilities;

(@ Prepare, adopt, and issue the syllabi of the
subjects for examinations by determining and preparing
the questions which shall strictly be within the scope of
the syllabus of the subject for examination;

(g) Adopt a program for the full computerization of
the licensure examination;

(h) Prescribe guidelines and criteria in the Continuing
Professional Development (CPD) program for
food technologists;

@ Monitor the conditions affecting the practice of
food technology and adopt such measures as may be
deemed proper for the enhancement of the profession
and the maintenance of high professional, ethical, and
technical standards;

G) Prescribe and adopt, a Code of Ethics and a
Code of Technical Standards for the practice of
food technology;

(k) Hear and investigate cases on violations of this
Act, its implementing rules and regulations (IRR), the
Code of Ethics, the Code of Good Governance, the Code of
Technical Standards for the practice of food technology
and for this purpose, to issue summons, subpoena ad
testificandum, and subpoena duces tecum to alleged
violators and witnesses to compel their attendance
in hearings or investigations: Provided, That the
decision of the Board shall, unless appealed to the PRC,
become final and executory after fifteen (15) days from
receipt thereof;

@) Grant registration without examination subject to
approval by the PRC;

(m) Administer oaths in connection with the
administration of this Act;

@) Maintain a roster of food technologists indicating
therein the basic information about the registered
professionals;

(0) Adopt an official seal of the Board; and

(p) Discharge such other powers and functions as the
Board may deem necessary for the practice of the
profession and the upgrading, enhancement, development,
and growth of food technology profession in
the Philippines.

The policies, resolutions, rules and regulations,
orders or decisions issued or promulgated by the Board
shall be subject to the review and approval of
the PRC.

SEC. 7. Qualifications of the Members of the Board. —
At the time of their respective appointments, the
members of the Board, including the Chairperson,
must be:

(a) A citizen and resident of the Philippines for the
last five (5) years;

(vb) A degree holder of a Bachelor of Science in Food
Technology as conferred by a school, college or university
in the Philippines or abroad where its food technology
program is recognized by the CHED;

(c) A duly registered food technologist under this
Act, with a valid certificate of registration and professional
license and has been in the active practice of the
profession in the Philippines for at least five (5) years
prior to the appointment of the member;

@ A member in good standing of the integrated
and APO of food technologists; and

(e) A person without any pecuniary interest, directly
or indirectly, in any school, academy, college, university or
institution conferring an academic degree necessary for
admission to the practice of food technology or where
review classes in preparation for the licensure examination
are being offered or conducted, nor a member of the
faculty or of the administration thereof at the time
of the appointment of the member to the Board; and
has not been convicted by any competent court of an
offense involving moral turpitude.

SEc. 8. Term of Office of the Members of the Board. —
The Chairperson and members of the Board shall
hold office for a term of three (3) years from the date of
appointment or until their successors shall have been
qualified and appointed. They may be reappointed in
the same office for another term of three (3) years
immediately after the expiry of their term: Provided,
That no member of the Board shall hold office for
more than two (2) terms or more than six (6) years:
Provided, further, That the first Board appointed under this
Act shall hold these terms of office: the Chairperson for
three (3) years, the first member for two (2) years, and the
second member for one (1) year: Provided, finally, That
an appointee to a vacancy shall serve only the unexpired
portion of the term of office. The Chairperson and
members shall take their oaths of office before a
duly authorized officer.

SEC. 9. Compensation and Allowance of the Board. —
The Chairperson and members of the Board shall receive
compensation and allowances comparable to that being
received by the chairpersons and members of existing
regulatory boards under the PRC as provided for in
the General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 10. Removal or Suspension of Members of the Board.
— The Chairperson or any member of the Board may, upon
the recommendation of the PRC, be suspended or
removed by the President of the Philippines upon due
notice and hearing, for neglect of duties, incompetence,
malpractice, commission or tolerance of irregularities
in any examination given by the Board, manipulation
or rigging of the said examination, tampering of
questions prior to the conduct of the said examinations,
or tampering of grades, or unprofessional or unethical
conduct. The rights of the accused or respondent to be
heard, to defend oneself, and to be assisted by the counsel
shall be respected in the proper administrative investigation
to be conducted for the purpose.

Any vacancy in the Board shall be filled for the
unexpired portion of the term only.

SEC. 11. Supervision of the Board, Custodian of its
Records, Secretariat, and Support Services. — The Board
shall be under the administrative supervision of the PRC.
All records of the Board, including applications for
examination papers and results, minutes of deliberation,
administrative cases, and other investigations involving
food technologists shall be kept by the PRC.

The PRC shall designate the Secretary of the Board
and shall provide the secretariat and other support
services to implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 12. Annual Report. — The Board shall, at the
close of each calendar year, submit an annual report
to the PRC, giving a detailed account of its proceedings,
accomplishments during the year, and recommending
measures to be adopted, with the end in view of upgrading
and improving the conditions affecting the practice of
food technology in the Philippines.

ARTICLE IT
EXAMINATION AND REGISTRATION

SEC. 13. Licensure Examination Requirement. — Except
as otherwise specifically allowed under this Act, applicants
for registration for the practice of food technology shall be
required to pass a licensure examination as provided for
in this Act in such places and dates as the PRC may
designate in the Resolution thereof on the Master
Schedules for all licensure examinations in accordance
with Section 7(d) of Republic Act No. 8981,
“PRC Modernization Act of 2000”, as amended.

SEC. 14. Qualifications of an Applicant for the Licensure
Examinations. — An applicant for the licensure examination
for food technologist shall meet the following qualifications:

(a) Must possess Philippine citizenship or in the
case of a foreigner, citizenship of a country or State
that has a reciprocity agreement with the Philippines
on the practice of food technology;

(b) Must be of good moral character;

() Must hold a Bachelor's Degree in Food Technology,
conferred by a school, college, or university recognized and
duly accredited by the CHED; and

(@ Must not have been convicted of an offense involving
moral turpitude by a court of competent jurisdiction.

SEC. 15. Scope of Examination. — The licensure
examination shall cover the following subjects:

(a) Physical, Chemical, Biological, and Microbiological
Principles;

(b) Food Processing, Preservation, and Food Engineering;
(Q) Quality Sensory Evaluation of Food; and
(@ Food Laws and Regulations.

The Board may revise or exclude any of the above
subjects and add new ones as may be called for by the
requirements of the industry and of the profession.

SEC. 16. Ratings in the Examination. — To pass the
licensure examination, a candidate for food technologist must
obtain a passing rating of seventy-five percent (75%) in each
subject given during the examination: Provided, however,
That an examinee who obtains a passing rating in the majority
of the subjects but obtains a rating in the other subjects
below seventy-five percent (75%) but not lower than sixty
percent (60%), shall be allowed to take one removal
examination on the subjects where the passing rating
was not obtained: Provided, finally, That should the
examinee fail to obtain a passing rating in the removal
examination, the examinee shall be considered as having
failed the entire licensure examination.

SEC. 17. Report of Rating. — The Board and the PRC
shall correct and rate the licensure examination papers and
shall release the examination results within ten (10) days
from the date of the examination.

Sec. 18. Isswance of the Certificate of Registration and
Professional License. — A certificate of registration shall be
issued to examinees who pass the licensure examination for
food technologists subject to payment of fees prescribed


by the PRC. The certificate of registration shall bear the
signature of the Chairperson of the PRC and the members
of the Board, stamped with the official seal, indicating that
the person named therein is entitled to practice the
profession with all the privileges appurtenant thereto.
This certificate shall remain in full force and effect until
revoked or suspended in accordance with this Act.

A professional license bearing the registration number,
date of issuance, expiry date, duly signed by the
Chairperson of the PRC, shall likewise be issued to a
registrant who has paid the required registration fees.
This license will serve as evidence that the licensee can

lawfully practice the profession until the expiration of
its validity.

Sec. 19. Refusal io Register. — The Board shall not
register any successful examinee who has been convicted
by a court of competent jurisdiction of any criminal offense
involving moral turpitude or has been found guilty of
immoral or dishonorable conduct after investigation by
the Board, or has been declared to be of unsound mind.
The reason for the refusal shall be set forth in writing.

SEC. 20. Regisiration Without Examination. —The PRC
shall issue a certificate of registration and professional
license to the Chairperson and members of the first Board
of Food Technology and to a person who, on the date of the
effectivity of this Act, has passed the examination for food
technologists given by the Board. The same privilege shall
be granted to a qualified applicant who shall apply for
registration without taking the prescribed licensure
examination and who is a holder of a Bachelor’s Degree in
Food Technology or allied fields in Nutrition, Agriculture,
Biochemistry or Molecular Biology, Chemistry, Fishery,
Chemical Engineering, and who has been actively practicing
the profession of food technology for a period of at least

five (5) years immediately preceding the effectivity of
this Act.

A qualified applicant shall file the application in the
form prescribed for the purpose not later than two (2) years
from the date of the effectivity of this Act.

li

SEC. 21. Revocation or Suspension of the Certificate of
Registration and Cancellation of Special Permit. ~ The
Board may, after giving proper notice of hearing to the
party concerned, revoke the certificate of registration,
cancel the special permit, or suspend the practice of a food
technologist for any unprofessional or unethical conduct,
malpractice, or violation of any of the provisions of this
Act, its rules and regulations, the Code of Ethics, and the
Code of Technical Standards for food technologists.

Sec. 22. Reinstatement, Reissuance or Replacement of
Certificate of Registration and Professional License. —
Two (2) years after the date of revocation, the Board may,
upon application and for reasons deemed proper and
sufficient, reinstate any revoked certificate of registration
and reissue a professional license, and in so doing, may,
in its discretion, exempt the applicant from taking
another examination.

A new certificate of registration or professional
license or special permit, to replace lost. destroyed or
mutilated ones may be issued subject to the rules as
implemented by the Board.

SEC. 23. Roster of Food Technologisis. - The Board
shall prepare, update, and maintain a roster of food
technologists which shall contain the name of each
registered food technologist, the residence and office
addresses, the date of registration and issuance of
certificates, and other data which the Board may deem
pertinent. The roster shall be open to the public, a copy
of which shall be furnished to each person listed therein.

SEC. 24. Issuance of Temporary or Special Permits. —
Without prejudice to the requirements of existing law
on the practice by foreigners in the Philippines, foreigners
may be issued temporary or special permits to practice food
technology in the Philippines: Provided, That these shall
be limited to the particular work for which they are
commissioned: Provided, further, That the temporary or
special permits shall be renewed every year. The permits
may be issued to:


(a) Foreign food scientists or technologists hired to
provide consultancy services in the Philippines;

(b) Foreign food scientists or technologists employed
as exchange professors or instructors in recognized local
schools, universities, colleges, or instructors to teach Food
Science and Technology subjects; and

(©) Foreign food scientists or technologists attached
to international agencies or organizations assigned to
perform certain work in the Philippines relative to the
practice of food technology.

SEC. 25. Oath. — All successful examinees or those
allowed to register without licensure examination given
by the Board and the PRC shall be required to take their
oaths of office before the Board or any member thereof and
any official of the PRC or any person authorized by law
prior to the practice of food technology.

ARTICLE IV
PRACTICE OF FooD TECHNOLOGY

SEC. 26. Continuing Professional Development (CPD)
Program. — The CPD guidelines shall be prescribed and
promulgated by the PRC upon consultation with the Board,
which shall consult the integrated and APO of food
technologists, affiliated association of food technologists,
and other concerned sectors: The Board shall create a CPD
Council that shall be composed of a Chairperson coming from
the Board, a member from the APO of food technologists,
and a member from the academe.

SEC. 27. Integration of Food Technologists. — All food
technologists shall be integrated into one (1) national
organization, which shall be recognized by the Board and
by the PRC as the one and only integrated and APO of
food technologists. A food technologist duly registered with
the Board shall automatically become a member of the
integrated and APO of food technologists, and shall receive
the benefits and privileges thereto, upon payment of the
required fees and dues. Membership in the integrated and
APO shall not be a bar to membership in other
associations of food technologists.

SEC. 28. Foreign Reciprocity. — No foreign food
technologist shall be admitted to the licensure examination,
or be given a certificate of registration and a professional
license, or be entitled to any of the privileges under this
Act, unless the country of which is a subject or citizen
specifically permits Filipino food technologists to practice
within its territorial limits under the same conditions
and an equal basis as its own subjects or citizens.

SEC. 29. Indication of License and Privilege Tax Receipt.
— The date of issuance of the certificate of registration
and the date of expiry of the same, the privilege tax
receipt number, and the professional number of a food
technologist shall be indicated or any document the food
technologist signs or issues in connection with the practice
of profession.

SEC. 30. Prohibited Acis. — It shall be unlawful for
any person to practice or offer to practice food technology
in the Philippines, or offer oneself as food technologist,
or use the title, word, letter, figure, or any sign tending
to convey the impression that one is a food technologist
or advertise or indicate in any manner whatsoever as
qualified to perform the work of food technologist,
unless the person has satisfactorily passed the licensure
examination given by the Board, except as otherwise
provided in this Act, and is a holder of a valid certificate
of registration and a valid professional license or a
valid temporary or special permit duly issued by the
Board and the PRC.

Likewise, the following acts shall be prohibited:

(a) Representing of one’s self as a food technologist
during the time that the professional license is not valid,
or that the certificate of registration has been suspended
or revoked, or that the temporary or special permit
is cancelled;,

(b) Allowing another person to use one’s certificate
of registration and/or professional license or temporary or
special permit as a food technologist to enable the other
person to engage in the practice of food technology; and


(c) Using the certificate of registration and/or
professional license or temporary or special permit of
another food technologist.

ARTICLE V
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 31. Penal Provisions. — Any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this Act or any of its IRR
as promulgated by the Board subject to the approval of
the PRC shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
of not less than forty thousand pesos (P40,000.00) but
not more than one hundred fifty thousand pesos
(P150,000.00) or by imprisonment of not less than six (6)
months but not more than four (4) years, or both, at the
discretion of the court.

Suc. 32. Funding Provision. - The Chairperson of
the PRC shall include in the PRC’s program the
implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be
included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 33. Implementing Rules'and Regulations. — To
implement the provisions of this Act, the Board shall,
subject to the approval of the PRC, promulgate the
rules and regulations and the Code of Ethics for food
technologists within thirty (30) days after the effectivity
of this Act.

SEC. 34. Separability Clause. — If any section or
provision of this Act shall be declared invalid or
unconstitutional, such shall not invalidate any other
section or provision of this Act.

SEC. 35. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees,
orders, issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

SEC. 36. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,
AX 1 hah 2
AQ O“KOKO” PIMENTEL I PANTALEON D. Z
Use
ives

President of the Senate Speaker of th
of Represeni

This Act was passed by the House of Representatives
as House Bill No. 6714 on December 11, 2017 and adopted
by the Senate as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 1269

on March 5, 2018.
ay LE
/
<n ho |
easgunl™

L

CESAR STRAIT P JA
Secretary General
House of Representatives

_7 LUTGARDO B. BARBO
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: JUN 29 2018

    
 

ROD ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO Office of the Presktent
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIEIED COPY

PRRD 2016 - 006408