H. No. 6919

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
‘Highteenth Congress

Seronk Regular Sessian

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11508]

AN ACT AMENDING THE :FRANCHISE GRANTED TO
PHILIPPINE COLLECTIVEMEDIA CORPORATION
UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9773, ENTITLED “AN ACT
GRANTING THE PHILIPPINE COLLECTIVEMEDIA
CORPORATION A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, ESTABLISH, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN
RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
STATIONS IN REGION VII (BASTERN VISAYAS)”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 1 of Republic Act No. 9773 is hereby
amended to read as follows:


“SRCTION. 1. Nature and Scope of
Franchise. - Subject to the provisions of the
Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
regulations, there is hereby granted to Philippine
Collectivemedia Corporation, hereunder referred
to as the grantee, its successors or assignees,
a franchise to construct, install, establish,
operate, and maintain for commercial purposes
and in the public interest, radio and/or television
broadcasting stations in the Philippines, where
frequencies and/or channels are still available
for radio and/or television broadcasting, including
digital television system, through microwave,
satellite or whatever means, as well as the use
of any new technology in television and radio
systems, with the corresponding technological
auxiliaries and facilities, special broadcast and
other program and distribution services and relay
stations.”

SEC. 2. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 9773 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

, “Spc. 3. Prior Approval of the National
Telecommunications Commission. — The grantee
shall secure from the National Telecommunications
Commission (NTC) the appropriate permits and
licenses for the construction and operation of
its stations or facilities and shall not use any
frequency in the radio/television spectrum without
authorization by the NTC. The NTC, however,
shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant
of any such authority.

“fhe grantee shall not dispose or lease its
facilities except to entities with a radio or,
television broadcasting franchise: Provided, That
the grantee shall inform and secure written
authorization from the NTC to proceed with
such disposal or lease, and report the transaction

a

to the NTC within sixty (60) days after its
completion: Provided, further, That the NTC
shall determine the corresponding sanction for
any violation of this provision.

“The NTC shall have authority to revoke or
suspend, after due process, the permits or licenses
of the grantee for any violation of the provisions
of the franchise, and may recommend to Congress
the revocation of the franchise for any violation of
the provisions thereof.”

SEC. 3. Section 4 of Republic Act No. 9773 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Responsibility to the Public. —
The grantee shall provide, free of charge, adequate
public service time which is reasonable and
sufficient to enable the government, through the
grantee’s broadcasting stations or facilities,
to reach the pertinent populations or portions
thereof, on important public issues, and relay
important public announcements and warnings
concerning public emergencies and calamities,
as necessity, urgency or the law may require;
provide at all times sound and balanced
programming; promote public participation;
assist in the functions of public information
and education; conform to the ethics of honest
enterprise; promote audience sensibility and
empowerment including closed captioning; and
not use its stations or facilities for the
broadcasting of obscene or indecent language,
speech, act or scene; or for the dissemination
of deliberately false information or willful
misrepresentation, to the detriment of the public
interest; or to incite, encourage or assist in
subversive or treasonable acts.

,

“Publie’ service time referred herein shall be
equivalent to a maximum aggregate of ten percent
(10%) of the paid commercials or advertisements
which shall be allocated based on need to the
executive and legislative branches, the judiciary,
constitutional commissions, and international
humanitarian organizations duly recognized by
statutes: Provided, That the NTC shall increase
the public service time in case of extreme emergency
or calamity. The NTC shall issue rules and
regulations for this purpose, the effectivity of
which shall commence upon applicability with
other similarly situated broadcast network
franchise holders.

“Pursuant to Republic Act No. 8370, otherwise
known as the ‘Children’s Television Act of 1997',
the grantee shall allot a minimum of fifteen
percent (15%) of the daily total air time of each
broadcasting network to child-friendly shows
within its regular programming.”

Src. 4. Section 11 of Republic Act No. 9773 is hereby
_ amended as follows:

“SEC. 11. Nontransferability of Franchise. —
The grantee shall not lease, transfer, grant the
usufruct of, sell nor assign this franchise or
the rights and privileges acquired thereunder
to any person, firm, company, corporation or
other commercial or legal entity, nor merge
with any other corporation or entity, nor shall
the controlling interest of the grantee be
transferred, whether as a whole or in parts,
whether simultaneously or contemporaneously,
to any such person, firm, company, corporation
or entity without the prior approval of the Congress
of the Philippines.

“Congress shall be informed of any sale,
lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or assignment
of franchise, or the rights and privileges acquired
thereunder, or the merger or transfer of the
controlling interest of the grantee within sixty (60)
days after the completion of the said transaction.
Failure to report to Congress such change of
ownership shall render the franchise ipso facto
revoked.

“Any person or entity to which this franchise
is sold, transferred or assigned, shall be subject
to the same conditions, terms, restrictions and
limitations of this Act.”

SEC. 5. Section 12 of Republic Act No. 9778 is hereby
amended as follows:

“SEC. 12. Dispersal of Ownership.:~ In
accordance with the constitutional provision
to encourage public participation in public
utilities, the grantee shall offer at least thirty per
cenium (80%) of its outstanding capital stock
or a higher percentage that may hereafter be
provided. by law in any securities exchange in the
Philippines within five (5) years from the renewal
of its franchise: Provided, That in cases where
public offer of shares is not applicable, the grantee
shall apply other methods of encouraging public
participation by citizens and corporations operating
public utilities as allowed by law. Noncompliance
therewith shall render the franchise ipso facto
revoked.” , :

Sic. 6. A new Section 15 is hereby inserted to read as
follows:

“4


“SEC, 15. Commitment to Provide and
Promote the Creation of Employment Opportunities.
- The grantee shall create employment
opportunities as well as accept on-the-job trainees
in their franchise operations: Provided, That
priority shall be accorded to the residents of the
place where the principal office of the grantee is
located: Provided, further, That the grantee shall
comply with the applicable labor standards and
allowance entitlement under existing labor laws,
rules and regulations and similar issuances:
Provided, finally, That the employment opportunities
or jobs created shall be reflected in the General
Information Sheet (GIS) to be submitted to the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
annually.”

SEC. 7. Section 15 of Republic Act No. 9778 is hereby
renumbered as Section 16, and amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 16. Reportorial Requirement. — The
grantee shall submit an annual report to
the Congress of the Philippines, through the
Committee on Legislative Franchises of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on
Public Services of the Senate, on its compliance
with the terms and conditions of the franchise
on or before April 80 of every year during the term of
its franchise.

“The annual report shall include an update
on the roll-out, development, operation and/or
expansion of business; audited financial
statements; latest GIS officially submitted to

the SEC, if applicable; certification of the NTC

on the status of its permits and operations;
and am update on the dispersal of ownership
undertaking, if applicable.

“The reportorial compliance certificate
issued by Congress shall be required before any
application for permit or certificate is accepted
by the NTC.” ‘

SEc. 8. A new Section 17 is hereby inserted to read as
follows:

“SEC. 17. Fine. — Failure of the grantee to
submit the requisite annual report to Congress
shall be penalized by a fine of Five hundred
pesos (P500.00) per working day of noncompliance.
The fine shall be collected by the NTC from the
delinquent franchise grantee separate from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC and the
same shall be remitted to the Bureau of the Treasury.”

SEC. 9. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —
This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration,
or repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the public
interest so requires and shall not be interpreted as an
exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided for.

SEc. 10. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections
or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions
not affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. ~ All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended,
or modified accordingly.

 

SEC. 12. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

     

   

VICENTE C. $OTTOII LORD AL:
President of the Senate Speaker sf the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on
June 5, 2020, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on
October 5, 2020, and which amendments were concurred
in by the House of Representatives in a special session on
October 16, 2020.

MYRA MARIE D, VILLARICA JOCELIA BIGHANI C. SIPIN

Secretary of the Senate Secretary General
House of Representatives

Approved: DEC 21 2020

peed MILD AAW OL seececeeeeeeeseseeeeeeee ee
-ithout the signature of the Presi -
dent, in accordance with Article VL
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

}

|

}
|
}
t
I
'
i
}
I