H. No. 7016

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila

Seventeenth Cangress
Chirk Regular Season

—_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11338]

AN ACT CREATING THE POSITION OF ASSISTANT CITY
ADMINISTRATOR, EMPHASIZING THE PROHIBITION
ON ILLEGAL GAMBLING, AND ESTABLISHING THE
CITY REGISTRY OF DEEDS OFFICE, AMENDING FOR
THE PURPOSE SECTIONS 7, 10, 36, 51 AND 52 OF
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8983, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS
THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BAYAWAN

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 8983, otherwise
known as the “Charter of the City of Bayawan’, is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“Suc. 7. The Officials of the City of
Bayawan. — (a) There shall be in the City: a
city mayor, a city vice mayor, sangguniang
panlungsod members, a secretary to the

sangguniang panlungsod, a city treasurer and
an assistant city treasurer, a city assessor and
an assistant city assessor, a city accountant, a
city budget officer, a city planning and
development coordinator, a city engineer, a city
health officer, a city civil registrar, a city
administrator and an assistant city
administrator, a city legal officer, a city social
welfare and development officer, a city
veterinarian, a city general services officer, a
city agriculturist, a city cooperatives officer, a
city register of deeds, and an environment and
natural resources officer;

SEc. 3. There shall be inserted a new section in the same
Charter to be known as Section 36-A to be read as follows:

“Suc. 36-A. Assistant City Administrator.
— (a) The assistant city administrator must be a
citizen of the Philippines, a resident of the City
of Bayawan, of good moral character, a holder
of a college degree preferably in public
administration, law, or any other related course
from a recognized college or university, and a first
grade civil service eligible or its equivalent. The
person appointed must have acquired experience
in management or administrative work for at
least three (3) years immediately preceding the
date of the appointment.

“b) xxx
“6) xxx “&) The assistant city administrator shall
be entitled to such compensation pursuant to
§) sxx?” Republic Act No. 6758, as amended, otherwise
known as the ‘Compensation and Position
SEC. 2. Section 10(D)(1)€) of the Charter of the City of Classification Act of 1989".
Bayawan is hereby amended to read as follows:
“© The assistant city administrator shall
“SEC. 10. The Sangguniang Panlungsod. assist the city administrator and perform such
— XXX duties as the latter may assign.”
"KE Sec. 4. Article VII in the Charter of the City of Bayawan

is hereby amended and two (2) new sections shall be inserted to
“e) Enact ordinances intended to prevent, be known as Sections 51 and 52, which shall read as follows:
suppress and impose appropriate penalties for
habitual drunkenness in public places, vagrancy, “ARTICLE VIII
mendicancy, prostitution, establishment and
maintenance of houses of ill-repute, illegal
gambling and other prohibited games of chance,
fraudulent devices and ways to obtain money or
property, drug addiction, maintenance of drug
dens, drug pushing, juvenile delinquency, the «
printing, distribution or exhibition of obscene or xen
pornographic materials or publications, and such
other activities inimical to the welfare and morals
of the inhabitants of the City;”

“Tyg Crry FIRE STATION SERVICE, THE CITY
JAIL SERVICE, THE CITY SCHOOLS DIVISION,
THE CITY PROSECUTION SERVICE AND THE
CiTy REGISTRY OF DEEDS OFFICE

“Suc. 51. The City Registry of Deeds
Office. — (a) There shall be established in the

City a city registry of deeds office, which shall
be under the supervision and control of the
Administrator of the Land Registration
Authority, pursuant to the provision of Section
7 of Presidential Decree No. 1529, otherwise
known as the Property Registration Decree.

“(b) The City of Bayawan shall provide a
suitable space or building for the office of the
city register of deeds until such time as the same
could be provided out of the national fund.

“©) The Department of Budget and
Management (DBM) is mandated to establish a
full staff complement to support the registry of
deeds until such time that the same shall be
provided out of the national fund.”

“SEC. 52. The City Register of Deeds. —
(a) The city registry of deeds office shall be headed
by a city register of deeds, who must be a citizen
of the Philippines, a resident of the City, of good
moral character, a member of the Integrated
Bar of the Philippines and must have practiced
law for at least three (3) years immediately
preceding the date of the appointment.

 

 

 

 

“tb) The city register of deeds shall be
entitled to such compensation pursuant to
Republic Act No. 6758, as amended, otherwise
known as the ‘Compensation and Position
Classification Act of 1989’.

“(o) The city register of deeds shall perform
all the duties and functions as mandated under
the provisions of the Property Registration Decree
within the territorial jurisdiction of the City.”

SEC. 5. The subsequent sections in the Charter of the City
of Bafawan are hereby renumbered accordingly.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

 

Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 27, 2018,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on February 4, 2019,
and which amendment was concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 7, 2019.

We hthnrn
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA DANTI
Secretary of the Senate

    
  

? MALING
Acting Sec. General
House of Representatives

Approved:

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

poe
E

Lapsed into law on _APR 2 7 2019

re of the Py
bh Article VE Sechon

Without the sana

  
 

In sere

IF (ts

 

to Loonstlution, |