H. No. 10283

Republic of the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippites
Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress
Chirk Regular Sessinn

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11859}

t

AN ACT CONVERTING THE NORTHERN NEGROS STATE
COLLEGE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY IN
SAGAY CITY, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL,
INTO A STATE UNIVERSITY TO BE KNOWN AS THE
“STATE UNIVERSITY OF NORTHERN NEGROS”,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Conversion. — The Northern Negros State
College of Science and Technology (NONESCOST) in Sagay City,
Province of Negros Occidental, including the Laga-an Campus in
the Municipality of Calatrava, Negros Occidental, and the
Escalante Campus in Escalante City, Negros Occidental, is hereby
converted into a state university to be known as the
“State University of Northern Negros”, hereinafter referred to as
the SUNN. The main campus of the SUNN shall be located in
Sagay City, Negros Occidental.

SEC. 2. Curricular Offerings. — The SUNN shall offer
short-term technical-vocational courses, undergraduate and
graduate programs within its competency and areas of
specialization in the fields of agriculture, arts, biology, national
science, business and management, criminology, education,
engineering, fisheries, food technology, healthcare, industrial
technology, information and communications technology,
management, and marine sciences, and other relevant fields of
study, as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, may deem necessary for the accomplishment of its
objectives, and those which respond to the human resource
development needs of the Province of Negros Occidental and
Region VI.

It shall also undertake research and extension services,
and provide progressive leadership in its areas of specialization.

SEC. 3. Administration. - The SUNN shall have the
general powers of a corporation set forth in Republic Act No. 11232,
otherwise known as the “Revised Corporation Code of the
Philippines”. The administration of the SUNN and the exercise
of its corporate powers shall be vested exclusively in the Board
and the President.

SEC. 4. The Governing Board. — The governing body of
the SUNN shall be the Board, which shall be chaired and
co-chaired by the Chairperson of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED) and the President of the SUNN, respectively,
and with the following as members:

(a) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher, Technical
and Vocational Education of the Senate;

(b) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical
Education of the House of Representatives;

ff
(©) Regional Director of the National Economic and
Development Authority;

@) Regional Director of the Department of Science
and Technology; ‘

©) Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture;

(® President of the federation of faculty associations of
the SUNN;

@ President of the federation of student councils of
the SUNN;

(h) President of the federation of alumni associations of
the SUNN; and ‘

@) Two (2) prominent citizens from the private sector who
have distinguished themselves in their professions or fields
of specialization.

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens who
shall be selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified persons
from the Province of Negros Occidental, as recommended by a
‘search committee constituted by the President of the SUNN, in
consultation with the Chairperson of the CHED and other
members of the Board, based on the standards and qualifications
for the position set by the Board. They shall serve for a term of
two (2) years from the date of appointment.

The membership of the President of the federation of faculty
associations, the President of the federation of student councils,
and the President of the federation of alumni associations in the
Board shall be coterminous with their terms of office, as provided
under their respective constitutions and bylaws.

Src. 5. Powers and Duties of the Board. — In addition to
its general powers of administration and the powers granted to
the board of directors of a corporation under existing laws, the
Board shall have the following specific powers and duties:

(a) Promulgate and implement policies in accordance with
the declared State policies on education, other pertinent provisions
of the Constitution on education, agriculture, science and
technology, and the policies, standards and thrusts of the CHED
under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known as the “Higher
Education Act of 1994”;

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programs, and
rules on student discipline drawn by the Administrative and
Academic Councils as herein provided;

(©) Appoint, upon the recommendation of the President of
the SUNN, the vice presidents, deans, directors, heads of the
campuses, faculty members, and other officials and employees of
the SUNN;

@) Fix and adjust the salaries of faculty members,
administrative officials and employees, subject to the provisions
of the Revised Compensation and Position Classification System
and other pertinent budget and compensation laws governing hours
of service, and such other duties and conditions as it may deem
proper; grant them, at its discretion, leaves of absence under
such regulations as it may promulgate, any provision of existing
law to the contrary notwithstanding; and remove them for cause
in accordance with the requirements of due process of law;

© Fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges,
such as matriculation fees, graduation fees and laboratory fees,
as the Board may deem proper to impose, after due consultation
with the concerned sectors. The fees and charges, including
government subsidies and other income generated by the SUNN,
shall constitute its special trust funds and shall be deposited in
any authorized government depository bank. All interests that
shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same funds for the
use of the SUNN;

Any provision of existing law, rule or regulation to the
contrary notwithstanding, any income generated by the SUNN
from tuition fees and other charges, as well as from the operation
of auxiliary services and land grants, shall be retained by the
SUNN and may be disbursed by the Board for instruction,
research, extension services or other programs and projects of
the SUNN: Provided, That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed
for the specific purposes for which these are collected: Provided,
however, That if, for reasons beyond its control, the SUNN shall
not be able to pursue any project for which the funds have been
appropriated and allocated under its approved program of
expenditures, the Board may authorize the use of said funds for

at

a

any reasonable purpose which, in its discretion, may be necessary
and urgent for the attainment of the objectives and goals of
the SUNN; .

(@ Adopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition and
other school fees for greater access of poor, but deserving students,
in accordance with Republic Act No. 10931, otherwise known as
the “Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act”;

(g) Establish professorial chairs in the SUNNiand provide
fellowships for qualified faculty members, and scholarships to
deserving students;

(h) Receive and appropriate sums as may be provided by
law for the support of the SUNN, and all other sums in the manner
it may, in its discretion, determine to carry out the purposes and
functions of the SUNN;

i) Set the policies on admission and graduation of students;

(j) Award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of
their outstanding contributions in the fields of education, public
service, arts, science and technology, sports and human kinetics
or any field of specialization within the academic competency of
the SUNN, and authorize the awarding of certificates of completion
of nondegree and nontraditional courses;

(x) Establish research and extension centers to promote
the development of the SUNN;

@ Develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate institutions and agencies,
whether public, private, local or foreign, and appoint experts or
specialists as consultants, part-time, visiting or exchange
professors, scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

(m) Adopt modern and innovative modes of transmitting
knowledge to allow greater access to education such as the use of
information technology, dual training system, open distance
learning, and community laboratory;

(n) Collaborate with the governing bodies of other state
universities and colleges within the Province of Negros Occidental
and Region VI, under the supervision of the CHED and in
consultation with the Department of Budget and Management.
(BM), in restructuring the SUNN to make it more efficient,
relevant, productive and competitive;

© Absorb non-chartered tertiary institutions within the
Province of Negros Occidental and Region VI as branches, extension
or external centers, in coordination with the CHED and in
consultation with the DBM, and offer therein programs or courses
to carry out the constitutional mandate of providing equal access
to educational opportunities;

(p) Authorize an external management audit of the SUNN,
to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and regulations
of the Commission on Audit, and institute reforms, including
academic and structural changes, on the basis of the audit results
and recommendations;

(q@) Develop consortia and other economic forms of linkages
with local government units (LGUs), as well as public, private,
local or foreign institutions and agencies for the furtherance of
the purposes and objectives of the SUNN;

(rt) Import economic, technical and cultural books and
publications;

(8) Enter into joint ventures with business and industry
for the profitable management of economic assets, the proceeds of
which shall be used for the development and strengthening of
the SUNN;

() Receive, in trust, such legacies, gifts, and donations of
real and personal ptoperties of all kinds and administer and dispose
of the same, when necessary, for the benefit of the SUNN and
subject to the limitations, directions and instructions of the
donor, if any;

(u) Extend the term of the President of the SUNN beyond
the age of retirement, but not beyond the age of seventy (70),
based on the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the
Board: Provided, That the President’s performance has been rated.
by the Board as outstanding and a unanimous recommendation
for such extension has been decided upon by the search committee;

(v) Delegate any of its powers and duties to the President
and other officials of the SUNN, as it may deem appropriate, so
as to expedite the administration of the affairs of the SUNN;

(w) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for
participative and transparent decision-making within the SUNN;

(x) Where most advantageous to the SUNN, privatize the
management of nonacademic services such as health, food,
building or grounds or property maintenance, and such other
similar activities;

(y) Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment, and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real property, including the necessary supplies,
materials, and equipment; and

@) Promulgate rules and regulations, as may be necessary,
to carry out the purposes and functions of the SUNN.

SEC. 6. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall regularly
convene once every three (3) months. The Chairperson of the Board
may, however, call a special: meeting whenever necessary:
Provided, That members are notified in writing at least three (3)
days prior to the conduct of said meeting.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of all its
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
however, That the Chairperson of the Board or the President of
the SUNN is among those present in the meeting.

In case the Chairperson of the CHED cannot attend a
meeting of the Board, a CHED Commissioner duly designated by

the Chairperson of the CHED as representative to the meeting,
shall have all the rights and responsibilities of a regular member:
Provided, That during the meeting, the President of the SUNN,
as Vice Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer: Provided,
further, That this provision notwithstanding, the Chairperson of
the CHED is hereby authorized to designate a CHED
Commissioner as the regular Chairperson of the Board, in
which case, the said CHED Commissioner shall act as the
presiding officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Senate Committee on
Higher, Technical and Voéational Education and the House
Committee on Higher and Technical Education shall not be able
to attend the Board meeting, they may designate their respective
representatives who shall have the same rights and responsibilities
as the regular members of the Board.

The members of the Board shall not receive any salary,
but shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and necessary
expenses incurred, either for their attendance to the meetings of
the Board or in connection with other official business
authorized by resolutions of the Board, subject to existing laws
and regulations.

SEc. 7. The University President. ~ The SUNN shall be
headed by a President who shall be appointed by the Board, subject
to its guidelines on qualifications and standards, and based on
the recommendation of a search committee duly constituted for
the purpose of selecting the President. The SUNN President shall
render full-time service, serve a term of four (4) years, and may
be eligible for reappointment to another term: Provided, That in
order to effect the smooth transition of the college to a state
university, the incumbent President of the NONESCOST, if
qualified, shall serve as the first President of the SUNN.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of

office of the incumbent President of the SUNN, the Board shall
constitute the Search Committee for the Presidency.

The powers and duties of the President of the SUNN, in
addition to those specifically provided for in this Act, shall include

those usually pertaining to the Office of the President of similar
state universities and colleges and those delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the SUNN shall be in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11466 or the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”, and such other laws amendatory
thereto, which may ‘hereinafter be enacted, and shall be
comparable to that being received by the Presidents of similar
educational institutions.

‘

Incase of a vacancy in the Office of the President by reason
of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause,
or incapacity of the President to perform the functions of the
office, the Board shall designate an Officer-in-Charge of the SUNN,
pending the appointment of a new President: Provided, That the
Officer-in-Charge shall serve only during the unexpired portion
of the term.

The President of the SUNN shall be assisted by a
Vice President for Academic Affairs, a Vice President for
Administration, and a Vice President for Research, Development,
and Extension, who shall all be appointed by the Board upon the
recommendation of the President of the SUNN.

Src. 8. The Secretary of the University. ~ The Board
shall appoint a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the
Board and the SUNN and shall keep all records and proceedings
of the Board. The Secretary of the SUNN shall serve upon each
member of the Board the appropriate notice of board meetings.

SEc. 9. The Treasurer of the University. — The Treasurer
of the Philippines shall be the ex officio Treasurer of the SUNN.

SEc. 10. The Administrative Cowncil. ~ There shall be
an Administrative Council consisting of the President of the SUNN
as chairperson, and the vice presidents, deans, directors, and
other officials of equal rank as members, that shall review and
recommend to the Board the policies that shall govern the
administration, management, and development planning of
the SUNN. .


SEC. 11. The Academic Council. — There shall be an
Academic Council which shall formulate academic policies. It shall
be composed of the President of the SUNN, who shall act as
chairperson, and all academic staff with the rank of at least an
assistant professor, as members.

The Academic Council shall have the power to review and
recommend the curricular offerings and rules on student
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board. It shall fix the
roquirements for the admission of students, as well as for their
graduation and conferment of degrees, subject to the review and
approval of the Board through the President of the SUNN.

It shall exercise disciplinary power over the students of the
SUNN and shall formulate rules and regulations on student
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

SEC. 12. Heads of University Campuses. - The Campus
Directors shall respectively serve as heads or administrators of
the campuses of the SUNN and shall render full-time service.

They shall be appointed or designated by the Board, upon
recommendation of the search committee and the President of
the SUNN, subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards
set by the Board: Provided, That, upon the effectivity of this Act,
the incumbent Campus Directors of the existing campuses of the
NONESCOST shall continue to serve as such.

SEc. 13. The Faculty. — No political belief, gender
preference, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic origin,
nor religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in
the appointment of faculty members of the SUNN: Provided,
That said appointment shall be subject to the guidelines,
qualifications, and standards set by the Board: Provided, further,
That no member of the faculty shall teach for or against any
particular church or religious sect.

SEC. 14. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
— The SUNN shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article XIV of
the Constitution.

SEc. 15. Scholarship Programs and Admission. — The
SUNN shall provide scholarships and other affirmative action
programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify for
admission to the SUNN.

No student shall be denied admission to the SUNN by
reason of gender, religion, cultural or community affiliation, or
ethnic origin.

SEC. 16. Authority to Loan or Transfer Apparatus,
Equipment or Supplies and Detail of Personnel. + Upon the
request of the Board, through the President of the SUNN, the
heads of the bureaus and offices of the national government may
loan or transfer to the SUNN such apparatus, equipment or
supplies as may be needed by it, and detail employees for duty
therein when, in the judgment of the head of bureau or office, the
apparatus, equipment, supplies or service of such employees can
be spared without serious detriment to public service.

The employees so detailed shall perform such duties as
required of them by the President of the SUNN, and the time so
served shall be counted as part of their regular service.

SEC. 17. Assets, Liabilities and Personnel. — All assets,
both real and personal, personnel, and records of the NONESCOST,
as well as its liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred to
the SUNN: Provided, That the positions, rights, and security of
tenure of faculty members and personnel therein employed under
existing laws prior to the conversion into a university shall be
respected: Provided, further, That the incumbents occupying the
positions shall remain in the same status until otherwise provided
for by the Board: Provided, finally, That the SUNN shall also
accordingly upgrade or increase its human resource component
as may be deemed appropriate by the Board.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the NONESCOST and all its campuses are hereby declared
property of the SUNN, and shall be titled under its name:
Provided, That should the SUNN cease to exist or be abolished
or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed


by the SUNN, the same shall revert to the concerned LGU or to
the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 18. Duty and Tax Exemptions. — The importation
by the SUNN of economic, technical, and cultural books or
publications, which are for economic, technical, vocational,
scientific, philosophical, historical, or cultural purposes shall, upon
certification by the CHED, be exempt from customs duties in
accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10863,
otherwise known as the “Customs Modernization and Tariff
Act (CMTA)”’.

All grants, bequests, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actually, directly and exclusively
for educational purposes by the SUNN, shall be exempt from
donor’s tax and the same shall be considered as allowable
deduction from gross income for purposes of computing the taxable
income of the donor in accordance with the provisions of the
National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended.

SEC. 19. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the conversion of the
NONESCOST to a state university shall become effective only
upon the determination and declaration by the CHED, based on
the recommendation of a panel of experts constituted for the
purpose, that the institution has complied with the requirements
for a university status based on CHED Memorandum Order
No. 46, series of 2012 (Policy-Standard to Enhance Quality
Assurance (QA) in Philippine Higher Education. Through an
Outcomes-Based and Typology-Based QA): Provided, That the
panel may issue such recommendation when the NONESCOST
has substantially complied with the requirements for the grant
of university status.

The following operational requirements for a university,
as established by ‘the CHED, shall be complied with:

(a) Employment of full-time, permanent faculty members
who possess relevant degrees in their areas of specialization, as
required by the CHED, and shall have participated in research
and development activities in their respective disciplines, as
evidenced by refereed publications and other scholarly outputs;

(b) Offering of a comprehensive range of degree programs
in all levels, from basic post-secondary to doctoral programs;

© Conduct of viable research programs in specific
disciplinal and multidisciplinary areas of study that produce new
knowledge, as evidenced by refereed publications, citations,
inventions, and patents, among others;

(a) Establishment and maintenance of comprehensive
learning resources and support structures, to include libraries,
practicum laboratories, relevant educational’ resources,
and linkages with relevant disciplinal and professional sectors,
so as to allow students to explore basic, advance, and even
cutting-edge knowledge in a wide range of disciplines or
professions;

© Maintenance of linkage and affiliation with other
research institutions in various parts of the world to ensure that
the research activities of the SUNN are functioning at current
global standards; and

@® Conduct of outreach activities to allow the students,
faculty, and research staff to apply the new knowledge they
generate to address specific social development problems.

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly
provide technical assistance to the NONESCOST and monitor
its compliance with the requirements of the CHED.

The NONESCOST shall retain its status prior to the
effectivity of this Act until it is able to comply with the
requirements provided herein.

SEC. 20. Development Plan, Management Audit,
Organizational, Administrative, and Academic Structure. ~
Within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval
of this Act, the SUNN shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
program budget to the CHED for recommendation to the DBM;


(b) Set up its organizational, administrative, and academic
structure, including the appointment of key officials of the
SUNN; and

(© Undergo a management audit in coordination with
the CHED.

SEC. 21. Filing of Report. - On or before the fifteenth
(15%) day of the second (2) month after the opening of regular
classes each year, the Board shall file a detailed report on the
progress, condition, and needs of the SUNN with the Office of the
President of the Philippines and both Houses of Congress, through
the Chairperson of the CHED.

SEC. 22. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997”, shall form part of this Act.

SEc. 23. Parity Clause. —- All other powers, functions,
-privileges, responsibilities, and limitations to state universities
and colleges and their officials under existing laws shall be
deemed granted to or imposed upon the SUNN or its officials,
whenever appropriate.

SEc. 24. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to
carry out the provisions of this Act shall be charged against the
current year’s appropriations of the NONESCOST. Thereafter,
such sums as may be necessary for the continued operation and
maintenance of the SUNN shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

:

SEC. 25. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the approval of this Act, the Board shall, in.
consultation with the CHED, issue the rules and regulations to
fully implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 26. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected are in full force
and effect.

‘

SEC. 27. Repealing Clause. — All laws, presidential
decrees, executive-orders, and rules and regulations contrary
to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are repealed or
modified accordingly..

SEC. 28. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

    

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on November 8, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

TF Othn—s

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

    

OR 7 (i) Constitution
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO t