H. No. 8261
S. No. 1563

Republic af the Philippines .
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Fighteenth Congress
Pecand Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day-of July, two thousand twenty.

[ REPUBLIC ACT NO.115 4 9g]

AN ACT LOWERING THE MINIMUM HEIGHT
REQUIREMENT FOR APPLICANTS OF THE
PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP), BUREAU OF
FIRE PROTECTION (BFP), BUREAU OF JAIL
MANAGEMENT AND PENOLOGY (BJMP), AND
BUREAU OF CORRECTIONS (BUCOR), AMENDING
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6975, AS AMENDED, REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 9263, AND REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10675

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known
as the “PNP, BFP, BJMP and BuCor Height Equality Act”.

SEC. 2. Section 30 of Republic Act No. 6975, as amended,
is further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 80. General Qualifications for
Appointment. — No person shall be appointed as
officer or member of the PNP unless he or she
possesses the following minimum qualifications:

“@) xxx

“b) xxx

“© xxx

“@ xxx

“© xxx

“® xxx
* “@) xxx

“(h) Must be at least one meter and
fifty-seven centimeters (1.57 m.) in height for
males and one meter and fifty-two centimeters
(1.52 m.) for females: Provided, That a waiver
for height requirement shall be automatically

granted to applicants belonging to the cultural
communities/indigenous peoples;

“@ xxx

“Q) xxx

«, 4
XXX

«, ”

XXX.

SEC. 8. Section 4 of Republic Act No. 9268 is amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Professionalization and Upgrading
of Qualification Standards in the Appointment of
Uniformed Personnel to the BFP and the BJMP.
— No person shall be appointed as uniformed
personnel of the BFP and the BUMP unless he/she
possesses the following minimum qualifications:

“@) xxx
“b) xxx
“@Q xxx
“@ xxx
“© xxx
“®@ xxx

“@ xxx

“h) Must be at least one meter and
fifty-seven centimeters (1.57 m.) in height for:'
nfales, and one meter and fifty-two centimeters
(1.52 m.) for females: Provided, That a waiver
for height and age requirements shall.be
automatically granted to applicants belonging to
the cultural communities/indigenous peoples; and

“@ xxx

SEC. 4. Section 11 of Republic Act No. 10575 is amended
to read aa follows:

“SEC. 11. Professionalization and
Upgrading of Qualification Standards in the
Appointment of the BuGor Personnel, — (a) No
person shall be appointed as personnel of the
BuCor unless one possesses the following
minimum qualifications:

“Q) xxx
“@ xxx
“@ xxx
“‘@ xxx
“6) xxx
“© xxx
~ “ xxx

“®) Must be at least one meter and
fifty-seven centimetere (1.57 m.) in height for males,
and one meter and fifty-two centimeters (1.52 m.)
for females: Provided, That a waiver for height
and age requirements may be granted to applicants
belonging to the cultural communities/indigenous
peoples: Provided, further, That a new applicant
must not be less than twenty-one (21) or more than
forty (40) years of age. Except for this particular
provision, the above-enumerated qualifications shall
be continuing in character and an absence of any
one of them at any given time shall be ground for
separation or retirement frorh the service: Provided,
furthermore, That those who are already in the
service upon the effectivity of this Act shall be given
five (5) years from the date of such effectivity to

obtain the minimum educational qualification and
eligibility with subsidiary assistance as provided for
in this Act.

“®) xxx
“© xxx
“@ xxx.”

Ske. 5. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (80) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Department
of the Interior and Local Government and the Department of
Justice shall, in coordination with the Civil Service Commission,
National Police Commission, the PNP, the BFP, the BJMP, and
BuCor, promulgate the rules and regulations necessary to
implement this Act.

SEc. 6. Separability Clause. — If any part, section
or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the sections or provisions which are not affected shall remain
valid and subsisting.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, ordinances,
rules, regulations, other issuances or parts thereof which
are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEc. 8. Effectivity, ~ This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette or
in a newspaper of general circulation. -

Approved,

   

  

VICE] C.SOTTOM LORDALL
President\of the Senate Speake
of Representatives

—eee Os

This Act which isa consolidation of House Bill No. 8261
and Senate Bill No. 1563 Was passed by the House
of Representatives and the Senat
March 15, 2021.

 
 
  

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: MAY 26 2924

coon le DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC oF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 017480