H. No. 5739

Republic of the Philippines
. Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11789]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A CAMPUS OF THE
POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES
(PUP) IN CALOOCAN CITY-NORTH, TO BE
KNOWN AS THE PUP-CALOOCAN CITY-NORTH
CAMPUS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “PUP-Caloocan
City-North Campus Act’.

SEc. 2. There is hereby established a campus of the
Polytechnic University of the Philippines (PUP), hereinafter
referred to as the University, in Caloocan City-North to be known
as the PUP-Caloocan City-North Campus.

See accue eae titties

SEc. 3. The PUP-Caloocan City-North Campus shall
primarily provide short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate,
and graduate courses within its areas of competency and
specialization, pursuant to its mandate, and according to its
capabilities as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as
the Board, may deem necessary to respond to the human resources
development needs of the City and the National Capital Region.

The PUP-Caloocan City-North Campus is also mandated
to undertake research and extension services, and to provide
progressive leadership in these areas, including the offering of
graduate degrees through open distance learning under the PUP
Open University System.

Src. 4. The PUP-Caloocan City-North Campus shall be
headed by a Campus Administrator who shall render full-time
service and shall be appointed or designated by the Board upon
the recommendation of the search committee and the President
of the University. Such appointment or designation shall be
subject to the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by
the Board.

SEc. 5. The establishment of the PUP-Caloocan City-North
Campus shall ensure that the minimum requirements for its
operation and program offerings have been complied with, as duly
prescribed by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED).

SEC. 6. All assets, real and personal, personnel, and records
of the PUP-Caloocan City-North Campus, as well as liabilities
and obligations, are hereby transferred to the University. The
positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members and
personnel employed at the PUP-Caloocan City-North Campus
under existing laws prior to the integration to the University
shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the PUP-Caloocan City-North Campus are hereby declared to
be the property of the University and shall be titled under its
name: Provided, That should the University cease to exist or be
abolished or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no
longer needed by the University, the same shall revert to the

ee

concerned local goverment unit or to the Republic of the
Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 7. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997”, shall
form an integral part of this Act, and together, shall serve as the
governing charter of the University.

Sec. 8. All other powers, functions, privileges,
responsibilities, and limitations to state universities and their
officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to or imposed
upon the University and its officials, whenever appropriate.

SEC. 9. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

Sec. 10. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

Sc. 11. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 12. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

ICENTE C. SOTTO II
President of the Senate

 

of. Representatives


This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on January 27, 2020 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved:

MAY 2.9 2022
oe

vithout the signature of the Presi
dont, in accordance with Article VI.
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

LApeed mid aw O12

oO