H. No. 7491

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Aleten Manila
Seventeenth Congress

Third Regular Session
eA

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC AcT No.11397]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A PROVINCIAL FISHERIES AND
AQUATIC RESOURCES TRAINING, DEVELOPMENT,
AND PRODUCT CENTER IN THE PROVINCE OF
AKLAN AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established in the Province of
AkJan, a provincial fisheries and aquatic resources training,
development, and product center, under the supervision of the
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department
of Agriculture (BFAR-DA).

The BFAR-DA shall collaborate with, and tap the expertise,
resources, and facilities of the state universities and colleges
(SUCs) in the province in the establishment, management, and
operation of the center.

 

 

 

 

SEC. 2. The provincial center shall, at a minimum, provide
onsite and online access to the following:

(a) Applied technology for innovative and sustainable fish
breeding and hatchery of high-value marine species;

(b) Training activities and technical assistance to provide
sustainable development and production support and education
to fisherfolk;

(c) Technical assistance for sustainable production and
environmentally sound post-harvest development services;

(d) Technical assistance in the establishment, operation,
enhancement, and maintenance of government-operated marine
sanctuaries, seaweed nurseries, seaweed processing plants, and
mariculture development park facilities;

(e) Catalog, display, and promote local fisheries and aquatic
products, and provide marketing and product distribution
assistance to fisherfolk; and

() Database of available insurance and credit assistance
for fisherfolk, and local and international grants and scholarships
for fisheries and aquatic resources studies and research.

SeEc, 3. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the
Department's programs the establishment of the provincial
fisheries and aquatic resources training, development, and product
center, the funding of which shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act. The local government units
concerned shall set aside funds from any available local revenue
in an amount deemed appropriate for the operationalization of
this center.

Sec. 4. The Department of Agriculture, through the BFAR,
shall issue rules and regulations necessary to carry out the
purposes of this Act.

 

SEc. 5, This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in any newspaper of general
circulation.

Approved,

‘+ |
VI TEC. SOTTO GLORIA CAPAGAL ARROYO
Se

President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the
Philippines on May 28, 2019 and June 3, 2019, respectively.

Toctre mn
ha ED. VILLARICA DANTE/ROBER

Secretary of the Senate Acting SecretaryGeneral
louse of Representatives

RODRAG DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

  

Approved: AUG 22 2049

j

 
 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 ~ 012117 j

Sy 9729 WH