a

   

SEL RISLRRRIRA RR rose tal nee mee essere se

H.No. 9086
S. No. 1947

Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Righteenth Congress
Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11691)

|
j
|

AN ACT CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE JUDICIARY
MARSHALS, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Judiciary Marshals Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the declared policy
of the State to ensure the safety and security of the members
| of the Judiciary, judicial personnel, and court assets, in order
for the Judiciary to function independently and impartially
} in upholding the rule of law and in preserving the rights
and guarantees granted by the Constitution.

a

To this end, an independent, professional, and organized
security force under the control and supervision of the Supreme
Court is necessary to protect the Judiciary from violence,
threats, and undue influence, thereby securing the performance
of its constitutionally-mandated duty to administer justice in
accordance with the laws of the land.

SEC. 3. Creation of the Office of the Judiciary
Marshals. - There is hereby created the Office of the Judiciary
Marshals under the control and supervision of the Supreme
Court, through the Office of the Court Administrator. The
Office of the Judiciary Marshals shall be primarily responsible
for the security, safety, and protection of the members,
officials, personnel, and property of the Judiciary, including
the integrity of th€ courts and its proceedings.

SEc. 4. Powers, Functions, and Responsibilities. — The
Office of the Judiciary Marshals shall have the following
powers, functions, and responsibilities:

(a) Protect, defend, safeguard, watch over, provide security
for, and ensure the safety of, justices, judges, court officials
and personnel, including their families, and halls of justice,
courthouses, court buildings, and other court properties;

(b) Conduct threat assessments and undertake
investigations and forensic analysis, in coordination with other
law enforcement agencies, of crimes and other offenses
committed against, including potential actionable security
threats to, justices, judges, court officials and personnel, halls
of justice, courthouses, court buildings, and other court
properties, as directed by the Supreme Court, the Chief
Justice, or the Court Administrator. This shall include
coordinating with other law enforcement agencies to maximize
the collection and sharing of intelligence information for
purposes of identifying threats;

(©) Ensure that court proceedings, trials and hearings,
including judicial conferences, seminars and meetings, are

ambos

ite Seth am ata

conducted in a safe, secure, and orderly manner in accordance
with existing rules, guidelines, and practice;

(@) Conduct investigations, as directed by the Supreme
Court, the Chief Justice, or the Court Administrator and in
coordination with other law enforcement agencies, concerning
allegations of irregularities, including graft and corruption,
committed by justices, judges, court officials and personnel;

@ Assist in the execution and implementation of all
lawful writs, processes, and orders;

(® Assist in the protection of witnesses and in the
security in the transportation of the accused or witnesses
necessary for the continuation of court proceedings, as may be
directed by courts of competent j urisdiction;

(g) Assist in the management and disposal of assets
seized, frozen or forfeited by courts, and deposit public money
collected to the National Treasury, in accordance with the
lawful order of the court;

(h) As directed by the Supreme Court, the Chief
Justice, or the Court Administrator, issue subpoenas for the
appearance of any person for investigation, apply for search
warrants before any court of law, and file complaints before
the Office of the Ombudsman, the Department of Justice,
or city or provincial prosecutors;

@ Take and require sworn statements from any
person so summoned in relation to cases under investigation,
in accordance with the Constitution, existing laws,
jurisprudence and rules, as directed by the Supreme Court,
the Chief Justice, the Court Administrator, or appropriate
courts of law;

@) Administer the oath of any person in relation to
cases under investigation, as directed by the Supreme Court,
the Chief Justice, the Court Administrator, or appropriate
courts of law;

(k) Make arrests and conduct searches and seizures in
relation to the functions of the Office of the Judiciary
Marshals, and in accordance with the Constitution, existing
laws, jurisprudence and rules.

For this purpose, any member of the Office of the
Judiciary Marshals may make arrests when in his or her
presence, the. person to be arrested has committed, is actually
committing, or is attempting to commit an offense; or when an
offense has just been committed, and he or she has probable
cause to believe, based on personal knowledge of facts or
circumstances, that the person to be arrested has committed
it; or when the person to be arrested is a prisoner who has
escaped from a penal establishment or place while serving
final judgment of is temporarily confined while his or her
case is pending, or has escaped when being transferred from
one (1) confinement to another;

@) Have access over all public records under the
custody of any government branch, institution, agency or
instrumentality, and upon proper request made to private
telecommunications companies, the records of any individual
under investigation which shall be treated with utmost
confidentiality and only for purposes of the case or cases
under investigation, as directed by the Supreme Court, the
Chief Justice, the Court Administrator, or appropriate courts
of law;

(m) Possess suitable and adequate firearms for their
personal safety and protection in connection with their duties
and responsibilities, and for the proper safety and protection
of the justices, judges, court officials and personnel, including
their families, and halls of justice, courthouses, and other
court properties,

For this purpose, the Chief Marshal is hereby authorized
to issue permits to carry duly licensed firearms outside of
residence to officials and personnel of the Office of the Judiciary
Marshals;

(n) Issue Mission Orders and Memorandum Receipts for
the purpose of providing personnel with firearms, ammunition,
and other equipment;

(0) Request assistance from and coordinate with the
Philippine National Police (PNP), Armed Forces of the
Philippines (AFP), National Bureau of Investigation (NBI),
and other law enforcement agencies in connection with the
performance of the functions and duties of the Office of the
Judiciary Marshals, notwithstanding the latter’s concurrent
jurisdiction with other law enforcement agencies to investigate
crimes and other offenses committed against justices, judges,
court officials and personnel, halls of justice, courthouses,
and other court properties;

(p) Establish a Judiciary Marshals Academy which shall
be responsible for the recruitment, training, and development
of Judiciary Marshals and personnel, among others; and

(q) Perform such other related functions as the Supreme
Court, the Chief Justice, or the Court Administrator may order,
direct or instruct from time to time.

SEc. 5. Jurisdiction. — The Office of the Judiciary
Marshals shall have concurrent jurisdiction with other law
enforcement agencies to undertake investigations of crimes
and other offenses committed against justices, judges, court
officials and personnel, halls of justice, courthouses, and other
court properties.

SEC. 6. Officials and their Assignments. ~ The Office
of the Judiciary Marshals shall be headed by a Chief Marshal
assisted by three (3) Deputy Marshals who shall be respectively
in charge of, assigned and stationed in Luzon, Visayas and
Mindanao.

Sec. 7. Qualifications and Appointment of the Chief
Marshal. — The Chief Marshal shall be appointed by the
Supreme Court en banc and shall have a Salary Grade of 30.
Any person appointed as Chief Marshal must be a natural-born
citizen of the Philippines, preferably a member of the Philippine

Bar and must have held the rank of at least a full Colonel in
the AFP or the PNP, or an Assistant Director in the NBI, with
experience in investigation in all instances: Provided, That a
Chief Marshal may be appointed despite not having been a full
Colonel of the AFP or the PNP, or an Assistant Director of the
NBI, if he or she has a proven track record and adequate experience
in investigation and law enforcement.

SEC. 8. Qualifications and Appointment of the Deputy
Marshals. ~ The Deputy Marshals shall be appointed by
the Supreme Court en banc and shall have the Salary Grade
of 29. They must be natural-born citizens of the Philippines
and must have held the rank of at least a full Colonel of
the AFP or the PNP, or an Assistant Regional Director of
the NBI, with experience in investigation in all instances:
Provided, That a Deputy Marshal may be appointed despite
not being a fufl Colonel of the AFP or the PNP, or an
Assistant Regional Director of the NBI, if he or she has a
proven track record and adequate experience in investigation
and law enforcement.

SEC. 9. Qualifications, Composition and Size of
Personnel. ~ The qualifications, composition and size of
personnel of the Office of the J udiciary Marshals shall be
determined by the Supreme Court which may create such
offices, divisions and units under it as it may deem necessary.
For this purpose, the Supreme Court is authorized to adopt
and implement the corresponding staffing pattern for the
Office of the Judiciary Marshals. The positions, titles, and
salaries of its officials and personnel shall be in accordance
with Republic Act No. 11466, otherwise known as the “Salary
Standardization Law of 2019”. All officials and personnel
appointed under this Act shall belong to the classified service
and shall be governed by the Civil Service Law, except those
whose positions are highly technical or primarily confidential.
The organizational structure and staffing pattern shall be
submitted to the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM) for review and/or approval.

SEC. 10. Tenure and Retirement. — The Chief Marshal,
Deputy Marshals, officials and personnel of the Office of the
Judiciary Marshals shall serve until they reach the age of

om

sixty-five (65), unless they sooner become incapacitated to
discharge the duties of their office, or are dismissed or relieved
for just cause by a vote of not less than eight (8) justices of
the Supreme Court.

SEC. 11. Training and Education, — Judiciary Marshals
shall undergo continuous training and education to ensure
that they maintain and improve their skills, knowledge, and
capabilities in performing their mandate.

SEC. 12. Administrative and Disciplinary Action. —
Existing rules, codes, and procedure for the administrative
discipline of personnel of the Supreme Court shall likewise
govern administrative and disciplinary actions against officials
and personnel of the Office of the J udiciary Marshals.

SEC. 13. Benefits and Privileges. ~ The Office of the
Judiciary Marshals shall provide its officials and personnel
the following benefits and privile ges:

(a) Trainings, scholarships, and seminars to deserving
employees to upgrade their knowledge and skills, on official
time and at the expense of the Office, and pursuant to its
implementing rules and regulations;

(b) Hazard pay, subject to pertinent laws, rules and
regulations; and

() Retirement benefits as may be provided by existing
or pertinent laws.

The Office of the Judiciary Marshals shall likewise bear
the costs for all fees required in relation to Section 4(m) of
this Act.

SEC. 14. Appropriations. — For purposes of this
Act, there is hereby appropriated the initial sum of
Fifty million pesos (P50,000,000.00) for the salaries, wages
and other expenses of personnel, the purchase of
necessary supplies, materials and equipment, and for other

  
 

purposes. Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill

continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the No. 9086 and Senate Bill No. 1947 was passed by the House

annual General Appropriations Act. of Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on
January 31, 2022 and January 25, 2022, respectively.

SEC. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within ‘ .

sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Supreme >A tera

Court shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be weeee

necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act. = MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MARK §Q L- MENDOZA

Secretary of the Senate 9 neral

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the provisions not
affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.
Approved: APR 0 8 2022

 

a

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations or parts thereof which are contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby amended, f tink
repealed or modified accordingly.

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE

SEC. 18. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen President of the Philippines
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation. O

Approved,

     
     

 

    
   

 

| Office ot the Present

VICENTE C. SOJTO Il LORD ALL Y Q. VELASCO MALACARANG RECORDS OFTICE
President of the Senate Spea the House 4 :
of Representatives € x Rg TE F BH c oP? Y
?

!
|
|

ATTY. CORLEP TION &
DIRECTOR ry

ED

 

eee
REPUBLIC OF
PRRD 2016 - 021849