H. No. 5577

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Alleten Manila

Seventeenth Congress
Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11194)

AN ACT MANDATING THE CONSERVATION OF
GABALDON SCHOOL BUILDINGS NATIONWIDE,
PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Gabaldon School Buildings Conservation Act’.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared
the policy of the State to conserve and promote the country’s
historical and cultural heritage and resources. Towards this end,
it shall strengthen its efforts and pursue a more proactive role in
the conservation and restoration of built heritage, such as the
Gabaldon school buildings, to preserve their architectural,
historical, and social significance.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(@) Conservation refers to all processes and measures of
maintaining the cultural significance of Gabaldon school buildings
including preservation, restoration, reconstruction, protection,
adaptation or any combination thereof; and

(b) Gabaldon school buildings refer to school buildings
designed by American Architect William Parsons and funded
through Act No. 1801, authored by Assemblyman Isauro
Gabaldon.

SEC. 4. Gabaldon School Buildings as Cultural Properties.
~ All Gabaldon school buildings shall be recognized as
built heritage and therefore be included as part of cultural
properties under Republic Act No. 10066 or the National
Cultural Heritage Act of 2009. However, notwithstanding the
provisions of this Act as well as the provisions of Republic
Act No. 10066, no public school teacher shall be held liable
for acts committed to cause or effect emergency repairs on
such structures.

SEC. 5. Conservation of Gabaldon School Buildings. —
The Department of Education (DepEd), in consultation with the
National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA), the
National Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP),
and the National Museum (NM), shall implement a program
for the identification and conservation of all Gabaldon school
buildings nationwide.

For this purpose, an inventory of all Gabaldon school
buildings, whether fully functional or condemned, in all public
elementary and secondary schools, shall be jointly undertaken
by the DepEd and the NCCA to determine the physical
status of each structure. School heads shall submit to their
respective Schools Division Superintendents, for appropriate
action, a report indicating the existence of or any structural
damage to any Gabaldon school building in schools under their
respective supervisions.

Local government units that have Gabaldon school
buildings under their jurisdiction shall likewise adopt measures
for the protection and conservation of these structures and
shall provide the DepEd with the necessary assistance in the
implementation of any conservation project.

Any modification, alteration, destruction, demolition, or
relocation of Gabaldon school buildings shall be strictly
prohibited. In cases where conservation measures are necessary,
the DepEd, in coordination with the NCCA, the NHCP,
and the NM, shall provide proper technical assistance to
school heads to ensure that the original architectural design
of the school building is maintained: Provided, however, That,
subject to the issuance of a permit from the NCCA, any
modification or alteration of the original architectural design
of Gabaldon school buildings may be allowed in public
elementary and secondary schools where the exigency of
constructing new school buildings is a priority in anticipation
of the increase in student population by virtue of the
implementation of Republic Act No. 10533, or the “Enhanced
Basic Education Act of 2013”: Provided, further, That the
facade and other distinct features of the original Gabaldon
school buildings shall, as much as possible, be preserved.

SEC. 6. Appropriations. — The Secretary of Education
shall immediately include in the Department’s program
the implementation of this Act, the initial funding of
which shall be charged to the current year’s appropriation
of the DepEd. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the
continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the
annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the approval of this Act, the DepEd,
in consultation with the NCCA, the NHCP, and the NM,
shall formulate the rules and regulations implementing the
provisions of this Act.

 

 

SEC. 8. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions
not so declared shall remain in force and effect.

SEC. 9. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders
and rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended
accordingly.

SEC. 10. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen ,
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Appyoved,

cs y
VICENTE C.SQTTO III GLORI ‘APAGAL-ARROYO
President of thd Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on May 22, 2017,
amended by the Senate on August 28, 2018, and which
amendments were concurred in by the House of Representatives
on November 21, 2018.

Cc

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

  

RODRIGO xl,

President of the Philippines

oO

t Cha noe _ Office of the President
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

PRRD 2016 - 009154 CERTI RF nw COPY

HO~EWAD