t

sprctevmneats wapsnns Aten .nsienn nso mundi: ant spt aiinssriiniisnemn ncn ge namraht aime ape AA NER St AE RIN th BO ne nha

sap cinininciencn mie

H. No. 6877

Republic ofthe Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Highteenth Congress
Chih Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11751]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING CAMPUSES OF THE CEBU
TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY (CTU) IN THE
MUNICIPALITIES OF LILOAN AND BORBON, PROVINCE
OF CEBU, TO BE KNOWN RESPECTIVELY AS THE
CTU-LILOAN CAMPUS AND CTU-BORBON CAMPUS,
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “Cebu
Technological University (CTU)-Liloan Campus and Cebu
Technological University (CTU)-Borbon Campus Act”.

SEc. 2. There are hereby established campuses of the Cebu
Technological University (CTU), hereinafter referred to as the

=~,


University, in the Municipalities of Liloan and Borbon, Province
of Cebu, to be known respectively as the CTU-Liloan Campus
and CTU-Borbon Campus.

SEC. 3. The CTU-Liloan Campus and CTU-Borbon Campus
shall primarily provide short-term, te chnical-vocational,
undergraduate, and graduate courses within their areas of
competency and specialization, pursuant to their mandate,
and according to their capabilities as the Board of Regents,
hereinafter referred to as the Board, may deem necessary for the
accomplishment of their objectives, and those which respond to
the human resources development needs of the Province of Cebu
and Region VII.

The CTU-Liloan Campus and CTU-Borbon Campus are also
mandated to undertake research and extension services, and to
provide progressive leadership in these areas.

SEc. 4. The CTU-Liloan Campus and CTU-Borbon Campus
shall be headed by Campus Administrators who shall render
full-time services and be appointed or designated by the Board
upon the recommendation of the search committee and the
President of the University. Such appointment or designation
shall be subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards
set by the Board.

SEC. 5. The establishment of the CTU-Liloan Campus
and the CTU-Borbon Campus shall ensure that the minimum
requirements for their operation and program offerings have
been complied with, as duly prescribed by the Commission on
Higher Education.

SEC. 6. All assets, real and personal, personnel, and
records of the CTU-Liloan Campus and CTU-Borbon Campus, as
well as liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred to the
University. The positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty
members and personnel employed at the CTU-Liloan Campus
and CTU-Borbon Campus under existing laws prior to the
integration to the University shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the CTU-Liloan Campus and the CTU-Borbon Campus are
hereby declared to be the property of the University and shall be
titled under its name: Provided, That should the University
cease to exist or be abolished or should such aforementioned parcels
of land be no longer needed by the University, the same shall
revert to the concerned local government unit or to the Republic
of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 7. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997’, shall
form part of this Act, and together, shall serve as the governing
charter of the University.

SEC. 8. All other powers, functions, privileges,
responsibilities, and limitations to state universities and their
officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to or imposed
upon the University and its officials, wheneyerappropriate.

SEC. 9. The amount necessary to carry out the
provisions of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEc. 10. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEc. 11. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 12. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

proved,

   

 

President af the Senate

   

part eich me HH Ame EEE mot torah Se a omutrnaneteneg im co neourie Sanne

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on June 4, 2020 and January 17, 2022, respectively.

x

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MARK.
Secretary of the Senate 8

Approved: APR 2 7 2022

  

RODRIG Wee . .
President of the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 022167

 

 

o