tapings election picture

S. No, 2488

. Metro Manila

Kighteenth Congress

day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

—

[ Repusiic Act No. 11765 ]

AN ACT AFFORDING MORE PROTECTION TO CONSUMERS
OF FINANCIAL PRODUCTS AND SERVICES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congressassembled: —~

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “Financial Products and Services Consumer Protection
Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to ensure that appropriate mechanisms are in place to
protect the interest of consumers of financial products and
services under the conditions of transparency, fair and sound
market conduct, and fair, reasonable, and effective handling
of financial consumer disputes, which are aligned with global
best practices. These mechanisms reinforce their confidence in
the financial market and foster the stability of the Philippine

financial system. Towards this end, the State shall implement
measures to protect the following rights of financial consumers:

(a) Right to equitable and fair treatment;

(b) Right to disclosure and transparency of financial
products and services;

© Right to protection of consumer assets against fraud
and misuse;

@ Right to data privacy and protection; and
© Right to timely handling and redress of complaints.
SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(@) Financial consumer refers to a person or entity, or
their duly appointed representative, who is a purchaser, lessee,
recipient, or prospective purchaser, lessee or recipient of
financial products or services. It shall also refer to any person,
natural or juridical, who had or has current or prospective
financial transaction with a financial service provider
pertaining to financial products or services;

(b) Financial consumer complaint refers to an expression
of dissatisfaction submitted by a financial consumer against
a financial service provider relative to a financial product or
service in which a response or resolution is expected;

(c) Financial product or service refers to financial
products or services which are developed or marketed by a
financial service provider which may include, but are not
limited to, savings, deposits, credit, insurance, pre-need and
health maintenance organization (HMO) products, securities,
investments, payments, remittances and other similar products
and services. This also includes digital financial products or
services which pertain to the broad range of financial services
accessed and delivered through digital channels;

(d) Financial regulators refer to the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas (BSP), Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC),
Insurance Commission (IC), and the Cooperative Development
Authority (CDA);

(e) Financial service provider refers to a person, natural
or juridical, which provides financial products or services that
are under the jurisdiction of the financial regulators as defined
in this Act. This term shall include Investment Advisers as
defined under Section 7 of this Act;

(f) Investment fraud refers to any form of deceptive
solicitation of investments from the public. This includes Ponzi
schemes and such other schemes involving the promise or
offer of profits or returns which are sourced from the
investments or contributions made by the investors themselves,
boiling room operations, and the offering or selling of
investment schemes to the public withgut a license or permit
from the SEC, unless such offering or selling involves exempt
securities or are considered as exempt transactions as provided
for under existing laws; ,

(g) Market conduct refers to the manner by which a
financial service provider designs and delivers its financial
products or services and manages its relationships with its
clients and the public;

(h) Marketing refers to the act of communicating, offering,
promoting, advertising, or delivering of financial products or
services by financial service providers; and

(i) Responsible pricing refers to the pricing, terms, and
conditions of financial products and/or services that are set in
a way that is both affordable to clients and sustainable for
financial service providers by taking into account, among
others, client needs and the pricing schemes of the competitors.

SEC. 4. Scope and Coverage. — This Act applies to all
financial products or services offered or marketed by any
financial service provider.

SEC. 5. Financial Regulators. — The BSP, SEC, and IC
shall enforce the provisions of this Act on all financial service
providers under their jurisdiction by virtue of their respective
charters, special laws and amendments thereto. The CDA
shall be considered an implementing government agency of this
Act only with respect to cooperatives offering financial products
or services, such as but not limited to savings and credit,

-

except insurance cooperatives which shall be under the
jurisdiction of the IC, and cooperative banks and other
BSP-supervised cooperative financial institutions, which shall
be under the jurisdiction of the BSP.

SEC. 6. Powers of the Financial Regulators. — Financial
regulators under this Act shall have the following powers:

(a) Rulemaking ~ Financial regulators shall have the
authority to formulate their own standard and rules for the
application of the provisions of this Act to the specific financial
products or services within their jurisdiction guided by
internationally accepted standards and practices. Financial

regulators may also determine reasonableness of interest, -

charges or fees which a financial service provider may demand,
collect, or receive for any service or product offered to a
financial consumer. Likewise, they may issue their respective
rules of procedure concerning administrative actions arising
from the implementation of this Act.

(b) Market Conduct Surveillance and Examination —
Financial regulators may conduct surveillance and
examination, on-site or off-site, on their respective supervised
financial service providers, consistent with their respective
risk-based supervision policies, to ascertain that the provisions
of this Act are complied with. The examination for financial
consumer protection compliance wmay be conducted separately
from examination of prudential regulations compliance. The
provisions on the conduct of examination and surveillance
provided in the respective charters of financial regulators, and
pertinent special laws shall be made applicable in the
examination and surveillance activities authorized under this
Act. °

The department heads and the examiners of the financial
regulators shall be authorized to administer oaths to any
director, officer, or employee of the supervised financial service
providers subject to the examination of their market conduct
and compliance with this Act, and to compel the presentation
of all books, documents, Papers, or records in any form
necessary in their judgment to ascertain compliance of
financial service providers to this Act.

— --—

Set

The supervised financial service provider shall afford to
its respective financial regulator full opportunity to examine
its records, and review its systems and procedures, at any time
during business hours when requested to do so by the financial
regulator.

(©) Market Monitoring — Financial regulators shall have
the authority to require their respective supervised financial
service providers and their third party agents/service providers
to submit reports or documents, as needed.

For purposes of market monitoring, the financial
regulators may obtain relevant data about financial products,
services and markets from other government agencies, which
shall be duty-bound to furnish the sarhe,

(d) Enforcement — Financial regulators shall have the
authority to impose enforcement actions on their respective
supervised financial service providers for noncompliance with
this Act and other existing laws pertinent to the jurisdiction
and authority of the respective financial regulators. Such
enforcement actions may include the following:

()_ Restriction on the ability of the supervised financial
service provider to continue to collect excessive or unreasonable
interests, fees or charges, including all other interests, fees
and charges covered under Republic Act No. 10870, otherwise
known as the “Philippine Credit Card Industry Regulation
Law’;

(2) Disqualification and/or suspension of directors,
trustees, officers, or employees of the supervised financial
service provider responsible for violations of the provisions of
this Act, its implementing rules and regulations (IRR), or
orders of the financial regulators;

(3) Imposition of fines, suspension, or penalties for any
noncompliance with or breach of this Act, its IRR, or the orders
of the financial regulators;

(4) Issuance of a cease and desist order to the financial
service provider without the necessity of a prior hearing if in
the financial regulator’s judgment, the act or practice, unless
restrained, amounts to fraud or a violation of the provisions

of this Act and its IRR, or may unjustly cause grave or
irreparable injury or prejudice to financial consumers. The
financial service provider shall be afforded an opportunity to
defend its act or practice in a summary hearing before the
financial regulator or its designated body, upon request made
by the financial service provider within five (5) calendar days
from its receipt of the order. If no such hearing is requested
within said period, the order shall be final. If a hearing is
requested by the financial service provider, the proceedings
shall be conducted summarily without adhering to the technical
rules of evidence, and all issues shall be determined primarily
on the basis of records, after which the financial regulator
may either reconsider or finalize and execute its order;

(5) Suspension of operation of any supervised financial
service provider in relation to a particular financial product
or service when in the financial regulator’s judgment, based
on findings, the financial service provider is operating in
violation of the provisions of this Act, and its IRR; and

(©) In any proceeding in which the financial regulators
may impose a penalty for noncompliance with or breach of this
Act and other existing laws under their jurisdiction, the
financial regulators, in addition to the imposed fine, may enter
an order requiring accounting and disgorgement of profits
obtained, or losses avoided, as a result of a violation of this
Act and other existing laws, inclyding reasonable interest. The
financial regulators are authorized to adopt rules, regulations,
and orders concerning the creation and operation of a
disgorgement fund, payments to financial consumers, rate of
interest, period of accrual, and such other matters as deemed.
appropriate to implement this provision.

(e) Consumer Redress or Complaints Handling
Mechanism — Financial regulators shall provide efficient and
effective consumer redress or complaints handling mechanism
such as mediation, conciliation or other modes of alternative
dispute resolution to address conflict/dissatisfaction from
financial consumers arising from financial products or services.
The financial consumer may avail of the mechanism prior to
adjudication.

“he

-——

(f) Adjudication — Financial regulators shall have the
authority to adjudicate all actions as provided under existing
laws.

The BSP and SEC shall have the authority to adjudicate
actions arising from or in connection with financial
transactions that are purely civil in nature, and the claim or
relief prayed for by the financial consumer is solely for
payment or reimbursement of sum of money not exceeding the
amount of Ten million pesos (P10,000,000.00). The decision of
the financial regulators in the adjudication shall be final and
executory, and may not be restrained or set aside by the court
except on petition for certiorari on the,ground of grave abuse
of discretion, or lack or excess of jurisdiction of the financial
regulators. The petition for certiorari may only be filed within
ten (10) days from receipt by the aggrieved party of the
decision: Provided, That in the case of BSP and SEC, the
aggrieved party may file the petition with the Court of
Appeals. The adjudicatory power shall be exercised by the
Head of the concerned financial regulator or a duly authorized
officer or body: Provided, That in case of BSP and SEC, the
decision of the authorized officer or body is not appealable to
the Monetary Board or to the Commission en banc,
respectively.

The BSP and SEC may order the payment or
reimbursement of money which is subject of the action filed
before them. In the exercise of their adjudicatory powers, they
shall have the power to issue subpoena duces tecum and
summon witnesses to appear in their proceedings*and when
appropriate, order the examination, search and seizure of all
documents, and books of accounts of any entity or person
under investigation as may be necessary for the proper
disposition of the cases before them. Further, the BSP and
SEC shall have the authority to punish for contempt, both
directly and indirectly, in accordance with the pertinent
provisions of and penalties prescribed by the Rules of Court.

(g) Other Powers — Financial regulators may exercise
such other powers as may be provided by their enabling laws
or charters as well as those which may be implied from, or
which are necessary or incidental to the carrying out of, the
express powers granted to the financjal regulators to achieve
the objectives and purposes of these laws.

é

SEC. 7. Investment Adviser. — Investment advisers shall
be subject to the provisions of Chapters VII, VII, X and XIII
of Republic Act No. 8799, and the rules and regulations to
be issued by the SEC.

The term “investment adviser” shall mean any person
who, for compensation, engages in the business of advising
others, either directly or through publications or writings, as
to the value of investment products or as to the advisability
of investing in, purchasing, or selling investment products, or
who, for compensation and as part of a regular business, issues
or promulgates analyses or reports concerning investment
products; but does not include the following:

(a) Trust Department/Unit of Banks;
(b) Stand-alone Trust Entities;

(©) Lawyer, accountant, engineer, or teacher whose
performance of such services is solely incidental to the practice
of his profession;

@) Insurance agent whose performance of such’ services
is solely incidental to the practice of his profession;

(© Any investment banker or broker dealer whose
performance of such services is solely incidental to the conduct
of his business as such investnient banker or broker dealer
and who receives no special compensation therefor;

(f) The publisher of any bona fide newspaper, news
magazine, or business or financial publication of general and
regular circulation; and

(g) Such other persons as the SEC may designate by
rules and regulations, or appropriate order.

SEC. 8. Duties and Responsibilities of Financial Service
Providers. -

(a) Board and Senior Management Oversight — The
Board of Directors and the members of senior management of
financial service providers shall ensure conformity with this

, “*%

Act and shall provide the means by which they shall identify,
measure, monitor, control, and manage consumer protection
risks inherent in their operations, in accordance with the rules
and regulations of their financial regulators.

(b) Appropriate Product Design and Delivery —
Financial service providers shall continuously evaluate their
financial products or services to ensure that they are
appropriately targeted to the needs, understanding and capacity
of both their markets and their clients. This shall include,
among others, the following:

(1) Affordability and suitability qgssessments — Financial
service providers should have written procedures for
determining whether a particular finantial product or service
is suitable and affordable for their clients. This shall include
the determination of whether or not the amount and terms
of the offered financial product or service allow various clients
to meet their respective obligations with a low probability of
a serious hardship, and that there is a reasonable prospect
that the financial product or service will provide value to its
client. For the purpose of extending credit, this assessment
will include measures to prevent over-indebtedness.

) Cooling-off period — Financial service providers are
expected to adopt a clear cooling-off policy, as may be
prescribed by law or by rules and regulations issued by the
relevant financial regulator upon its determination that a
cooling-off period is necessary for a particular financial product
or service that is subject to its regulation. Such policy should,
among others, provide a cooling-off period that will allow a
client to consider the costs and risks of a financial product
or service, free from the pressure of the sales team of the
financial service provider. The length of the cooling-off period
should be individually determined by financial service providers
based on reasonable expectation of the time required for a client
to fully evaluate all the terms and risks of the financial
product or service and contact concerned parties who may be
affected by its terms and conditions, unless a minimum or
fixed period is prescribed by the financial regulator for
compliance by the financial service provider or when stipulated
in the terms of the financial product or service. Financial
regulators may opt not to provide for a cooling-off period for
short-term transactions or contracts.

é

During the cooling-off period, the financial consumer may
cancel or return the contract without penalty; however,
nothing herein prevents the financial service providers from
recovering the processing costs incurred, as may be approved.
by the financial regulators. Financial service providers are
prohibited from engaging in practices that unreasonably
burden the financial consumer in the exercise of the right of
cancellation during the cooling-off period. If the financial
product or service is a contract of insurance, a pre-need or
a health maintenance organization (HMO) product, the right
of return cannot be exercised after the financial consumer has
made a claim.

(3) Pre-payment of loans and _ other credit:

accommodations — A borrower may, at any time prior to the
agreed maturity date, prepay a loan or other credit transactions
in whole or in part: Provided, That costs or fees charged to
the borrower for such pre-payment, if any, shall be disclosed
to ensure transparency, disclosure, and responsible pricing as
required under this section.

(©) Transparency, Disclosure, and Responsible. Pricing
— Financial service providers must ensure that they adopt
disclosure principles in their communications and their
contracts with financial consumers, including the use of clear
and concise language to ensure that all information concerning
the financial product or service, is understood by the target
clients. This shall also include updated and accurate disclosure
of information such as pricing or any cost associated with the
product or service, and should be made in a consistent manner
to facilitate a‘tomparison between similar financial products
or services across the industry.

Sufficient product disclosure must be provided before the
contracting of the financial product or service to give the client
enough basis and time for review. Any change in the terms
or conditions of a financial product or service shall be provided
to the client.

In their advertising materials, financial service providers
shall disclose the contact information of their consumer
assistance unit providing consumer assistance and handling
financial consumer complaints. Financial service providers

“he

shall also disclose that they are regulated and the advertising
materials must identify the relevant financial regulator.

Financial service providers are legally responsible for all
statements made in the marketing and sales materials that
they produce relative to their financial products or services.
Disclosure of information on financial products or services shall
be made available to the public by the financial service
provider through printed materials, mass media, websites or
digital platforms.

Financial service providers must have internal policies
and procedures for setting prices for their products and services
that take into consideration, among others; the principle of
responsible pricing. se

@) Fair and Respectful Treatment of Clients — Financial
service providers shall have the right to select their clients:
Provided, That they shall not discriminate against clients on
the basis of race, age, financial capacity, ethnicity, origin,
gender, disability, health condition, sexual orientation, religious
affiliation, or political affiliation: Provided, further, That
financial service providers may provide distinction, as
necessary, when making a risk assessment on a specific
financial product or service.

Financial service providers are prohibited from employing
abusive collection or debt recovery practices against their
financial consumers.

© Privacy and Protection of Client Data — Each
financial service provider must respect the privacy and protect
the data of their clients. Consistent with the provisions of
Republic Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the “Data Privacy
Act of 2012”, the financial regulators shall issue regulations
in coordination with the National Privacy Commission,
governing the disclosure of client data to a third party.

Clients have the right to review their data to ensure that
inaccurate or deficient data is corrected or amended, refuse
the sharing of their information to a third party and request
the removal of their data from the service provider’s system
if they no longer wish to use the provider's services.

‘

(Financial Consumer Protection Assistance Mechanism —
Each financial service provider must establish a single
consumer assistance mechanism for free assistance to financial
consumers on financial transactions concerns. This shall
include handling of complaints, inquiries and requests.

A financial service provider must provide. clear
information on the actions taken or to be taken on a
complaint, inquiry or request from a financial consumer. In
the case of alleged disputed amount or unauthorized
transactions, a financial service provider, pending the result
of its final investigation report, shall suspend the imposition
of interest, fees or charges, or provide similar reasonable
accommodations to the financial consumer. :

Financial consumers who are unsatisfied with the
financial service provider's handling of their complaints,
inquiries and requests, may elevate their concerns to the
financial regulator which has jurisdiction over the financial
service provider concerned.

(@) Information Security Standards — Financial service
providers shall adopt and implement information ‘security
standards to ensure the safety and protection of the
confidentiality, integrity, availability, authenticity, and non-
repudiation of the client’s information and financial transactions
and to ensure the data privacy, of their clients. The financial
regulators shall prescribe the minimum information security
standards for compliance by all financial service providers.

SEC. 9.\Bundling of Products. - When a financial
consumer is obliged by the financial service provider to
purchase any product, including an insurance policy, as a pre-
condition for availing a financial product or service, the
financial consumer shall have the option to choose the provider
of such product subject to reasonable standards set by the
financial service provider, and this information shall be made
available to the financial consumer.

SEC. 10. Training. — Staff of financial service providers
who deal directly with financial consumers, including those
who are involved in financial consumer protection assistance
mechanism or cybersecurity, must receive adequate training

” ~s.

suitable to the complexity of the financial products or services
they offer. Financial service providers must be qualified as
appropriate for the complexity of the financial product or
service they offer.

SEC. 11. Investment Fraud. - It shall be unlawful-for
any person or persons to commit investment fraud as defined
in this Act. Any person who commits investment fraud shall
be subject to the penalties under Section 73 of Republic Act
No. 8799 and the administrative sanctions under Section 16
of this Act.

SEC. 12. No Waiver of Rights.,- No provision of a
contract for a financial product or service shall be lawful or
enforceable if such provision waives or‘ otherwise deprives a
client of a legal right to sue the financial service provider,
receive information, have their complaints addressed and
resolved, or have their non-public client data protected.

SEC. 13. Liability of a Financial Service Provider on
the Acts or Omissions of its Authorized Representatives. —
The financial service provider shall be responsible for the acts
or omissions of its directors, trustees, officers, employees, or
agents in marketing and transacting with financial consumers
for its financial products or services. The financial service
provider shall be solidarily liable with accredited third-party
gervice providers for their acts or omissions in marketing and
transacting, which may include, but not limited to, debt
collection, with financial consumers for its financial products
and services.

SEC. 14. Prescription. — All actions or claims accruing
under the provisions of this Act, and the rules and regulations
issued pursuant thereto, shall prescribe after five (5) years
from the time the financial consumer transaction was
consummated, or after five (5) years from the discovery of
deceit or nondisclosure of material facts: Provided,, That such
actions shall, in any event, prescribe after ten (10) years from
the commission of the violation: Provided, further, That for
insurance contracts, the prescriptive period for the
commencement of action provided under the Insurance Code
shall apply.

i
i
i
i
ti
j
i
j
i
j
{
i
i
i|
{'.}
i
{
{
i
i
i
iyi

SEC. 15. Penalties. - Any person who willfully violates
this Act or the rules, regulations, orders, or instructions issued
by the financial regulators to implement this Act, shall be
punished by imprisonment of not less than one (1) year, but
not more than five (5) years, or by a fine of not less than
Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) but not more than
Two million pesos (P2,000,000.00), or both, at the discretion
of the court: Provided, That if the violation is committed by
a corporation or a juridical entity, the directors, officers,
employees, or other officers who are directly responsible for
such violation shall be held liable thereto.

SEC. 16. Administrative Sanctions. — Without prejudice
to the enforcement actions prescribed under Section 6(d) of this
Act and the criminal sanctions provided under Section 15 of
this Act, the administrative sanctions of the respective charters
of the financial regulators shall be made applicable to a
financial service provider, its directors, trustees, officers,
employees or agents for violation of this Act or any related
rules, regulations, orders or instructions of financial regulators;
or to any persons found administratively liable for investment
fraud: Provided, That for persons found responsible for
investment fraud, the SEC may impose a fine of no ‘less than
Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) nor more than Ten million
pesos (P10,000,000.00) for each instance of investment fraud
plus not more than Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00) for each
day of continuing violatiop in addition to the other
administrative sanctions under Section 54 of Republic Act
No. 8799: Provided, further, That in case profit is gained or
loss is avoided as a result of the violation of this Act or
investment fraud, a fine not more than three. (3) times the
profit gained or loss avoided may also be imposed by the
financial regulator: Provided, finally, That in addition to the
administrative sanctions that may be imposed, the authority
of the financial service provider to operate in relation to a
particular financial product or service may be suspended or
cancelled by the financial regulator.

SEC. 17. Independent Civil Action. - A financial

regulator, consistent with public interest and protection of
financial consumers, is authorized to institute an independent

” “R

civil action on behalf of aggrieved financial consumers for
violations of this Act and its IRR.

If in any of these proceedings, the financial regulators
obtain a civil penalty against any person or entity, or such
person or entity agrees to settle such civil penalty, the amount
of such civil penalty shall, on the motion of the financial
regulators, be added to and become part of a disgorgement
fund or other fund established for the benefit of the aggrieved
financial consumer.

SEC. 18. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
financial regulators shall prepare the necessary rules and
regulations to implement the provisions of this Act within
one (1) year from its effectivity.

SEC. 19. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, all other provisions not
thereby affected shall remain valid.

SEC. 20. Repealing Clause. — Articles 131 to 147 of Title
IV of Republic Act No. 7394 are hereby repealed. All other
laws, executive orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof
which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or
amended accordingly.

SEC. 21. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

LORD Q. VELASCO VICENTE C. SOTTO III
Speaker ‘of’ the House Presidelat of the Senate

16 5

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
4 Senate Bill No. 2488 on February 2, 2022 and adopted by the

House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill
No. 6768 on Ve ™

MARK LYK : MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA

RODRI'
President of the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES