H. No. 4637

Republic at tye BiyStppios
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Svventeenth Congress
Airst Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand sixteen.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 10926]

AN ACT EXTENDING FOR TWENTY-FIVE (25) YEARS
THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO SMART
COMMUNICATIONS, INC. (FORMERLY SMART
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, INC.), AMENDING
FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7294,
ENTITLED "AN ACT GRANTING SMART
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, INC. (SMART)
A FRANCHISE TO ESTABLISH, MAINTAIN,
LEASE AND OPERATE INTEGRATED
TELECOMMUNICATIONS/COMPUTER/ELECTRONIC
SERVICES, AND STATIONS THROUGHOUT THE
PHILIPPINES FOR PUBLIC DOMESTIC AND
INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES"

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:


SECTION 1. Section 1 of Republic Act No. 7294 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

"SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. —
Subject to the provisions of the Philippine Constitution
and applicable laws, rules and regulations, the
franchise granted to the Smart Communications, Inc.
(‘SMART’, formerly Smart Information Technologies,
Inc.), hereunder referred to as the grantee, its
successors or assignees, to construct, establish,
install, maintain, lease, purchase, operate and carry
on the business of providing telecommunications,
including electronic telecommunications or electronic
communications services throughout the Philippines
and between the Philippines and other countries and
territories, including outer space, as public interest
may warrant, for public domestic and international
telecommunications is hereby extended for
twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of this Act.
For this purpose, the grantee is hereby granted the
right to construct, establish, install, maintain, lease,
purchase and operate the corresponding transmitting
and receiving stations, satellites, lines, systems,
networks, international gateways, local exchanges,
and platforms as it_may consider necessary,
convenient, or reasonab)

"In this Act, the term 'telecommunications'
shall include ‘electronic communications’. In addition,
the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth herein:

" ‘Electronic communications network’ shall
mean: (a) a transmission system for conveyance, by
use of electrical, magnetic or electro-magnetic energy,
of signals of any description; and (b) any of the
following as are used, by the person providing the
system and in association with it, for conveyance of
the signals: (1) apparatus comprised in the system;
(2) apparatus used for the switching and routing of
the signals; and (3) software and stored data.

 

"Electronic communications service' shall mean
a service consisting in, or having as its principal
feature, the conveyance by means of an electronic
communications network of signals. It includes
wired, wireless, fixed, cellular, and/or mobile, or
integrated telecommunications/computer/electronic
services, including value-added services, or
technologies related to such service which are at
present available or made available through
technical advances or innovations in the future,
and fixed and mobile stations."

SEC. 2. Section 4 of Republic Act No. 7294 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

"SEC. 4. Responsibility to the Public. — The
grantee shall conform to the ethics of honest enterprise
and shall not use its stations for obscene or indecent
transmissions, or for the dissemination of deliberately
false information or willful misrepresentation, or
assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

"The grantee shall improve and extend its
services in areas not yet served, and in hazard- and
typhoon-prone areas that shall be determined by the
National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Council in coordination with the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC).

"The grantee shall also improve and upgrade its
equipment, facilities, and services in order to ensure
effective compliance with the objectives of Republic
Act No. 10639 or the ‘Free Mobile Disaster Alerts
Act'."

SEC. 3. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 7294 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

"SEC. 7. Term of Franchise. — The franchise
shall be extended and in effect for a period of
twenty-five (25) years from the date of the effectivity
of this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled.

ame;

Inthe event the grantee fails to operate continuously
for two (2) years, this franchise shall be deemed
ipso facto revoked."

SEC. 4. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 7294 is hereby

nded to read as follows:

"SEC. 8. Acceptance and Compliance. ~
Acceptance of this franchise shall be given in
writing to the Congress of the Philippines, through
the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on
Public Services of the Senate, within sixty (60)
days from the effectivity of this Act. Upon giving
the acceptance, the grantee shall exercise the
privileges granted under this Act. Refusal or

 

effective from the date of the effectivity of this Act:
Provided, That the grantee, its successors or
assignees, shall continue to be liable for income
taxes payable under Title II of the National
Internal Revenue Code pursuant to Section 2 of
Executive Order No. 72 unless the latter enactment
is amended or repealed, in which case the amendment
or repeal shall be applicable thereto.

"The grantee shall file the return with and pay
the tax due thereon to the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue or his duly authorized representative in
accordance with the National Internal Revenue Code
and the return shall be subject to audit by the
Bureau of Internal Revenue."

failure to accept the franchise within the prescribed

period shall render the franchise void." “ SEC, 6. Section 11 of Republic Act No. 7294 is hereby

amended to read as follows:
i
SEC. 5. Section 9 of Republic Act. No. 7294 is hereby

amended to read as follows: "SEC. 11. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Usufruct, or

"Sec. 9. Tax Provisions. — The grantee, its
successors or assi , Shall be liable to pay the
same taxes on their real estate, buildings and
personal property, exclusive of this franchise, as
other persons or corporations which are now or
hereafter may be required by law to pay, except radio
telecommunications and electronic communications
equipment, machinery and spare parts needed in
connection with the business of the grantee which
shall be exempt from customs duties, tariffs and other
taxes, as well as those declared exempt in this section.
In addition thereto, the grantee, its successors or
assignees, shall pay a value-added tax on all gross
receipts of the business transacted under this
franchise by the grantee, its successors or assignees,
in the Philippines, in lieu of any and all taxes of any
kind, nature or description levied, established or
collected by an authority whatsoever including, but
not limited to, city, municipal, provincial or national,
from which the grantee is hereby expressly exempted

Assignment of Franchise. — The grantee shall not
sell, lease, transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign
the franchise herein granted or the rights and
privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal
entity, nor shall transfer the controlling interest of
the grantee, whether as a whole or in parts, and
whether simultaneously or contemporaneously, to
any person, firm, company, corporation or entity
without the prior approval of the Congress of the
Philippines. Any person or entity to which the
franchise herein granted is validly sold, transferred
or assigned shall be subject to the same conditions,
terms, restrictions, and limitations of this Act."

SEC. 7. Section 13 of Republic Act No. 7294 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

"SEC. 18. Listing of Shares. — The grantee
shall list, subject to the requirements of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the stock
exchange concerned, and make a public offering


through the stock exchange of the shares
representing at least thirty per centum (30%) of

its authorized capital stock in any securities
exchange in the Philippines within two (2) years
from the effectivity of this Act, unless the grantee
is wholly owned by a publicly listed company with
at least thirty per centum (30%) of whose authorized
capital stock is publicly owned."

Src. 8. A new Section 14 is hereby inserted after Section
13 of Republic Act No, 7294 to read as follows:

"Spc. 14. Compliance with Labor Standards. —
The grantee, its successors or assignees shall
comply with the applicable labor standards under
existing labor laws, rules and regulations and such
other issuances as may be promulgated by the
Department of Labor and Employment, taking into
consideration the nature and peculiarities of the

SEC. 11. A new Section 16 shall now read as follows:

"SEC. 16. Equality Clause. — Any advantage,
favor, privilege, exemption, or immunity granted
under existing franchises, or which may hereafter
be granted upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and
shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally
to the herein grantee: Provided, That the foregoing
shall neither apply to nor affect provisions of
telecommunications franchises concerning territory
covered by the franchise, the lifespan of the franchise
or the type of service authorized by the franchise."

Sc. 12. A new Section 20 is hereby inserted to read as
follows:

"Sec. 20. Penalty Clause. — Failure of the
grantee to submit the requisite annual report to

telecommunications industry." Congress shall’be penalized by a fine in the amount

of one million pesos (P1,000,000.00) per working

SEC. 9. The present Sections 14, 15 and 16 of Republic Act day of noncompliance, the effectivity of which

No. 7294 are hereby renumbered as Sections 17, 18 and 19, shall commence upon applicability with other
respectively. telecommunications franchise grantees: Provided,

Src. 10. A new Section 15 shall now read as follows:

"SEC. 15. Mobile Number Portability. — The
grantee shall provide Mobile Number Portability
(MNP) to all its subscribers. It shall set up a
mechanism for the purpose of implementing MNP.
It shall interconnect directly or indirectly with the
infrastructure, facilities, systems or equipment of
other telecommunications franchise grantees. It
shall not install network features, functions or
capabilities that will impede the implementation
of a nationwide MNP system. The NTC shall issue
rules and regulations for this purpose, the effectivity
of which shall commence upon applicability with
other telecommunications franchise grantees.”

That in the interim, the grantee shall be liable to
pay the fine of five hundred pesos (P500.00) per
working day of noncompliance. The fine shall be
collected by the NTC from the delinquent franchise
grantee separate from the reportorial penalties
imposed by the NTC and the same shall be
remitted to the National Treasury.”

Src. 13. The present Section 17 of Republic Act No. 7294
is hereby renumbered as Section 21.

Skc. 14. Applicability Clause. — All other provisions of
Republic Act No. 7294 which are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act and remain unrepealed shall continue
to be in full force and effect: Provided, That all pending suits
of whatever kind or nature, whether civil, criminal or
administrative filed by or against the grantee in connection
with the provisions of Republic Act No. 7294 shall continue

 

to be prosecuted under the said law: Provided, further, That
all valid and existing liabilities, fines, penalties, surcharges
and/or unpaid tax assessments of the grantee from
March 27, 1992 until the effectivity of this new law shall
remain valid and enforceable under Republic Act No. 7294.

SEC. 15. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a

newspaper of general circulation.
Approved,
AQUILINO Kees Il PANTALEON D.
President of the Senate Speaker of the e

of Represi

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives
on January 16, 2017, amended by the Senate on March 13, 2017,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on March 14, 2017.

ae

LUTGARDO B. BARBO
Secretary of the Senate

   

iF iA
Secreti ‘al
House of Répresentatives

Approved: apr 21 2017

RODRI ‘A DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 002371