H. No. 8249
S. No. 1527

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Seventeenth Cangress
bird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11218]

AN ACT RECOGNIZING THE BRITISH SCHOOL
MANILA AS AN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF
INTERNATIONAL CHARACTER GRANTING THE
SCHOOL CERTAIN PREROGATIVES CONDUCIVE
TO ITS DEVELOPMENT

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Official Recognition. — The British School
Manila, herein referred to as the “School”, operated by the
British Education, Inc., is hereby declared and officially

recognized as a British international education institution
authorized to operate educational programs that primarily and
principally adhere to universally accepted and recognized
educational policies.

SEC. 2. Governing Body. - The School shall be
governed by a Council of Trustees, herein referred to as
the “Council”, elected in accordance with its corporate
charter.

SEc. 3. Grant of Prerogatives. — To enable the School to
continue carrying out its educational program, improve its
standard of instruction and meet the needs of the foreign
diplomatic and temporary resident community for quality
education, it shall:

(a) Accept applicants for admission, regardless of
nationality, in accordance with its own eligibility standards
and rules for admission and grade placement, the School
having been established primarily for foreign diplomatic
personnel and their dependents and for other temporary
residents, and as such the School is covered by the
exemptions provided in Section 4(2), Article XIV of the
Constitution of the Philippines;

(b) Be managed and administered by a Head of
School, who shall possess the qualifications prescribed
by the Council;

(© Upon consultation with the Secretary of the
Department of Education (DepEd), determine its own
curriculum, calendar of studies and work schedule, teach
whatever language or languages it may deem proper, and
determine the amount of fees and assessments which may
be reasonably imposed upon its students to maintain and
conform to the School’s standard of education;

(d) Maintain standards of education compatible with
those obtaining in similar schools of generally recognized
international standing;

© Employ its own teaching and management
personnel selected by the Council either locally or abroad,
from the Philippines or other nationalities, such foreign
personnel being exempt from laws and regulations that impose
nationality restrictions on employment, and control the
administration of educational institutions, except laws that
have been or will be enacted for the protection of employees:
Provided, That such exception shall not be extended to
their liability for income taxes; and

@) Benefit from privileges under the law to nonstock,
nonprofit educational institutions.

SEC. 4. Supervision and Regulation of the Department of
Education. — Notwithstanding the recognition and
prerogatives under this Act, the British School Manila
shall be under the supervision and regulation of the
DepEd and shall adhere to basic laws, and rules and
regulations of the DepEd governing international or
foreign schools.

Sec. 5. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
DepEd Secretary shall issue such rules as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 6. Separability Clause. — If any clause, sentence,
paragraph or part of this Act is subsequently declared
unconstitutional, the validity of the remaining provisions
hereof shall remain in full force and effect.

 

SEC. 7. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

  

Cs

VICENTE C. SOTTOTL GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act was passed by the House of Representatives
as House Bill No. 8249 on November 20, 2018 and adopted
by the Senate as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 1527 on
November 28, 2018.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA DANT# ROB Q P. MALING
Secretary of the Senate ing Sdcretary General

  

Approved: FEB 1 4 201%

?
‘
L

 

RODRI ule DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 009294

Krk m4.