H. No. 9941
é :
Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metre Manila
Highteenth Congress
Third Regular Sesston

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 1778]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A TECHNOLOGY VERIFICATION
STATION WITH TILAPIA AND FRESHWATER
PRAWN HATCHERIES IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF
STO. DOMINGO, PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: .

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the
supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
of the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a technology
verification station with tilapia and freshwater prawn
hatcheries in the Municipality of Sto. Domingo, Province of
Nueva Ecija. -

Sec. 2. Prior to the establishment of the technology
verification station with tilapia and freshwater prawn
hatcheries, the BFAR-DA shall conduct a full-scale feasibility
study in support of its construction to comply with the
requirements of the Department of Budget and Management.

Within two (2) years after the construction of the
technology verification station with tilapia and freshwater
prawn hatcheries, the BFAR-DA, through a memorandum of
agreement, shall transfer its management to the local
government of the Municipality of Sto. Domingo. It shall
implement a training and phasing-in program for local
government personnel on the management and operation of
the technology verification station and hatcheries.

SEc. 3. The BFAR-DA shall conduct continuing research
and experimentation on the breeding and production of tilapia
and freshwater prawn species, especially as they apply to local
conditions, to discover new methods and technologies that will
enhance the fishing industry.

Sec. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include
in the Department’s programs the conduct of the feasibility
study and the consequent establishment of the technology
verification station with tilapia arid.freshwater prawn
hatcheries in the Municipality of Sto. Domingo, Province
of Nueva Ecija, the funding of which shall be included
in the General Appropriations Act. The local government
unit concerned shall set aside funds from any available
local revenue in an amount deemed appropriate for the
operationalization of the technology verification station
and hatcheries.

SEc. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity
of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the
rules and regulations on the supervision, operation,
monitoring, and the eventual transfer of the technology
verification station and hatcheries to the local government
of the Municipality of Sto. Domingo.

 

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

    
  
 

VICEN iC. SOTTO I LORD ALL, YY Q. VELASCO
the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on September 14, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MARK
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: MAY 27 2022

sad POO AbieS AW 01d oo cece ene

without the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article V7
Section 27 (1) af the Constitution

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines.

OW.

Pee bins ——