H. No. 7927

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Hightoenth Congress
Dhird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

‘LREPUBLIC Act No. 11645]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A HERITAGE ZONE WITHIN
THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN VICENTE, PROVINCE
OF ILOCOS SUR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. A Heritage Zone, as defined and provided for
by Article II, Section 3(q) and Article IV, Sections 12 and 13 of
Republic Act (R.A.) No. 10066, otherwise known as the “National
Cultural Heritage Act of 2009,” is hereby established within the
Municipality of San Vicente, Province of Ilocos Sur in order to
protect the historical and cultural integrity of the area.

The Heritage Zone shall include the cultural properties
declared as National Cultural Treasures and Important Cultural
Properties as well as National Historical Landmarks, Shrines,
Monuments, and Sites, and such other immovable, movable or

intangible cultural properties whether publicly or privately owned,
as may be designated for inclusion therein by the National
Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) and its affiliated
cultural agencies, in coordination with the Municipality of San
Vicente, ocos Sur and other concerned agencies and government
entities.

The Department of Tourism (DOT), in coordination with
the Province of Ilocos Sur, the Municipality of San Vicente, Ilocos
Sur, and the NCCA and its affiliated cultural agencies, shall
immediately prepare the development plan involving the
preservation, conservation, restoration, and maintenance of
cultural and historical sites and structures for the enhancement
and sustainability of tourism in San Vicente, Ilocos Sur: Provided,
That the NCCA shall approve only those methods and materials
that strictly adhere to the accepted international standards of
conservation in undertaking conservation and restoration works,
as provided for in Section 15 of R.A. 10066.

Within the period of one (1) year from the effectivity of this
Act, the Municipality of San Vicente, Ilocos Sur shall pass a
municipal ordinance to operationalize appropriately the
management of its Heritage Zone, including all the cultural
properties designated as intrinsic thereto, in accordance with the
development plan and in line with the objectives and provisions of
R.A.10066 and this Act. The ordinance shall likewise include the
metes and bounds of the Heritage Zone established pursuant to
this Act. .

SEC. 2. The preservation, protection, study, and promotion
of the cultural and historical integrity of the geographical area
represented by the Heritage Zone shall receive priority development
attention, assistance, and funding from the NCCA and its affiliated
cultural agencies, and from the DOT and its attached agencies,
subject to existing appropriate government rules and regulations.

SEc. 3. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the DOT, in coordination with the Municipality of San Vicente,
Tlocos Sur, the NCCA, and concerned cultural agencies of the
government, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations
for the proper implementation of this Act.

 

Sec. 4. If any provision of this Act is declared
unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act or any provision not
affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SEc. 5. All laws, executive orders, presidential decrees,
proclamations, rules, regulations, issuances, and enactments or
parts thereof inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or
modified accordingly.

SEc. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

 

of Representatives

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on December 2, 2020,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on September 27, 2021,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on November 23, 2021.

   
 

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: JAN 14 2022

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of t Philippines ch the Present ~ |
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

   

FRRD 2016 - 019727