H. No. 5558

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Srreuteentl Congress

Chirk Regular Seasinn
ae

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

 

wo. 11412]

  

 

» Senate and House of Representatives of the
suewmbived
S ASST

 

   
 
   
 

nd Seope of Franchise. — Subject
to the p constitution and applicable laws,
rules
Nation Network Inc
its SUCCESSO.
establish, o
in the publ

  
 

creunder referred to as the grantee,
a franchise to construct, install,
ntain for commercial purposes and

stations throughout the Philippines, where frequencies and/or
channels are still available for radio and/or television
broadcasting, including digital television system, through
microwave, satellite or whatever means, including the use

of any new technology in television and radio systems,
with the corresponding technological auxiliaries and facilities,
special broadcast and other program and distribution servi
and relay stations.

   

SEc. 2. Manner of ©;
The stations or facilities of the
operated in a manner as will, at most
interference on the wavelengths or freqx
or other stations which may be j 5
any way diminishing its rivilege to use its assigned
wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission ox
reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantee’s
services and/or the availability t of.

 
 
  
  

 

ations or Bf s
all be constructed and
tonly in the minimum

1 stations

    

 

 

  
  

SEC. 3. Prior
Telecommunications
secure from the Nati
(NTC), the appropriate permits and licen
construction and operation of its stations or f:
shall not use any frequency in the radio/television spe
without authorization from the NEC. The NTC, however,
shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of any
such authority.

  

 

     

   
 

 

 

The grantee shall not dispose or lease its faciliti
except to entities with radio or telev n broadcasting
franchise: Provided, That the grantee shall inform and secure
written authorization to proceed from the NTC, and report
the transaction to the NTC within sixty (60) days after its
completion: Provided, further, That the NTC shall determine
the corresponding sanction for any violation of this provision.

 

 

 

 

SEC. 4. Responsibility to the Public. ~ The grantee
shall ‘provide, free of charge, adequate public service time
which is reasonable and sufficient to enable the government,
through the broadcasting stations or facilities of the
grantee, to reach the pertinent populations or portions thereof,
on important public issues and relay important public
announcements and warnings concerning public emergencies
and calamities, as necessity, urgency or law may require;
provide at all times sound and balanced programming;
promote public participation; assist in the functions of public
information and education; conform to the ethics of honest

enterprise; promote audience sensibility and empowerment
including closed captioning; and not use its stations or facilities
for the boradcasting of obscene or indecent language, speech, act,
or scene; or for the dissemination of deliberately false information
or willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of the public
interest; or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or
treasonable acts.

Public service time referred herein shall be equivalent
to a maximum aggregate of ten percent (10%) of paid
commercials or advertisements which shall be allocated
based on need to the Executive and Legislative branches,
the Judiciary, Constitutional Commissions and international
humanitarian organizations duly recognized by statutes:
Provided, That the NTC shall increase the public service
time in case of extreme emergency or calamity. The NTC shall
issue rules and regulations for this purpose, the effectivity
of which shall commence upon applicability with other

y situated broadcast network franchise holders.

   

 

    

 

SeC.5. Right of the Government. — The radio
1 is a finite resource that is part of the national
ny and the use thereof is a privilege conferred upon

grantee by the State and may be withdrawn any time

 

  
 

 

 

 

  
  
 
 
  
 

  

y reserved to the President of
iihppines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril,
calamity, emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and
order: to temporarily take over and operate the stations or
facilities of the grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation

tation or fa y in the interest of public safety,
‘and public welfare; or to authorize the temporary
d operation thereof by eny agency of the government,
e grantee, for the use of the
od when these shall be so

special sight is

 

 

 

 

  
   
 
 
 
 

 

  

 

operated.

SEe

   

. 6. Ferm of F: ~ This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years, unless sooner
revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto
revoked in the event the grantee fails to comply with any of the
following conditions:

be

(a) Commence operations within one (1} year from the
approval of its operating permit by the NTC:

 

(b) Commence operations w 1 three (3) vears from

the effectivity of this Act; and

 
 

(c) Operate continuous);

Sec. 7. Bond. — The grantee shall file a bond with
the NTC, in the amount that NTC shall det i
to guarantee compliance wit d fulfillment
conditions under which this franchi granted. lf, afte
(3) years from the date of the approval of its pe
the NTC, the grantee shall have ful
shall be released by the NTC. Other
forfeited in favor of the government an
revoked.

  
  
  

  
  
     
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
      

censorship of any speech, glay
matter to be broadcast from
play, act or scene, or other matt
of the law or infringement
shall be free from any Habili
speech, play, act or scene, or ot}
grantee, during any broadcast, shall cut off the airing of
speech, play, act or scene, or other matter being broadcast
if the tendency thereof is to propose and/ur incite treason,
rebellion or sedition; or the language used therein or the theme
thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided, further, That willful
failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause for the revocation
or cancellation of this franchise.

 

matter: Provided, That the

 

_Sec. 9. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The grantee shall hold the, national,
provincial, city, and municipal governments of the Philippines
free from all claims, liabilities, demands, or actions arising
out of accidents causing injury to persons or damage to
properties during the construction or operation of the stations
of the grantee.

SEC. 10. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. — The grantee shall
create employment opportunities and shall allow on-the-job
trainings in their franchise operation: Provided, That priority
shall be accorded to the residents where their principal office
is located: Provided, further, That the grantee shall follow
the applicable labor standards and allowance entitlement
under existing labor laws, rules and regulations and similar
issuances: Provided, finally, That the employment opportunities
or jobs created shall be reflected in the General Information
Sheet (GIS)-to be submitted to the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) annually.

 

 

Src. 11. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct,
or Assignmeni of Franchise. ~ The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise
or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person,
firm, company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity,
nor merge with any other corporation or entity, nor the controlling
interest of the grantee be transferred, simultaneously or
contemporaneously, to any such person, firm, company,
corporation, or entity without the prior approval of the
Congress of the Philippines. Congress shall be informed of any
sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or assignment of franch
or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder, or of the merger
or transfer of the controlling interest of the grantee, within sixty
(60) days after the completion of the said transaction. Failure
to report to Congress such change of ownership shall
render the franchise tpso facto revoked. Any person or entity to
which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be
subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.

  

SEC. 12. Dispersal of Ownership. ~— In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation
in public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens
at least thirty percent (30%) or a higher percentage that may
hereafter be provided by law of its outstanding capital stock
in any securities exchange in the Philippines within five
(5) years from the commencement of its operations: Provided,
That in cases where public offer of shares is not applicable, the
grantee shall apply other methods of encouraging public

participation by citizens and corporations operating public utilities
as allowed by law. Noncompliance therewith shall render the
franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 13. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate, on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations on or before
April 30 of every year during the term of its franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the roll-out,
development, operation and/or expansion of business; audited
financial statements; latest GIS officially submitted to the SEC,
if applicable; certification of the NTC on the status of its permits
and operations; and an. update on the dispersal of ownership
undertaking, if applicable.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress

shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

 

SeC. 14. Fine. ~ Failure of the grantee to submit the
requisi sport to Congress shall be penalized by a
fine of undred pesos (P5U0.00) per working day of
ance. The fin all be collected by the NTC from the
at franchise grantee separate from the r
imposed by the NTC and the same shall be re
the National Treasury.

 
 
 
 
  
  

   
  

     
   
  

i

Sec Equality Clause. — Except for taxes and
ms duties, any advantage, favor, privilege, exemption,
or immunity granted under existing franchises, or which
may hereafter be granted for radio and/or television
breadeasting, upon prior review and approval of Congress,
shail become part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein grantee:
Provided, That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor
affect the provisions of broadcasting franchises concerning
territorial coverage, the term, or the type of service authorized
by the franchise.

     

 

 

 
 
 

Src. 16. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections
or provisions of this Act are held invalid, all other provisions
not affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 17. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —
This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration,
or repeal by the Congress of the Philippines when the public
interest so requires and shall not be interpreted as an
exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided.

SEC. 18. Repealing Clause. — Alllaws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations or parts or provisions thereof
which are not consistent with this Act are hereby repealed,
amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 19. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazetie or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

   
    
 

VICENTE G. SOTTO II GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO
President of the Senate weaker of the House
of Representatives

  

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on May 29, 2019.

Pasavea ARIE D. VILLARICA DATE ROBE
Secretary of the Senate “Acting Secr

      

y MALING
*y General

  

House of Representatives

Approved: aug 22 2048