S. No: 1766
H. No. 7525

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Seventeenth Congress

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

{ Repusiic Acr No. 11164]

AN ACT INCREASING THE MONTHLY OLD-AGE
PENSION OF SENIOR VETERANS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

_ SECTION 1. For purposes of this Act, Senior Veterans
refer to the veterans of World War II, Korean and Vietnam
wars.

SEC. 2. Increase in Old-Age Pension of Senior Veterans.
— The old-age pension of veterans of World War IJ, Korean
and Vietnam wars shall be increased to Twenty thousand pesos
(P20,000.00) per month: Provided, That the veterans of Korean
and Vietnam wars are not receiving pension from the Armed
Forces of the Philippines (AFP): Provided, further, That the
entitlement to the increase in old-age pension shall be limited

to the eligible living senior veterans and shall not be
transferable to any family members and/or dependents of the
senior veterans.

SEC. 3. Funding. — In order to augment the amount
needed to fund the increase in the old-age pension as provided
in this Act, the amount necessary for the initial
implementation shall be charged agairist the current year’s
available appropriation of the Philippine Veterans Affairs Office
(PVAO). Thereafter, such sums as may be needed for the
continued implementation of this Act shall be included in the
annual General Appropriations Act: Provided, That the PVAO
shall prioritize the distribution of the benefits granted under
this Act from whatever available appropriation that will be
included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 4. Repealing Clause. — All existing laws or parts
thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. Effectivity Clause. — This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in at least two (2) national newspapers of general

circulation.
/ j /
/ i

GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO = VICENTE C./SOTTO Ill
Speaker of the House President ofthe Senate
of Representatives

Approved,

 

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines
as Senate Bill No. 1766 on October 8, 2018 and adopted by
the House of Representatives as an amendment to House
Bill No. 7525 on October 10, 2018.

  
 

  

DANTE R bsexfo) P. MALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Acting afty General Secretary of the Senate
Houge of Representatives

Approved: DEC 2 6 2098

     

RODRIGE DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

Oo

PRRD 2016 - 008779

 

/-p 104