H. No. 9179

Republic of the Philippines ,
Gangress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Season

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11858}

t

AN ACT CONVERTING THE SOLANA EXTENSION CAMPUS
OF THE CAGAYAN STATE UNIVERSITY IN THE
MUNICIPALITY OF SOLANA, PROVINCE OF
CAGAYAN, INTO A REGULAR CAMPUS OF THE
CAGAYAN STATE UNIVERSITY, TO BE KNOWN AS
THE “CAGAYAN STATE UNIVERSITY-SOLANA
CAMPUS”, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1, This Act shall be known as the “Cagayan State
University (CSU)-Solana Campus Act”.

SEC. 2. The Solana Extension Campus of the CSU located
in the Municipality of Solana, Province of Cagayan, is hereby

converted into a regular campus, to be known as the CSU-Solana
Campus.

SEc. 3. The CSU-Solana Campus shall primarily provide
short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate
courses within its areas of competency and specialization,
pursuant to the mandate of the CSU, and according to its
capability, as the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, may deem necessary to respond to the human resources
development needs of the Province of Cagayan and Region II. Itis
also mandated to undertake research and extension services and
to provide progressive leadership in these areas.

Src. 4. The CSU-Solana Campus shall be headed by a
Campus Administrator who shall be appointed by the Board,
subject to its guidelines on qualifications and standards, and based
on the recommendation of a search committee duly constituted
for the purpose of selecting the Campus Administrator.

Src. 5. The CSU shall ensure that the minimum
requirements of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED)
for the operation of the CSU-Solana Campus, including those
related to its course offerings, are fully complied with.

Sec. 6. All assets, both real and personal, personnel, and
records of the Solana Extension Campus of the CSU, as well as
its liabilities or obligations, shall be transferred to the CSU. The
positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members and.
personnel therein employed under existing laws prior to its
conversion into a regular campus shall be respected:

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied.
by the Solana Extension Campus of the CSU shall be transferred
tothe CSU: Provided, That should the CSU-Solana Campus or
the CSU cease to exist or be abolished, or should such
aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed by the CSU,
the same shall revert to the local government unit concerned or
to the Republic of the Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 7. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997’, shall
form part of this Act.

SEc. 8. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations
Act (GAA).

The Municipality of Solana shall continue to fund the
operation and maintenance of the CSU-Solana Campus potil such
time that the amount needed to carry out the provisions of this
Act shall be included in the annual GAA.

SEC. 9. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Board shall, in consultation with the CHED, issue the

rules and regulations to fully implement the provisions of
this Act.

SEc. 10. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

Sc. 11. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules, and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 12. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation.

Approved,

  

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on May 25, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA. MARK’ Uy
Secretary of the Senate

  
 

Approved:

 

 

ceten 21 (A) ef the ‘Camstiiation
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

t oO