|

 

Repub af the Pippin
Gangesss of the Philippinen
Bis Brite
Fighterstth Cangreas
Hees Regulus Sosstins

Begun ond hetd in Metre Manda, on Monday, tha cverty-teventh “6
day of July, two thousand twanty,

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 115547

AN ACT CONVERTING THE BASILAN STATE COLLEGE
(BASSO) IN THE CITY OF ISABELA, PROVINCE OF
.BASTLAN INTO A STATE UNIVERSITY, TO BE
ENOWN AS THE BASILAN @TATE UNTVEESITY
(RASS), ANT: APPROPREATING FUNDS THEREROR

Ba it anacted by the Senoie ond Borne of Representatives oy tit
Pbtipp ines it Compre axsombvad:

SECTION 1. Conversion, - The Basiian Stata Collewe
im the Gidy of leabela, Provinces of Basilan, including ita
Sttension campusce in the mmmuicipalitien of Tipe-Tipo and.
Maluso and the sities of Lamitan and Jembala, afl kecgted in
Proviace of Basilan in hereby rontaried to a ey
university, to be known aa the Baeiinn State University ASS I.
fts tain campus cial? be located in Barangay Sumagdang,

City.

Sec. 2. General Mandate. — The BASSI shall primarily
pe Side advanced education, higher technological, professional
arti vocational courses, and training in arta and sciences,
adltation, agriculture and industrial ficlds, management,
criminology, maritime, medical education, legal education,
ncMiraditional courses and other relevant fields of aturty,
ast Yell aa short-term technical or vorational courses. It ahall alao
urfrtake research and extenaion services and production
acttrities, in support of the aocieaconomie development of the
Prewines of Bamlan and Region 1X

Sac. 3. Curricular Offerings. — The BASSO shall offer
shutt-term technical-yoentionsl, undergraduate, and graduate
oritses within its areas of competency and specialization in
thefields of arte and sciences, teacher education, engineering,
eciimee and technology, information and communications
technology, management and accountancy, medical education,
Jeg education, tourism, maritime education, criminology,
ard other relevant fielda of study, 1s the Board of Regents
may deem necessary for the accomplishment of ita objectives,
amd those which respond to meet the human regource
dewlopment needs of the Province of Basilan and Region Lt

The existing and any other future technical-vocational
Courses or programs under the superviaion of the Technical
Edeestion and Skille Development Authority (TESDA) shall
remain and comtinue to be offered within the campuses of
the BASSU.

The existing reasonably sized laboratory senior high
echeol anit elementary achool shall continue to operate under
the supervision of the College of Education of the BASSU to
serve the In-campus requirements of tte students.

SEC. 4. Administration. — The BASSU shall have
the general powers of a corporation set forth in Batas Fambanea
Big. 68, a5 amended, otherwise known a5" The Corporation Code
af the Philippines.” The exercise of tta corporate powers hall be
veated exclusively in the Board of Regents, horeinafter referred ta
a6 the Board, and the President of the BASSU.

SBC. 6. The Governing Board, - The governing body of
the BASSU shall la Go Boal. has ata to Ghd cea
cochaired by the Chairperson of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED) and the President of the BASSU, respectively,
ond with the following 2s members:

(a) Chairperaon cf the Committee on Higher, Technical
and Vocational Education of the Senate:

) Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and
‘Technical Education of the House of Representatives:

{ce} Regional Dirsetor of the National Economic and
Development Authority;

() Regional Director of the Department of Science and
Technology;

(e) Regional Director of the TESDA:
@ Regional Director of the Department of Agricultura:

@ President of the federation of faculty associations
BASSU;

of the

ih) President of the federation of etudent couneile of the
BASS;

i) President of the federation of alumni essociations
the BARST: and =

G) ‘Two (2) promiment citizens from the private sector
who have distinguished themselves in their professions or
fields of gperialization.

The Board shall appoint two (2) prominent citizens who
shall be selected from a list of at least five (5) qualified
bersons in the Province of Basilan where the BASSU and its
CHnplaes are located, a4 recommended by a search committer
constituted by the President of the BASSU, in conaultation with

(Es Chairperson of the CHED end other membersof the Board,
ested on the standards end qualifications for the position sat
beyths Board. They shall serve for o term of two (2) years from
tidate of appeintment.

The membership of the President of the federation of
feaulty associations, the President of the federation of student
cemneila, and the President of the federation of alumni
aGociations in the Hoard ghall be coterminous with their
eames of office, aa provided under their respective conativations
ami bylaws.

SEC. 6; Powers and Duties of the Board of Regents. -
Teiaddition to its general powers of administration and the
powers granted to the board of directors of a corporation
wader existing laws, the Board ahall have the inllowing apecific
powers and duties:

jo) Promulgate and implement policies in acoordancs
with the declared State policies on education, other pertinent
prvisions of the Constitution on education, agriculture,
acience and technology, and the policics, standards and thrusts
of the CHED under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise known
gethe “Higher Education Act of 1994";

(b) Approve the curricula, instructional programa, and
rules of discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic
Councils herein provided;

{e} sAppoint, upon the recommendation of the President
of the BASSU, the vice presidents, deans, directors, honda of
the campuses, faculty membera, and otber officials and
exiployeee of the BASSU;

(@) Fix and adjust the salariea of faculty members,
adminiatrative officiala and employees, gubject te the
provisions of the Revised Companaation and Position
Classification System and other pertinent budget and
compensation laws governing hours of aervice, and auch
other duties and conditions aa it may deem proper; grant

a

them, at its distretion, leaves of abeence undar auch regulations
as it may promulgate, any provision of existing law to the
comtrary notwithstanding; and remove them for cause in
accordance with the requirements of due process of law:

() Fix the tuition feea and other necessary school
charges, auch as matriculation fece, graduation fees and
laboratory fees, as the Board may deem proper to impone,
after due consultation with the concerned seetora. The foes
and charges, including government subsidies and other
income generated by the BASSU, shall constitute ita special
truat funda, and shall be deposited in any authorized
government depository bank. All interests that ahall accrue
therefrom shall form part of the samo funda for the uso of
the BASSLI.

Any provision of oxiating laws, rules or regulations to
the contrary notwithstanding, any income generated by the
BASSU from tuition free and other charges, as well aa from
the operation of auxiliary services and land grants, shall
be retained by the BASSU and may be disbursed by the
Board for instruction, research, extenaion services or other
programs and projects of the BASSU: Provided, That all
fideciary fees shall be disbursed for the apecific purposes
for which these are collected: Provided, however, That if,
for reasons beyond its control, the BASSU shall not be able
ta pursue any project for which the funde have been
appropriated and allocated under ite approved program
of expenditures, the Hoard may authorize the use of said
funds for any reasonable purpose which, in its discretion,
may he necegeary and urgent for the attainment of the
objectives snd goala of the BASSU:

(f Adopt and implement a socialised achome of tuition
and other school fees fir greater acceas of poor but deserving
students in accordance with Republic Act No. 10991 or
the “Universal Access to Quality Tartiary Eduention Act”:

(g) Establish profeasorin] chairs in the BASSU and
provide followahips for qualified faculty members, and
scholarships to deserving students;

fh) Receive aod appropriate guna ee maz be provited
by law for the support of che BASSU, and all other sume in
fhe mazoer ft ay, in ite di determine to carry oui
the purpoees sued functions ofthe BABE:

@ Get the policies om adniiewion aad graduation of

) Recablizh research and extension centers to promote
the development af the BASS:

@ Develop academic arcangements far inetixticnal
capability building with appropriate institudious and
Agencies, whether public, privata, kooal and foreign, and
appoint exparte/spedialiata an consultents, peet-tima of
“Wiitingfechange professor, scholars or renearchery, an the
un may he: '

ira) Adopt madera and innovativy modes of eanenithing
Ireontedge for the promotion of gyember scceas to education auch
athe te of inform ation technology, dus] training ayetem, open.
dimen learning, and community leboratery:

(oF Collaborate with the goreruing bodine of ather state
uunverdities and collages within the Province of Basile and
Region IX, under the suparvision of tha CHRD and in

with the Departineni of Badget and Management
(DEM), in reotructuring the BASAT to make it mows efficient.
ebbvant, productive and compatitive:

@) Abeorh nenchartered tertimry inatituiiooes within
th: Provinces of Bagilan and Eegioa TE as bragcbes and
FTingionexternal otere, in coordinating with the CHED

FL

oe

mate

a

SOUT

t

and in consultation with the DBM, and offer thensin programa
OF POUFGeE te Carry qué the conntitutional mandate of
Providing equal secean in educational opportmndties;

@ Develop conportia and cthar economia formes of
Hnkagea ith local government vite G0), am well at
public, private, local and fireign, inetitutions and agencica,
in the furtherance of the purposen nad chjuatives of the RASGUF,

& import sounnuic, technical, and cultural bovks and
peblicationr

®) Bouter into jedut ventures with busineus and i
for the profitable developuommt and mamaganat of setsigenic
assets, the proceads of which aba] ba aed for tha development
and strengthenlag of the RASST: :

i Hecstve, in tract, legacies, yifta ad donations of
real and persoaal properties of all kinds and administer and
dispose of the muge, whey Decesaary, for the benefit of the

ic) Extend the term of the Fronident of the BASST
hayond the age of retirement but ot beyond the age of
seventy (TO), based on the guidelines, qualifications and
standards act by tho Board: Provided, That tha Preadent’s
Parformance has bean rated by the Board ap cutatanding
and 2 Unanimous recommendation for auch etteoson hasbeen
decided upon by the ewsrch committer:

fe} Delegate any ef ite powers and duties provided to the

President and other officinks of the BASSI, ac it may doom

sporopritie, bo a6 to expedite the adminintration of the alfaite
the BASU

_&) Establish policy guidelines and procedures for

Bilding ereae OF Property maintenance, and such other

® Authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,

Y, equipment and other facilities, and the Purchase

aad acquisition of real property, including the necessary
= plies, materials and equipment; and

@) Promulgate rules and regulations, aa may be
Geeeesary, to carry out the purposesand functions ofthe BASSU.

SEC, 7, Meetings of the Bocrd. — The Board aluall
cotrene once every three (3) moaths, The Chairperson of the Board
mut, however, call a special meeting whenever necessary:
Provided, That members are notified in writing st leaat three (3)
days prior to the conduct of said meeting.

, A quorum of the Board shall consist of majority of all
ite: members holding office at the time of the’ meating:
Provided, however, That the Chairpereon of the Board or the
President of the BASSU is among those present in the meeting.

mietting of tee agen Peren of the CHED cannot attend a
Board, a 1D Commissioner, duly designated
by the ree a dep of the CHED 2s representative to the
meeting, a have all the rights and responsibilities of a
regular member: Provided, That during the meeting, the
President of the BASS, as Vice Chairperson, shall be the
presiding officer: Provided, further, That this provision
notwithstanding, the Chairperson of the CHED is hereby
authorized to designate a CHED Commissioner as the regular
Chairperson of the Board, in which case, the said CHED
Commissioner shall act as the preaiding officer,

Tn case the Chairpersons of the Sonate Committee on
Higher, Technical and Vocational Education and the Howse

Committee on Higher and Technical Education will not be
able to attend the Hourd meeting, they may designate their
respective representatives to attend the meeting. who shall
have the same rights acd responsibilities as regular members
of the Board_

The membera of the Board ehall not receive any salary,
but shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and
hecensary expendes incurred, ither for their attendance to
the meetings of the Board or in connection with other official
business authorized by resolutions of the Board, subject to
woneting laws and regulotions.

SEC, 8. The University President. - The HASSU shall
be headed by a President, who ehall render full-time service
and is appointed by the Board, subject to the guidelines,
qualifications and standards set by the Board, based on the
recommendation of a duly constituted search committer. The
BASSU President shall have a term of four (4) yeara and
shall be eligible for reappointment to another term: Provided,
That in order to effect the smooth transition of the college to
a state university, the incumbent President of the BASSC,
if qualified, shall serve as the firat Preaident of the BASS,

Within six (G) months before the expiration of the term of
tdfice of the incumbent President of the RASSU, the Hoard shall
constitute the Search Committee for the Presidency,

The Board ghall designate an Officerin-Charge of the
BASS in case of « vacancy in the Office of the President by
reason of death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal
for cause, or incapacity of the President to perform the
functions of the office, pending the appointment of a new
President: Prowded, That the Officer-in-Charge shall aerye
only during the unexpired portion of the term.

The powers and duties of the President of the BASSU,
in addition to thoee specifically provided in this Act, ahall be
thoae ueually pertaining to the Office of the President of
similar universities and thoar delegated by the Board.

1d.

The salary of the President of the BASSI ehall be in
«cordance with Republic Act No. 11466 of the “Salary
dization Law of 2019", and by such other lawa

The President of the BASST shall be tasisted by a Vice
President for Academie Affaire, a Viet President for
ini ion, and a Vice President for Research, Development
znd Extension, who chal] all be appointed by the Board upon
Tetommandation of the President of the BASSU.
i

SEC. 8. The Seeretary of the University. = The Board
alll appoint a Secretary who ghall serve aa such for both
th Board and the HASSU and shall keep all recorde and
paceedinge of meetings of the Board. The Secretary of the
BASSU shall serve upon each member of the Board the
aP\rupriate notice of board meetings,

SEC. 10. The Treacurer af the University, — The
Treiurer of the Philippines shall be the ex officia Treasurer
of the BASST.

SEC. 11. The Administrative Council, ~ There Bhall
be se Administrative Council consisting of the President
of ths BASSU as chairperson, and the vice presidents, deans,
directora and other officials of equal rank as members, that
shall review and recommend to the Board the policies that
shall govern the administration, Management and development
planning if the BASSU,

SEC. 12. The Academie Counejl. — There ¢hall be an
Academic Council that shall formulate academic policies,
It shall be composed of the President of the BASSU, who shall
act as chairperson, and all academic staff with the rank of
at least an sasistant Professcr, sa members,

The Academie Council shall alao have the power to
review and recommend the curricular offerings and rules of

HB

discipline of the BASSI, subject to the approval of the Board.
Tt shall fix the requirements for the admisaion of studenta,
aa well as for their graduation and confarment of degrees,
subject to the review and approval of the Board through the
President of the BASSU.

Tt ahall have disciplinary power over the etudenta of the
BASSU and hall formulate rules and regulations on atudent
discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

Sec. 13, Heads of University Campuses. — The Campus
i shall respectively carve as heads or administrators
ofthe BASSU's campuses and render full-time service.

They shall be appointed or designated by the Board,
upon recommendation of the search committes and the
President, subject to the @uidelines, qualifications and
standards set by the Board: Pravided, That, upon the
effectivity of this Act, the incumbent Campus Directors of
the existing campuses of the RASSC shall continue to Herve
as such.

SEC. 14. The Foewlty. — No political belief, Bender
preference, cultural or community affiliation or ethnic
origin, nor religious opinion or affiliation shall be a matter
of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members of the
‘BASSU: Provided, That aaid appointment ahall be subject
to the guidelines, qualifications and standards set by the
Board: Provided, further, That no member of the faculty ahall
beach figr of againat any particular church or religiona sect,

SEC. 15. Academic: Freedom and Institutional Autonomy,
~The BASSU shall enjoy academic freedom and institrtional
autonomy pursuant to Paragraph 2, Section 5 of Article KIV
of the Constitirtion.

Sec. 16. Scholarship Programs ane Admission, — The
BASSU shall provide acholarship and other affirmative action
Programa to assist poor but deserving altudenta who qualify for
admisaion to the BASS.


No student shall be denied admission to the BASSU hy
r@eon of gender, religion, cultural, political or mm unity
a eae at

BEC. 17, Authority to Loan or Transfer Apporatus,

at, Supplies and Detar! of Personnel. — The heada

othe bureaus and offices of the national government are

hevhy authorized to loan or tranafer, upon the request of

tk President of the BASSU, such apparatus, equipment or

stuplica as may be needed by the BASSU, and detail

exmployees for duty therein when, in the judgment of the

ued of bureau or office, such apparatue, equipment, supplies

or ervice of such emplpyees can be spared without serious
dhetiment to public service.

The employees eo detailed shall perform euch dutica as
re«sired of them by the Preaident of the BASSU and the time
thewaerved ahall be counted as part of their regular service.

85C. 16, Assets, Liabilities and Personnel. — All aeseta,
realand personal, personnel, and reeords of the BASSC as
wel aa ite Liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred
to the BASSU: Provided, That the positions, righta, and
security of tenure of faculty membera and personnel therein
emgleyed under existing laws prior to the conversion to a
unwersity shall be respected: Provided, further, That the
incunbemts occupying the positions shall remain in the
Sum: statue until otherwise provided for by the Hoard: Provided,
fércally, That the BASSU shall also accordingly upgrade or
inctase ite human resource component as may be deemed

appropriate by the Board.

All parcels of land belonging to the government
occupied by the BASSC and all ita campuses are hereby
dechred property of the BASSU, and shall be tithed under its
name: Provided, That should the BASS cease to exist or be
abolished, or should such aforementioned parcels of land be
no longer needed by the BASSU, the same ahall revert to
the concerned LOU or to the Republic of the Philippinen,
asthe case may be.

Sac. 19. Tor Exemption on Importation and Donations.
- The importation by the BASSU of economic, technical, and
cultural booke or publications, which are for economic,
technical, vocational, scientific, philosophical, histories] or

All grants, bequesta, endowments, donations, and
contributions made to and used actuall , directly and
exclusively by the BASSU, shall be exempt from donor'a tax
and the same shall be considered aa allowable deduction from

the recommendation of a panel of experts constituted
for the purpoge, that the institution has complied with
the requirements for university atatue under CHED
Memorandum Order No. 48, series of 2012, Policy-Standard
to Enhance Quality Assurance (QA) in Philippine Higher
Education through an Cuteomas-Rased and Typology-Based QA:
Provided, That the panel may issue such recommendation
when the BASSC hae substantially complied with the
requirements for the grant of university etatas,
A

The following operational requirements for a University,
as established by the CHED, shall ba comiplied with:

{a} Employment of full-time, permanent faculty mambers
who possess relevant degrees in their areas of aperialization,
88 required by the CHED, and shall have Participated im
Tesearch and development activities in their respective
discipimes, as evidenced by refereed publications and other
acholarly outpute;

_ _ Offering of a cnnprehensive range of degree programa
Hall levele, from basic post-secondary to doctaral programa:

(c) Conduct of viable research Programs in specific
Gsciplinal and multidisciplinary areaa of etudy that produce
ww knowledge, aa evidenced by refereed publicationa,
Satons, inventions, and patenta, others;

{) Establishment of comprehensive learning resources

‘ad support structures, te include libraries, practicum

hboratories, relevant educational resources, and linkages

with relevant diseciplinal and Profescional sectors, ao as to

- allow students to explgze basic, advance, and even cutting-edge
Thowledge ina wide range of disciplines or professions:

) Maintenance of linkage and affiliation with other
wuearch institutions in various parts of the world to engure
tint the research activities of the BASSI are functioning at
cwrent global standerds- and

oO Conduct of outreach activities to allow the students,
faculty, and research staff to apply the new knowledge they
Sraerate to address specific social development problama.

The CHED, through its regional office, shall regularly
phivide technical assistance to the BASSU and monitor its
compliance with the requirements of the Commiasion.

The BASSC shall retain ita status prior to the effectivity
of this Act until it is able to comply with the requirements

SEC. 21. Development Plan, Management Audit, and
Organizational, Administrative, and Academic Structure, —
Within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the
approval of this Act, the BASSU shall aceompliah the following:

@@) Submit a Sve (5)-your development plan, including
its program budget tothe CHED for recommendation tothe DBM:

Li

(B) Set up ite organizational, administrative, and
academic structure, including the appointment of key officials

() Undergo a mansgement audit in coordination with
the CHED.

SEC. 22. Filing of Heport.— On or before the fifteenth
(15") dey of the second (24) month after the opening of the
regular classes each year, the Board shall file, with the
Office of the President of the Philippines, through the
Chairperson of the CHED, and with both Houses of Congress,
4 detailed report on the progress, condition, and needa of ihe
BASSI.

SEC. 28. Suppistory Application, — The provisions of
Republic Act No, #292_otherwise Inown as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997", shall form part of thia Act,
and shall serve ag part of the governing charter of the BASSU.

Sic. 24. Portty Clouse. — All other powers, functions,
Privileges, responsibilities, and limitations under existing
laws shall be deemed granted to or imposed upon the BASSU
and ite officials, whenever appropriate,

SEC. 25. Approprictions. — Tho amount necessary to
carry out the provisions of this Act chall be charged againat
the current year's appropriations of the BASSC. Thereafter,
such sume as may be necessary for the continued operation
and maintenanes of the BASSU shall be included in the
annudl General Appropriations Act.

SEQ. 26. Implementing Rules and Regulations, — Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Board,
in consultation with the CHED, shall formulate the tules
and regulations to fully implement the provisions of thia Act.

SEC.-27. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason,
@ny part or provision of thie Act ia deelared invalid or
Unconstitutional, the remaining parte or provisions not
affected shall remain in full foree and effect.

 

Src. 28, Repealing Clause. — All laws, preaidential
decrees, executive orders, and rules and regulators contrary
to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.are repealed
or mmlified accordingly.

SEC. 29. Effectivity, — Thia Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette

or in a newspaper of general circulation.
/
yt
VICENTE “fone Il ¥ QO. VELASCO
President of the Senate Speaker Ofthe Houre
of Reprenentatives

Thia Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on September 28, 2020 and May 24, 2021,

respectively.

  
 

—_

MyRA MARIED. VILLARICA MARK pCa
fecrefary of the Senate i

RODRIG ROA DUTERTE
President of te Philippines

oO

BEruaLTc OF TEE varLcretins
pean EOE = O17785