H. No. 9938

# “Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. £1810]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A FRESHWATER FISH HATCHERY
IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BOMBON, PROVINCE OF
CAMARINES SUR, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the
supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
of the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a freshwater
fish hatchery~in the Municipality of Bombon, Province of
Camarines Sur.

SEC. 2. Prior to the establishment of the freshwater fish
hatchery, the BFAR-DA shall conduct a full-scale feasibility study
in support of its construction to comply with the requirements of
the Department of Budget and Management.

Within two (2) years after the construction of the freshwater
fish hatchery, the BFAR-DA, through a memorandum of
agreement, shall transfer its management to the local government
of the Municipality of Bombon. It shall implement a training and
phasing-in program for local government personnel on the
management and operation of the hatchery.

SEc. 3. The BFAR-DA shall conduct continuing research
and experimentation on the breeding and production of freshwater
fish species, especially as they apply to local conditions, to discover
new methods and technologies that will enhance the fishing
industry.

SEc. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the
Department’s programs the conduct of the feasibility study and
the consequent establishment of the freshwater fish hatchery in
the Municipality of Bombon, Province of Camarines Sur, the
funding of which shall be included in the General Appropriations
Act. The local government unit concerned shall set aside funds
from any available local revenue in an amount deemed SUPE aate
for the operationalization of the hatchery.

SEC. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shalf issue the rules and
regulations on the supervision, operation, monitoring, and the
eventual transfer of the freshwater fish hatchery to the local
government of the Municipality of Bombon.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation.

 

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on September 14, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

et hs

‘-MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

  

Approved:

AUN 0 2 2022

 

Lapsed WIVD aw OA .
vithout the signature of thie Prec
dent, in avcordance with Article VI,
Seetiea 27 (1) of the Constitartion

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

qe

Pb ethane P ON