Ww

H. No. 7616

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Kighteenth Congress
Devond Regular Session

—_i—-

Begun and held in Metra Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11540]

} AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)

: YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO THE

: UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES SYSTEM
UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8160 TO CONSTRUCT,
ESTABLISH, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE FOR
EDUCATIONAL AND OTHER RELATED PURPOSES
RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS
WITHIN THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES
AND IN OTHER AREAS WITHIN THE SCOPE OF ITS
OPERATIONS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules
and regulations, the franchise granted to the University of the
Philippines System, hereunder referred to as the grantee, its
successor or assignees, under Republic Act No. 8160, to construct,

‘

establish, maintain, and operate for educational and other related
purposes and in the public interest, radio and television
broadcasting stations within thé campuses of the University of
the Philippines and in other places within the Scope of its
operations, where frequencies and/or channels are still available
for radio and television broadcasting, including digital television
system, through microwave, satellite or whatever means, as well
as the use of any new technology in television and radio systems,
with the corresponding technological auxiliaries and facilities,
special broadcast and other program and distribution services
and relay stations, is hereby renewed for another twenty-five (25)
years,

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. —
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and
operated ina manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
any way diminishing its own privilege to use its assigned
wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission or

reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantee’s
services and availability thereof.

Skc. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications
Commission. ~ The grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) the appropriate permits
and licenses for the construction and operation of its stations or
facilities and shall not use any frequency in the radio and television
spectrums without authorization from the NTC. The NTC,

however, shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of
any such authority.

In case of any violation of the provisions of this franchise,
the NTC shall have the authority torevoke or suspend, after due
process, the permits or licenses it issued pursuant to the franchise.
The NTC may recommend to the Congress of the Philippines the
revocation of this franchise for any violation of its provisions.

SEc. 4. Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall
reach the pertinent populations or portions thereof on important
public issues and relay important public announcements and
warnings concerning public emergencies and calamities, as

necessity, urgency or law may require; provide at all times sound

- and balanced programming; promote public participation; assist

in the functions of public information and education; conform to
the ethics of honest enterprise; promote audience sensibility and
empowerment including closed captioning; and not use its stations
or facilities for the broadcasting of obscene or indecent language,
speech, act or scene, the dissemination of deliberately false
information or willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of. ‘public
interest, or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or
treasonable acts.

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 8370, otherwise known as
the “Children’s Television Act of 1997”, the grantee shall allota
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the daily total air time of
each broadcasting network to child-friendly shows within its
regular programming.

SEC. 5. Right of the Government. — The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony, and the
use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the grantee by the State
that may be withdrawn any time after due process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and order, to
temporarily take over and operate the stations or facilities of the
grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any station or
facility in the interest of public safety, security and public welfare;
or to authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any
agency of the government, upon due compensation to the grantee,
for the use of said stations or facilities during the period when
these shall be so operated.

SEC. 6. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of
this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall
be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the grantee fails to
operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 7. Renewal or Extension of Franchise. — The grantee
shall apply for the renewal or extension of its franchise three (3)


years before its expiration which shall be reckoned from fifteen
"_ (5) days after the publication of
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

SEC. 8. Tax Provision, — Being part of the government,
the grantee shall be exempt from paying all taxes and fees as
provided in Section 25 of Republic Act No. 9500 or “The University
of the Philippines Charter of 2008”.

SEC. 9. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of Grantee. —
The grantee shall not require any previous censorship of any
speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast from
its stations, but if any such speech, play, act or scene, or other
matter should constitute a violation of the law or infringement of
a private right, the grantee shall be free from any liability, civil
or criminal, for such speech, play, act or scene, or other matter:
Provided, That the grantee, during any broadcast, shall cut off
the airing of speech, play, act or scene, or other matter being
broadcast ifthe tendency thereof is to propose and/or incite treason,
rebellion or sedition; or the language used therein or the theme
thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided, further, That willful
failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause for the cancellation
of this franchise.

SEC. 10. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, liabilities, demands, or actions arising out of accidents
causing injury to persons or damage to properties, during the
construction or operation of the stations of the grantee.

SEC. 11. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. — The grantee shall
create employment opportunities and accept on-the-job trainees
in the franchise operations: Provided, That priority shall be
accorded to the residents of the place where the principal office of
the grantee is located: Provided, further, That the grantee shall
ensure that at least sixty percent (60%) ofits employees are regular
employees and in no case shall the percentage of contractual
employees, job order and casual employees, and independent
contractors combined, exceed forty percent (40%) of its total
workforce: Provided, furthermore, That the grantee shall follow

the franchise in the Official ..

the applicable labor standards and allowance entitlement under
existing labor laws, rulesand régulations, and similar issuances:
Provided, finally, That the grantee shall follow applicable civil
service rules and regulations and other similar issuances.

SEC. 12. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. — The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity.

SEC. 13. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations to the Congress,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the
Senate, on or before April 30 of every year during the term of its
franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the roll-out,
development, operation and/or expansion of business; audited
financial statements; and certification of the NTC on the status
of its permits and operations.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

‘SEC. 14. Fine. — The failure of the grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a fine of
Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of noncompliance.
The fine shall be collected by the NTC from the delinquent
franchise grantee separate from the reportorial penalties imposed
by the NTC and the same shall be remitted to the Bureauofthe
Treasury.

SEC. 15. Equality Clause. ~ Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio and/or
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein grantee: Provided,


That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions
of broadcasting franchises concerning territorial coverage, the
term, or the type of service authorized by the franchise.

SEC. 16. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
Congress when the public interest so requires and shall not be
interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein provided
for.

SEC. 17. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 18. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 19. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation. :

Approved,
:
VICENTE f SOTTO III LORISALL Y Q. VELASCO

President of the Senate Spea the House
of Representatives

      

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on September 23,
2020, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on March 24,
2021, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on March 25, 2021.

PO ap
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA 2 DOZA
Secretary of the Senate SeCretary\ceneral

House of Representatives

        

{

 

Approved: ¥AY 1 &

RODRIGOSROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

   

a
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 017322

 

 

{
f
i