H. No. 5738

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Highteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—__—_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC Act No.11784)]

AN ACTESTABLISHING A CAMPUS OF THE POLYTECHNIC
UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES (PUP) IN THE
CITY OF SANTA ROSA, PROVINCE OF LAGUNA, TO
BE KNOWN AS THE PUP-SANTA ROSA CAMPUS, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “PUP-Santa
Rosa City Campus Act”.

SEG: 2. There is hereby established a campus of the
Polytechnic University of the Philippines (PUP), hereinafter
referred to as the University, in the City of Santa Rosa, Province
of Laguna, to be known as the PUP-Santa Rosa Campus.

SEc. 3. The PUP-Santa Rosa Campus shall primarily
provide short-term technical-vocational, undergraduate, and
graduate courses within its areas of competency and specialization
pursuant to its mandate, and according to its capabilities as the
Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the Board, may deem
necessary to respond to the human resources development needs
of the Province of Laguna and of the Cavite, Laguna, Batangas,
Rizal, Quezon (CALABARZON) Region.

The PUP-Santa Rosa Campus is also mandated, to undertake
research and extension services, and to provide. progressive
leadership in these areas, including the offering of graduate degrees
through open distance learning under the PUP Open University
System.

Src. 4. The PUP-Santa Rosa Campus shall be headed by
a Campus Administrator who shall render full-time service and
shal} be appointed or designated by the Board upon the
recommendation of the search committee and the President of
the University. Such appointment or designation shall be subject
to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board.

Sec. 5. The establishment of the PUP-Santa Rosa Campus
shall ensure that the minimum requirements for its operation
and program offerings have been complied with, as duly prescribed
by the Commission on Higher Education. ”

SEc. 6. All assets, real and personal, personnel, and records
of the PUP-Santa Rosa Campus, as well as liabilities and
obligations, are hereby transferred to the University. The positions,
rights, and security of tenure of faculty members and personnel
employed at the PUP-Santa Rosa Campus under existing laws
prior to the integration to the University shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the PUP-Santa Rosa Campus are hereby declared to be the
property of the University and shall be titled under its name:
Provided, That should the University cease to exist or be abolished
or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no longer needed

i

ee eee Ones

by the University, the same shall revert to the concerned
local government unit or to the Republic of the Philippines, as
the case may be.

SEc. 7. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997’, shall
form an integral part of this Act, and together, shall serve as the
governing charter of the University.

SEc. 8. All other powers, functions, privileges,
responsibilities, and limitations to state universities and their
officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to or imposed
upon the University and its officials, whenever appropriate.

SEc. 9. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

Sec. 10. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 11. Alllaws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 12. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of

general circulation.

Approved,

    
  

VICE C.SOTTOTI LORD AL JAY Q. VELASCO
2 Speaker of the House
of Representatives

o4
This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate

of the Philippines on January 27, 2020-and January 31, 2022,
respectively-

rk *

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA = MAB
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved:

(MAY 29 202 mz

we PBed UDVO LAW OR gens

without the signature of the Presi.
dent, in accordance with Article VI,
Section 27 (1) of the Constitution.

“ RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO