S. No, 1749
H. No. 725

Republic of the Philippines
@ongress of the Philippines

Metra Manila
Sen enteenth Congress

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ RepusticActNo. ii 8i 1]

AN ACT TO IMPROVE LAND TRANSPORTATION
TERMINALS, STATIONS, STOPS, REST AREAS AND
ROLL-ON/ROLL-OFF TERMINALS, APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacied by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. - The State recognizes
that the right of every establishment to a fair return of
investment carries with it a corresponding social responsibility
to provide adequate facilities for the comfort of its clientele.
Towards this end, the State shall hereby require the owners,
operators and administrators of land transportation terminals,
stations, stops, rest areas and roll-on/roll-off terminals to
improve their facilities through the provision of free internet
services, and clean sanitary facilities.

SEC. 2. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act, the
following terms shall mean:

(a) Lactation station refers to a private, clean, sanitary,
and well-ventilated room or area where nursing mothers can
wash up, breastfeed or express their milk comfortably and
store this afterward;

(b) Land transport terminal/station refers to a
passenger station and a place for the final stopover or a
permanent station, office and yard of public utility vehicles,
which may also serve as loading and unloading area for
passengers;

(©) Land transport stop refers to a common place for
the stopover of public utility vehicles located along the
highways or regular route for transport in long-distance travel:

(d) Rest area refers to a facility located at a strategic
point along the national highway or route of the travelling
public which is provided with parking space, restaurants or
snack bars, other business shops, recreational facilities, service
stations, public restroom facilities or waiting sheds for
travellers or commuters:

(e) RORO terminal refers to a terminal which is part
of the Road Roll-On/Roll-Off system; and

() Sanitary facilities refer to a set of facilities that
include at least a combination of comfort room and hand-
washing facilities, as detailed in Section 4 of this Act.

SEC. 3. Provision of Free Internet. — Pursuant to
Republic Act No. 10929, otherwise known as the “Free Internet
Access in Public Places Act”, the Department of Information
and Communications Technology (DICT), in coordination with
the Department of Transportation (DOTr) and other concerned
stakeholders, shall ensure that free internet is provided in
transportation terminals, stations, stops, rest areas and RORO
terminals. Owners. operators. or administrators of such

establishments shall fully ensure the speedy and efficient
implementation of this provision.

SEC. 4. Standards for Sanitary Facilities. — The owner,
operator, or administrator of land transport terminals, stations,
stops, rest areas, and RORO terminals shall provide clean
sanitary facilities for passengers which shall be provided with
the following:

(a) Separate restrooms for persons with disabilities
(PWDs), male, and female passengers:

(b) Adequate ventilation and lighting:

(©) Safe. adequate, and running water supply:

(e) Toilet seat with cover:

() Lavatory with toilet paper. mirror, soap, hand dryer
and door lock:

(g) Waste bin; and
(hb) Exclusive space for diaper-changing.

In implementing this provision, owners, operators, or
administrators of land transport terminals, stations, stops, rest
areas, and RORO terminals shall also comply with the
applicable standards under Presidential Decree No. 856,
otherwise known as the “Code on Sanitation of the Philippines”.
The DOTr, in coordination with the relevant government
agencies, shall conduct random ocular inspections to ensure
that such establishments comply with this provision.

 

SEC. 5. Prohibition on Collection of Fees to Access
Sanitary Facilities. — It shall be unlawful to collect fees from
passengers for the use of regular sanitary facilities therein.
For the purpose of this Act, the concerned passenger must

 


show the paid bus ticket for the day in order to avail of the
free use of sanitary facilities: Provided, however, That the
provisions of this Act shall not apply to separate, well-appointed
or deluxe sanitary facilities that are operated solely for
commercial purposes and for the convenience of passengers who
require and prefer such facilities within land transport
terminals, stations, stops, rest areas, and RORO terminals.

SEC. 6. Lactation Station. - The owner, operator, or
administrator of land transport terminals, stations, stops, rest
areas, and RORO terminals shall establish at least one (1)
lactation station which shall be separate from the sanitary
facilities. The lactation stations shall be clean and compliant
with the applicable provisions under Republic Act No. 7600,
as amended by Republic Act No. 10028, otherwise known as
the “Expanded Breastfeeding Promotion Act of 2009” and its
rules and regulations. The DOTr, in coordination with the
Department of Health (DOH) and other relevant government
agencies, shall conduct random ocular inspections to ensure
that such establishments comply with this provision.

SEC. 7. Penalty. —

(a) Any owner, operator, or administrator of land
transport terminals, stations, stops, rest areas, and RORO
terminals who does not comply with the standards for sanitary
facilities under Section 4 of this Act shall be liable for a fine
in the amount of Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00) for each day
of violation;

(b) Any owner, operator, or administrator of land
transport terminals, stations, stops, rest areas, and RORO
terminals who violates the prohibition under Section 5 of this
Act shall be liable for a fine in the amount of Five thousand
pesos (P5,000.00) for each day of violation; and

(c) Any owner, operator, or administrator of land
transport terminals, stations, stops, rest areas, and RORO
terminals who does not provide and maintain a lactation
station as required under Section 6 of this Act shall, in
addition to the sanctions under Section 21 of the “Expanded
Breastfeeding Promotion Act of 2009", be liable for a fine in
the amount of Five thousand pesos (P5.000.00) for each day
of violation.

The Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory
Board (LTFRB), after five (5) years from the effectivity of this
Act and once every five (5) years thereafter, review the
applicability and enforcement of the fines prescribed in the
preceding paragraphs and the necessary adjustments on the
amount of the fine imposed subject to the approval of the
Secretary of the Department of Transportation.

SEC. 8. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
DOTr, in coordination with the DICT, LTFRB, DOH and the
Philippine Ports Authority and other concerned stakeholders
shall, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act,
jointly promulgate the necessary implementing rules and
regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 9. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

 

SEC. 10. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Officiai
least two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

 

   

Approved,

   
 

GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO — VICE
Speaker of the House Pre
of Representatives

TE C, SOTTO Ill
ident of the Senate

 

 

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 1749 on July 24, 2018 and adopted by the
House of Representativés as an amendment to House Bill
No. 725 on January 29, 2019.

 
   
  
 

Bs Aut, _
DANTE ROBERTO ALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
ActingSecretatysseneral Secretary of the Senate

Hous of Representatives

Approved: [APR 1 7 2018

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 

PRRD 2016 - 010895

 

 

- Office of the President /
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE