TRIER ARNT ELIE ST LN ILL PR TTR RM ERIE ot ON

-

H. No. 10196

Ropublic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Alvteo Manila
Highteenth Congress
Chird Regular Session

—__—_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11775]

AN ACT GRANTING THE ESTATE OF MR. AMADO L.
OLA, OPC DOING BUSINESS AS AMAPOLA
BROADCASTING SYSTEM, A FRANCHISE TO
CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, ESTABLISH, OPERATE,
AND MAINTAIN RADIO AND TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules
and regulations, there is hereby granted to the Estate of
Mr. Amado L. Ola, OPC, doing business as Amapola Broadcasting
System, hereunder referred to as the Grantee, its successors or
assignees, a franchise to construct, install, establish, operate,
and maintain for commercial purposes and in the public interest,
radio and television broadcasting stations in the Philippines, where
frequencies and channels are still available for radio and television

 

broadcasting, including digital television system, through
microwave, satellite or whatever means, as well as the use of any
new technology in radio and television systems, with the
corresponding technological auxiliaries or facilities, special
broadcast and other program and distribution services and
relay stations.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. ~
The stations or facilities of the Grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
any way diminishing its own privilege to use its assigned
wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission or
reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the Grantee’s
services and the availability thereof.

Sec. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The Grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) the appropriate permits
and licenses for the construction and operation of its stations
or facilities and shall not use any frequency in the radio
spectrum without authorization from the NTC. The NTC,
however, shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant
of any such authority.

In case of any violation of the provisions of this franchise,
the NTC shall have the authority to revoke or suspend, after due
process, the permits or licenses it issued pursuant to the franchise.
The NTC'may recommend to Congress the revocation of the
franchise for any violation of the provisions of this franchise.

SEC. 4. Responsibility“to the Public. — The Grantee
shall provide, free of charge, adequate\public service time which
is reasonable and sufficient to enable the government, through
the broadcasting stations or facilities of the Grantee, to reach the
pertinent populations or portions thereof, on important public
issues and relay important public announcements and warnings
concerning public emergencies and calamities, as necessity,
urgency, or law may require; provide at all times sound and
balanced programming; promote public participation; assist in

the functions of public information and education; conform to the
ethics of honest enterprise; promote audience sensibility and
empowerment including closed captioning; and not use its stations
or facilities for the broadcasting of obscene or indecent language,
speech, act or scene, the dissemination of deliberately false
information or willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of
public interest, or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or
treasonable acts. om

Public service time referred herein shall be equivalent toa
maximum aggregate of ten percent (10%) of paid commercials or
advertisements which shall be allocated based on need to the
Executive and Legislative branches, the Judiciary, Constitutional
Commissions, and international humanitarian organizations duly
recognized by statutes: Provided, That the NTC shall increase
the public service time in case of extreme emergency or calamity.
The NTC shall issue rules and regulations for this purpose, the
effectivity of which shall commence upon applicability with other
similarly situated broadcast network franchise holders.

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 8370, otherwise known as
the “Children’s Television Act of 1997”, the Grantee shall allot a
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the daily total air time of
each broadcasting network or station to child-friendly shows
within its regular programming.

Src. 5. Right of the Government. — The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony, and the
use théreof is a privilege conferred upon the Grantee by the State
that may be withdrawn any time after due process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and order: to
temporarily take over and operate the stations or facilities of the
Grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any station or
facility in the interest of public safety, security, and public welfare;
or to authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any
agency of the government, upon due compensation to the Grantee,
for the use of said stations or facilities during the period when
these shall be so operated.

SEc. 6. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of
this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise
shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the Grantee fails
to operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 7. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of the Grantee.
~ The Grantee shall not require any previous censorship of any
speech; play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast from
its stations, but if any such speech, play, act or scene, or other
matter should constitute a violation of the law or infringement of
a private right, the Grantee shall be free from any liability, civil
or criminal, for such speech, play, act or scene, or other matter:
Provided, That the Grantee, during any broadcast, shall cut off
the airing of speech, play, act or scene, or other matter being
broadcast if the tendency thereof is to propose or incite treason,
rebellion, or sedition; or the language used therein or the theme
thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided, further, That willful
failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause for the cancellation
of this franchise.

SEC. 8. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The Grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, liabilities, demands, or actions arising out of accidents
causing injury to persons or damage to properties, during the
construction or operation of the stations of the Grantee.

SEc. 9. Commitment to Provide and Promote the Creation
of Employment Opportunities. — The Grantee shall create
employment opportunities and accept on-the-job trainees in the
franchise operations: Provided, That priority shall be accorded
to the residents of the place whgre the principal office of the Grantee
is located: Provided, further, That,the Grantee shall comply
with the applicable labor standards und allowance entitlement
under existing labor laws, rules and regulations and
similar issuances.

The employment opportunities or jobs created shall be
refletted in the General Information Sheet (GIS) to be submitted
to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) annually.

=<

SEC. 10. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. — The Grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation, or other commercial or legal entity, nor
merge with any other corporation or entity, norishall the
controlling interest of the Grantee be transferred, simultaneously
or contemporaneously, to any person, firm, company, corporation,
or entity without the prior approval of Congress. The Grantee
shall inform Congress, through the Office of the Speaker of the
House of Representatives and the Office of the Senate President,
of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or assignment of
franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder, or of
the merger or transfer of the controlling interest of the Grantee,
within sixty (60) days after the completion of the said transaction.
Failure to report to Congress such change of ownership shall
render the franchise ipso facto revoked. Any person or entity to
which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be
subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.

SEC. 11. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in
public utilities, the Grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least
thirty percent (30%) ofits outstanding capital stock, or a higher
percentage that may hereafter be provided by law, in any
securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from
the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That in cases where public

+ offex of shares is not applicable, other methods of encouraging

public participation by citizens and corporations operating public
utilities must be implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall
render the franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 12. Reportorial Requirement. — The Grantee shall
submit an annual report on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations to the Congress
of the Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representatives and the Committee
on Public Services of the Senate, on or before April 30 of every
year during the term of its franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the

commencement of activities, development, operation, and
expansion of business; audited financial statements; latest GIS
officially submitted to the SEC, if applicable; certification of the
NTC on the status of its permits and operations; and an update
on the dispersal of ownership undertaking, if applicable.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

SEc. 13. Fine. — The failure of the Grantee to submit
the requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a
fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of
noncompliance. The fine shall be collected separately from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC; and it shall be remitted
to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 14. Equality Clause. - Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio and
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall bedome part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein Grantee: Provided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions
of broadcasting franchises concerning territorial coverage, the
term, or the type of service authorized by the franchise.

Src. 15. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal
by Congress when the public interest so requires and shall not
be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein
provided for.

”
SEC. 16. Separability Clause.,— If any of the sections
or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the

provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or
modified accordingly.

Sc. 18. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in
a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 

VICENTH C.SOTTOIW Li
Presiden of the Senate

 

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on September 20, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively. .

a Oban
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved:

MAY 27 2022
without the signature of the Presi.
dent, in accordance with Article V1.

wapsed Mio 1a" Ob