H No. 4631
Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meta Manila
Seventeenth Congress

First Regular Session
—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand sixteen.

AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)
YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO REPUBLIC
BROADCASTING SYSTEM, INC., PRESENTLY KNOWN
AS GMA NETWORK, INC., AMENDING FOR THE
PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7252, ENTITLED "AN
ACT GRANTING THE REPUBLIC BROADCASTING
SYSTEM, INC. A FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO AND
TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS IN THE
PHILIPPINES"

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Republic Act No. 7252 is hereby amended to
read as follows:

"SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise.
~ Subject to the provisions of the 1987 Constitution
and applicable laws, rules and regulations, the


frarctose granted to Regublic Broadcasting System,

Inc., presently known as GMA Network, Ine.,

hwreunder rederred to as the grantee, its muccessors

or assignees, under Republic Act No, T2652 to
construct, inetall establish, operate and maintain
for commercia) purposes and im the public interest
tedio and televiahos broadcasting stations in the
Philippines. includieg digital television system,
theough mocrownve, satellice, terrestrial or whatever
means oe the use of any new techanloges in television
and radio srsems. with the corresponding wuxilary,
spec) broadcast and other progress and thstribution
servaces and relay stations, and to install radio
cin munecabon Golbties for the grantees private vee
ia Ae broadcast wervioes ie hereby renewed for another
twenty-five (25) years frees the effectivity of thas Act.

“Sec 2. Monazer of Operation of Stations or
Forvitees, — The stations or facilities of the grantee
shall be constructed and operated in a manner aa
will, at most, resuit only in the minimum interference
on the wavelengths or frequennes of existing stations
or other stations wtech may be established by law,
wrltout tn amy way deronishing tte own right to use
ite astigned wavelengtte or frequencies and the
quabty of teanamssice of reception thereon as abould
maxusuize rendition of the grantee’s services ande
the avaulabehty thereof.

“Sac. 3. Prior Approval of the National
Trlecommunications Commission. ~ The grantee
shall secure from the National Telecommumnications
Commission (NTC) the appropriate permite and
licenses for ite stateons and shall mot use any
frequency un the redio/televiaion apectrum without
having been authorized by the NTC.

“Sec. 4. Responwibility to the Public. — The
grantee shall provide free of charge. adequate pubhe
service tume which is reasonable and sufficient to
enable the government, through the broadcasting
stations or fuciltses of the grantee, to reach the

ertinent population's or portions thereof on
Saale public iseues and relay important public
announcements and warnings as necesstty, urgency
or nw may require: provide at all trmes sound and
balanced programming; promote public participation;
aasist in the functions of public information and
edwcstion: conform to the ethics of hanest enterprise;
promote awdience sensibility and empowerment
through, but noé Limited to, cased captioning; and
Not use its stations or facilities for the broadcasting
of obscene and indecent language, speech, act or scone;
or for the diasemination of deliberately false
information or willful misrepresentation, to the
detriment of the public interest, or to incite,
eecournge, or atist in subversive or treasonsble acts.

“Public wervice time referred herein shall be
equivalent to ten percent (10%6) of the paid commercials
or advertisements which shall be alloceted hased o
need to the executive, legislative, judiciary,
constitutional commisaions and international
humanitarian organizations duly recognized by
statwtes; Provided, That the NTC shall incrense the
Publi: service time in case of emergency of calamity.
The NIC shall issue rules aed regulations for this

~ The grantee, its successors or assignees shall
comply with the applicable labor standards under
exasting labor laws, rules asd regulations and such

other lasuance as may be ted
2 a promulga' o


of pence and order: to temporarily take over and
operate the stations or fxcilities of the grantee; to

ity suspend the operation of any station or
facility in the interest of public safety, security and
public welfare; or to authorize the temporary use and
operation thereat by any agency of the government,
upon dive compensation to the grantee, for the use of
the stations or facilities of the grantee during the
period when these shall be eo operated.

"Sec, 7, Term of Franchise. ~ This franchies
shall be im effect foe # period of twenty-five (25) years
from the effectivity of this Act, unbess sooner revoked
or cancelled. In the event the grantee fnils to operate
continseuely for two (2) yeara, this franchise shall be
deemed ipeu facto rewoked.

“SEC. & Acceptance and Compliance. — This
franchise shall become effective upon acouptance giver
in writing by the grantee to the Congress of the
Philippines, through the Comanittee om Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representatives and the
Commattee on Public Services of the Sonate, within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act. Upon
giving such acceptance, the grantee shall exercise
thy perileges granted under this Act, Nomacceptance
of the gramtoe shall render the franchise void.

“Sec. 9. Tar Prowsiona. — The grantee, its
successors OF sseagnets chal] comtines to be subject
to all applicable taxes, duties, fees or charges and
other impositions under Republic Act No. 6424,
otherwise known as The National Internal Revenue
Code af 1997', a4 amended, Regrublic Aet No. 7160,
otherwiee known wt ‘The Local Government Code of
1991’, a6 amended, and other applicable laws.

"Swc.10. Self-reguistion by and Undertaking
of Grantee. ~ The grantee shall not require any
Previous censorship of any apeech, play, act or ecene,
or other matter to be broadcast andlor telecast from

«ta stations: but ifany such speech, play, act ar scene,
its tations ahould canatitute a violation of the
law or infringement of a private right, the grantee
ahall be free from any liability, civil or criminal, for
such speech, play, act or scene, or other matter from
its stations: Provided, That the grantee, during any
breadeast andor telecast, ahall not allow to be aired
the speech, play, act or scene, or other matter being
brosdeast andlor tolocast if the tendency thereof is to
propese andor incite tresson, rebellion or sedition;
o the language used therein or the theme thereof is
indecent or immoral: Provided, fsrther, That willful
failure to do 90 shall constitute a valid cause for the
cancellation of this franchise.

"Sec, 11, Warrenty in Favor of National and
Local Goveraments, — The grantee shall hold the
national, provincial, city and municipal governments
of the Philippines free from all claims, accounts,
demands of actions arising out of accsdente or injuries,
whether to property or to persons, caused by the
construction or operation of the stations of the grantee,

"Sec. 12. Sale, Leuse, Tronefer, Usufruct or
Astignment of Franchise. — The grantee shall mot
cell, lense, transfer, grant the usufruct of nor assign
this franchise or the rights and privileges acquired
thereunder to any person, firm, company,
corporation or other commercial or legal entity, nor
merge with any other corporation or entity, nor
shal} the controlling interest of the grantee be
traneferred, whether ae a whole or in parts, and
whether cimultancously or contemporantoutly, to
any such private person, firm, company, corporation
or emtity without the price approval af the Congress
of the Philippines: Prowded, That any person or
entity to which thie franchise is aold, transferred
or assigned shall be eubject to all the same
Se ee

as Act.

hy


"Sec. 13. General Rrondcast Policy Law, —
The grantee shall comply with and be subject to the
provisions of a general broadcast policy law, which
Congress may hereafter enact.

“Sec, 14. Reportorial Requirement. — The
grantee shall submit an annual report to the Congress
of the Philppines, through the Committee on
Legislative Franchises of the House of Representatives
and the Committee on Public Services of the Senate,
on its compliance with the terms and conditions of
the franchise and on its operations on or before
April 30 of every year during the term of the franchise.

"SEC. 15. Equality Clause. — Any advantage,
favor, privilege, exemption, or immunity granted
under existing franchise, or which may hereafter be
granted for radio and/or television broadcasting, upon
prior review and approval of Congress, shall become
part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein
grantee: Provided, That the foregoing shall not apply
to nor affect provisions of broadcasting franchises
concerning territory covered by the franchise, the
lifespan of the franchise or the type of service
authorized by the franchise,

"SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If any of the
sections or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all

bse ea provisions not affected thereby shall remain

2 "SEC.17, Repealability and Nonexclusivity
Clause. - This franchise shall be subject to
amendment, alteration, or repeal by the Congress of
the Philippines when the public interest so requires

and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive tof
the privileges herein provided for. o

“SEC. 18. x x x.”

iut i ike effect fifteen
SEC. 2. Effectivity. — This Act shall ta
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a

    

newspaper of general circulation.
Approved,
-\. A Cr
Ax "KOKO" P TELM PANTALEON D.
President of the Senate Speaker of the,

of Represepfatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on
January 16,2017, amended by the Senate on March 13, 2017,
and which amendments were concurred in by the
House of Representatives on March 14, 2017.

4 d ¢ :
LUTGARDO B. BARBO hb AREJA

Secretary of the Senate Secret ral
House of Representatives

Approved: apy 91 2017

  

ROD A DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

CERTIFIED COPY”

MARIAMITO M. DIMAANDA\

Dea F207;

ead Or ACARANG RECURDSOFFI
REPUBLIC OF TRE PHILIPPINES .

PRAD 2016 ~ 002359