ete ene a ne et

H. No. 8063

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metes Manila ,
Kighteenth Congress
Second Regular Session

—_—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11519}

AN ACT EXTENDING THE AVAILABILITY OF
APPROPRIATIONS UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 11494,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “BAYANIHAN TO
RECOVER AS ONE ACT”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Extension of the Availability of Appropriations.
— The appropriations authorized under Republic Act No. 11494
or the “Bayanihan to Recover as One Act” which includes, among

others, the automatic appropriations of new programs, projects,
and activities pursuant to Section 4 thereof, shall be available for
release, obligation and disbursement until June 80, 2021:
Provided, That the appropriations sourced from reprogrammed,
reallocated or realigned savings in Republic Act No. 11465 or the
2020 GAA for programs and projects for COVID-19 interventions
shall be valid for release, obligation, and disbursement in
accordance with the provisions of the 2020 GAA: Provided,
further, That the use of such appropriations shall continue to be
governed by the provisions of Section 4 of the Bayanihan to Recover
as One Act. The special and general provisions of the 2020 GAA
shall be suppletory thereto provided it is not inconsistent with
the said provision.

The balances of fund transfers between agencies,
instrumentalities and government-owned and -controlled
corporations which, while obligated, remain unused, unutilized,
unexpended, and undisbursed as of June 30, 2021 shall revert to
the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund.

Agency outsourcing requests or agreements by agencies,
’ instrumentalities and/or government-owned and -controlled
corporations with Philippine International Trading Corporation
shall not be allowed. Any balances of fund transfers in the books
of the Philippine International Trading Corporation shall revert
tothe unappropriated surplus of the General Fund upon effectivity
of this Act.

SEC. 2. Expiration of the President's Authority Granted
Under the Bayanihan to Recover as One Act. — The authority of
the President to exercise powers granted under the Bayanihan
to Recover as One Act, including the authority to reprogram,
reallocate, and realign from savings on other items in the
appropriations of the Executive Department in the 2020 GAA,
can only be exercised until December 19, 2020 pursuant to Section
18 thereof.

SEC. 3. Validity of Allotment. — The validity of Advices of
Allotments issued by the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM) for fund releases charged against Section 10 of the
Bayanihan to Recover as One Act shall automatically be extended
in accordance with Section 1 of this Act.

SEC. 4. Applicability to Local Government Units (LGUs)
and the Government Financial Institutions (GFls). — The fund
releases to the LGUs, and GFIs for programs, projects and
activities enumerated in Section 10 of the Bayanihan to Recover
as One Act shall be valid forrelease, obligation, and disbursement
until June 30, 2021, except for the balances of the fund releases
to the LGUs and GFIs sourced from savings in the 2020 GAA
which shall be governed by the applicable provisions of the
2020 GAA. .

SEC. 5. Allotment Releases from the Standby Fund, —
Appropriations covered by the standby fund as provided in
Section 10 of the Bayanihan to Recover as One Act shall be
available for release, obligation, and disbursement up to June 30,
2021, subject to the fulfillment of the conditionalities stipulated
under the same section of the Bayanihan to Recover as One Act.

SEC. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. —
Immediately after the effectivity of this Act, the Department of
Budget and Management shall, in consultation with implementing
agencies concerned, formulate the necessary rules and regulations
for the effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. ~ Any provision of Republic
Act No. 11494, otherwise known as the “Bayanihan to Recover as
One Act” and any other law, decree, executive order, or rules and
regulations contrary to or inconsistent with this Act, are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. + This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication inthe Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation. ‘

  

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the Hotise of Representatives on December 14,
2020, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on December 15,
2020, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on December 16, 2020.

  

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

ROD. ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 

    

r Office of the President
aE | MALACARANG RECORDS nee
PRRD 2016 - 016205 | CERTIF x ® CEPyY

___——} a. concert Ry
i j DIRECTOR IV