S. No. 1304
HH. No. 5633

Republic of the Philippines
@ougress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila

Seventeenth Go ngress

Hirst Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand sixteen.

| RepusLic Acr No. 10932}

AN ACT PROMOTING UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO
QUALITY TERTIARY EDUCATION BY PROVIDING
FOR FREE TUITION AND OTHER SCHOOL FEES
iN STATE UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES, LOCAL
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES AND STATE-RUN
TECHNICAL-VOCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS,
ESTABLISHING THE TERTIARY EDUCATION
SUBSIDY AND STUDENT LOAN PROGRAM,
STRENGTHENING THE UNIFIED STUDENT
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE SYSTEM FOR TERTIARY
EDUCATION, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be il enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Shori Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act”.

SEC, 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ It is hereby declared that
quality education is an inalienable right of all Filipinos and
it is the policy of the State to protect and promote the rights
of all students to quality education at all levels. Therefore, the
State shall take appropriate steps to make such education
accessible to all.

Likewise. the State hereby recognizes the complementary
roles of public and private higher education institutions and
technical-vocational institutions in the educational system and
the invaluable contribution that the private tertiary schools
have made and will make to education. For these intents. the
State shall:

_ (a) Provide adequate funding and such other mechanisms
to increase the participation rate among all socioeconomic
classes in tertiary education:

/ (b) Provide all Filipinos with equal opportunity to quality
tertiary education in both the private and public educational
institutions:

(c) Give priority to students who are academically able
and who come from poor families:

(d) Ensure the optimized utilization of government
resources in education;

(e) Provide adequate guidance and incentives in
channelling young Filipinos in their career choices and towards
the proper development and utilization of human resources: and

/ a) Recognize the complementary roles of public and
private institutions in tertiary educational system.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:
(a) Cost of Tertiary Education refers to (1) tition and

other school fees, (2) educational expenses and (3) the cost of
living allowance:

 

(b) Graduate courses vefer to higher education programs
leading to a certificate, diploma, master’s or doctorate degrees,
as may be authorized and recognized by the Commission on
Higher Education (CHED):

 

(c) Higher education vefers to the stage of formal
education, or its equivalent, requiring completion of secondary
education and covering programs of study leading to bachelor
and advanced degrees, including associate degrees:

(d) Higher Education Institution (HED vefers to an
education institution authorized and recognized by the CHED
to offer bachelor’s degree or graduate courses:

(e) Local universities and colleges (LUCs) refer to
CHED-accredited public HEIs established by local
government units (LGUs) through an enabling ordinance.
financially supported by the LGU concerned, and compliant
with the policies, standards and guidelines of the CHED;

(f) National Household Targeting System for Poverty
Reduction (NHTS-PR) or Listahanan 2.0 refers to the
information management of the Department of Social Welfare
and Development (DSWD) that identifies who and where the
poor are in the country. The system makes available to
national government agencies and other social protection
stakeholders a database of poor families as reference in
identifying potential beneficiaries of social protection programs;

(g) Other education-related expenses refer to expenses
related to the education of a student such as books, school
supplies, uniforms, reproduction of materials. electronic devices
necessary for education and other fees such as for practical
teaching devices. student publication, yearbook, insurance, and
student trust funds:

(h) Other school fees refer to fees charged by HEIs and
technical-vocational institutions which cover other necessary
costs supportive of instruction, specifically the following: library
fees, computer fees, laboratory fees, school ID fees, athletic
fees, admission fees, development fees, guidance fees, handbook
fees. entrance fees, registration fees, medical and dental fees.
cultural fees and other similar or velated fees:

Gi) Private higher education institution refers to 2 HEIL
not owned anc controlled by the government oy its
instrumentalities:

() Privaie technical-vocational institution vefers to
post-secondary technical-vocational institution run by the
private sector offering programs registered with the
Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
(TESDA); ,

(k) Qualified student refers to any student who possesses
all the qualifications under Sections 4 and 5 and none of the
disqualifications under Section 6 hereof:

Q State-run technical-vocational institutions refer to
technical-vocational institutions operated by the TESDA or
LGUs: Provided, That in the latter case. the same should be
accredited by the TESDA:

(m) State universities and colleges (SUCs) refer to public
HEIs established by national laws which are financed and
maintained by the national government and are governed by
their respective independent boards of trustees or regents:

(n) Siudeni loan program for tertiary education refers
to a loan program established under Section 8 of this Act;

. (0) Technical-Vocational Education and Training (TVET)
refers to the education process designed at post-secondary and
lower tertiary levels, officially recognized as nondegree
programs aimed at preparing technicians, paraprofessionals and
other categories of middle-level workers by providing them with
a broad range of general education, theoretical, scientific and
technological studies, and related job skills training;

(p) Technical-Vocational instilutions (TVIs) refer to
learning institutions offering post-secondary TVET:

. (q) Tertiary education refers to the stage of education
following the secondary cycle which covers post-secondary
nondegree diploma, TVET. and higher education programe,
including graduate education: :

(2) Tertiary education subsidy (TES) reters to a subsidy
established under Section 7 of this A

  

(s) Tuition fees refer to fees or school charges for the
subjects or course enrolled in by a tertiary education student:

(t) Undergraduate courses vefer to any program leading
to a degree as may be authorized and recognized by the
CHED; and

(u) Unified Student Financial Assistance System for
Tertiary Education (UniFAST) refers to the harmonized,
state-run and administered system of higher education and
technical-vocational scholarships, grants-in-aid, student
loans, and other modalities of student financial assistance
program under Republic Act No. 10687.

SEC. 4. Free Higher Education in SUCs and LUCs. —
All Filipino students who are either currently enrolled at the
time of the effectivity of this Act, or shall enroll at any time
thereafter, in courses in pursuance of a bachelor’s degree.
certificate degree, or any comparable undergraduate degree in
any SUC and LUC shall be exempt from paying tuition and
other school fees for units enrolled in: Provided, That they
pass the entrance examination and other admission and
retention requirements of the SUCs and LUCs: Provided,
further, That all SUCs and LUCs shall create a mechanism
to enable students with the financial capacity to pay for their
education in the SUC and LUC to voluntarily opt out of the
tuition and other school fees subsidy or make a contribution
to the school. SUCs and LUCs must report the tuition
payments and contributions collected from these students to
the CHED: Provided, finally, That the amount required to
implement the free tuition and other school fees in SUCs and
LUCs shall be determined by the respective governing boards
of SUCs and LUCs based on the projected number of enrollees
for each academic year, which shall be the primary factor in
computing the annual proposed budget of SUCs and. in the
case of LUCs, the CHED for such purpose. This shall in turn
serve as the baseline during the preparation of the annual
National Expenditure Program (NEP) by the Department of
Budget and Management (DBM).

 

     
 
 
  

 
 

in any po
or aoe 8 re

 

support the cosi

yart or portion thereof, a TES is

» Students. —

 

projected
the prima
budget of the
the baseline ec 4]
the DBM he
TES
TESD

  

pino students who shall enroll

programs of SUCs
and ali ‘ES shall be adiministered
ST Board and the amount necessary to fund the
be included in the budgets of the CHED and he

Provided, That prior tion shall be given to

    
 
  
 
 
 

  
 
  

   

post

     

ual proposed
: oe :

for such purpose hall in
during the preparation of the

      

private

     

SEC. 6

   

Tertiary Hducation. —

        

; . c “dente in + } op dente w aya ¢
following st a if students he following or der: cudents w ho late ron of
households included in the Listahanan 2.0, ranked according

   
 
  
   
  
 
    

 

ated per capita household income: and (b) students
t the Zisiahanan 2.0, ranked according to
rousehold incom

acome to be

     

to the estir

 

stimated
based on submitted documentation

an

mie Aol

     

  

capita
proof of

    
     

     

Students who
ree or comparable
ther public ov py

 
  

 

‘ovtded,

   

and to support the
portion thereof, cove

   

private

 

 

 

   
 
  

  
 
 

    

profes
ude the
class

Prot

ional credentia
following: appl

es fees, insuran

 
 

ce premium fees

    

   

 

guidelines set forth by the UniFAST Board and on the <
budgetary appropriation for this purpose

 

SEC. 8. Siudent Loan

 

Program for Tertiary Education.

 

    

— To support furth any part

prog for tertiary
for all Filipino studen

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 

or portion ther

 

studen

   

 

education is hereby likewise ¢

who shall enroll

 

Ee
B

   

an

 

be included
vided, Tha

 

loans: Provided

the loan during the

  

udent
te studies, including medicine

still avail of another cycle of :

 

  

once the
compensation.

Compulsoi
purposes of

t. the
the UniFAST Board. and

 
  
 
   

OL

   

     

epaymen
CRT shal

L oe set

adjusted when

 

his Act.

 

 

 

   

in consultation with relevant
| formulate loan repayment guidelines for loan

   
  

the SSS

 

     
 

{a) Establish a le

the oid
vith the guide

   
    

cilitate the tra

 

 

bmit

chool ity dy ¢Mar and

 

and to the Joint

 

 

 
    
  

11. Prohibite
e

 

> unlawful for any persor
to collect tuition and other
rourded, That
collectior idents who
and other schoo! fe:
school

scho f
section shall not

luntarily opt ¢

   
 
 

  

       

 

ibsidy or make e contribution to the

 

SEC. 12. Penalties.
under Section 11 of this
imprisonment of not less

 

' the prohibited act
meted a penalty of

   

  
  
   

A
a

more
than one (1) year or a fine of not | thousand

 

rundred thous

   

      

pesos (P20,000.00) but not more ¢
pesos (P100.000.00), or both, at the discretion of the In
case of a university. college or any other juridical enti

 

penalty shall be imposed on the surer or the

officer or person responsible

  

 

the Uni Board

ded to

  

ide the following

 

(a) President of the Philippine Association of
Solleges as Member

 

   

     

Coordinatin
lembe:

(o) Chairman of the
ional Associs

  
    

  
 

ociation of Locai

    

      
 

‘ viders
promulgated by the Uni

 
 
 
  
   
 

 

and the TESD.
last day of
iling the names

 

 

 

Appropriations. - The amounts necessary tc
out the provisions of this Act. specifically Sections

and 8

   
 

all

  

annual Ge
appropriated under

with the

      
 

priations A

 
    
  
 
 

   
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 

 

cost under

 

nati

 

funding this

 

long-term deeply
Other

and

domestic and
cilitated b

    

Qo te

 

ams under t

    


Provided, That in case of donations from foreign sources,
acceptance thereof shall be subject to existing government rules
and regulations.

SEC. 17. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee on
Universal Access to Tertiary Education. — There is hereby
created a Joint Congressional Oversight Committee to oversee,
monitor and evaluate the implementation of this Act.

The Oversight Committee shall be composed of five (5)
members each from the Senate and from the House of
Representatives, and shall include the following: Chairperson
of the Senate Committee on Education, Arts and Culture;
Chairperson of the House Committee on Higher and Technical
Education; Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Finance;
Chairperson of the House Committee on Appropriations; and
three (3) members each to be chosen from the membership
of the Senate Committee on Education, Arts and Culture and
the House Committee on Higher and Technical Education by
the Senate President and the House Speaker, respectively, with
at least one (1) member each from the minority in the House
of Representatives and in the Senate. Funding for the expenses
of the Committee shall be taken from the appropriations of
both the Senate and the House of Representatives.

SEC. 18. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Act, the UniFAST
Board, in consultation with the CHED, the TESDA, and other
relevant stakeholders in higher and technical education, shall
promulgate the implementing rules and regulations necessary
to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of this Act:
Provided, That the failure of the Board to promulgate the said
rules and regulations shall not prevent or delay the effectivity
and implementation of this Act in accordance with Section 21
hereof.

SEC. 19. Separability Clause. — Should any part of this
Act be declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other parts or
provisions hereof not affected thereby shall continue to be in
full force and effect.

EEO ieee

 

SEC. 20. Repealing Clause. — All laws, executive orders,
presidential decrees, implementing rules and regulations or
parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are
hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 21. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a

newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

er X &
PANTALEON D. V. Z wee “KOKO” PIMENTEL III

Speaker of the/Hotise
of Representffives

President of the Senate

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1304
and House Bill No. 5633 was finally passed by the Senate
and the House of Representatives on May 30, 2017 and
May 29, 2017, respectively.

PAREJA LUTGARDO B. BARBO

Secretary Genéral Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

  

Approved: AUG 0 3 2017

rt.

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 
 

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 003003