S. No. 1155
H. No. 10610

Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Monila

Highteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

—_—_s—

[Repusiic ActNo. 11766]

AN ACT FIXING THE VALIDITY PERIOD OF THE LICENSE
TO OWN AND POSSESS, REGISTRATION, AND PERMIT
TO CARRY FIREARMS OUTSIDE OF RESIDENCE OR
PLACE OF BUSINESS, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
SECTIONS 7 AND 19 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10591,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “COMPREHENSIVE
FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION REGULATION ACT”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: **

SECTION 1. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 10591 is
hereby amended to read as follows:

“Suc. 7. Carrying of Firearms Outside of
Residence or Place of Business. - A permit to
carry firearms outside of residence shall be igsued
by the Chief of the PNP or the duly authorized
representative to any qualified person whose life is
under actual threat or is in imminent danger due

to the nature of the person’s profession, occupation
or business: Provided, That such permit shall be
valid for two (2) years from the date of the
approval of the application, unless sooner revoked or
suspended.

“It shall be the burden of the applicant to
prove the actual threat to life by submitting a
threat assessment certificate: Provided, That the
appropriate PNP unit shall issue the threat
assessment certificate within fifteen (15) days.

“For purposes of this Act, the following
persons are considered to be in imminent danger
due to the nature of their profession, occupation or
business, and hence are exempted from the
requirement of a threat assessment certificate:

“(a) Members of the Philippine Bar;

“(b) Certified Public Accountants;

“@) Accredited Media Practitioners; .
“(d) Cashiers, Bank Tellers;

“e) Priests, Ministers, Rabbi, Imams;

“(f) Physicians and Nurées; .

“(g) Engineers;

“(h) Businessmen who, by the nature of their
business or undertaking, are exposed to high risk
of being targets of criminal \elements;

“(i) Elected incumbent and former officials;
and

”

“G) Active and retired military and law
enforcement personnel.” .

SEC. 2. Section 19 of Republic Act No. 10591 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“Src. 19. Renewal of Licenses and Registration.
— All licenses to possess a firearm, regardless of
type or classification, shall be renewed every five (5)
years or ten (10) years, at the option of the
licensee, which shall be reckoned from the birthdate
of the said licensee, unless sooner revoked or
suspended. Failure to renew the license on or before
the date of its expiration shall cause the revocation
of the license and of the registration of the firearm
or firearms under said licensee.

“The registration of the firearm shall be
renewed every five (5) years or ten (10) years, at
the option of the licensee, which shall be reckoned
from the birthdate of the said ligensee, unless sooner
revoked or suspended. Failure to-renew the
registration of the firearm on or before the date of
expiration shall cause the revocation of the license
of the firearm. The said firearm shall be confiscated
or forfeited in favor of the government after due
process.

“The failure to renew a license or registration
within the periods stated above on two (2) occasions
shall cause the perpetual disqualification of the
holder of the firearm from applying for any firearm
license. The application for the renewal of the
license or registration may be submitted to the
FEO of the PNP within six (6) months before the
date of the expiration of such license or
registration.”

SEC. 3. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the Chief of
the PNP shall formulate the rules afd regulations for the
effective implementation of this Act. The non-issuance of the
implementing rules and regulations’ shall not prevent the
implementation of this Act upon its effectivity.

SEC. 4. Separability Clause.- If any part, section or
provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, )
the sections or provisions which are not affected shall remain }

valid and subsisting. 1
‘

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause.- All faws, decrees, ordinances,
rules, regulations, other issuances or parts thereof which are
inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 6. Effectivity.- This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its complete publication in the Official Gazette

or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 
 
  

    
 

LORD ALLA! Q. VELASCO VICENTE ¢. SOTTO III
e House President df the Senate
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1155
and House Bill No. 10610 was passed by the Senate of
the Philip aud the House of Representatives on

MAE hk) L. MENDOZA MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
if Secretary of the Senate

  

 

RODR A DUTERTE )
President of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 022012