-

H. No. 9933

: Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meters Manila
Righteenth Congress
Chirk Regular Sessian

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

REPUBLIC Act No. 11776]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MULTI-SPECIES MARINE
HATCHERY IN THE CITY OF CALBAYOG, PROVINCE
OF SAMAR, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the
supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
of the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a multi-species
marine hatchery in the City of Calbayog, Province of Samar.

Src. 2. Prior to the establishment of the multi-species
marine hatchery, the BFAR-DA shall conduct a full-scale
feasibility study in support of its construction to comply with
the requirements of the Department of Budget and Management.

Within two (2) years after the construction of the
multi-species marine hatchery, the BFAR-DA, through a
memorandum of agreement, shall transfer its management
to the local government of the City of Calbayog. It shall
implement a training and phasing-in program for local
government personnel on the management and operation of
the hatchery.

SEc. 3. The BFAR-DA shall conduct continuing research
and experimentation on the breeding and production of
marine species, especially as they apply to local conditions,
to discover new methods and technologies that will enhance
the fishing industry.

SEc. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in
the Department’s programs the conduct of the feasibility
study and the consequent establishment of the multi-species
marine hatchery in the City of Calbayog, Province of Samar,
the funding of which shall be included in the General
Appropriations Act. The local government unit concerned shall
set aside funds from any available local revenue in an
amount deemed appropriate for the operationalization of
the hatchery.

Src. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of
this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the rules
and regulations on the supervision, operation, monitoring,
and the eventual transfer of the multi-species marine hatchery
to the local government of the City of Calbayog.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

proved,

    

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on September 14, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MyYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA = MARS
Secretary of the Senate

  
 

Approved: MAY 27 2022
aul peed aft 18% Go. “4
*ilhout the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article. VI,
Sectica 27 (1) ef the Constitution
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO