H. No. 7548

Republic af the Philippines
Cougress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Chirk Regular Session

—
ie
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11308]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE WEST VISAYAS STATE
UNIVERSITY (WVSU)-EXTENSION IN THE CITY OF
HIMAMAYLAN, PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL,
INTO A REGULAR CAMPUS OF THE WEST VISAYAS
STATE UNIVERSITY TO BE KNOWN AS THE WEST
VISAYAS STATE UNIVERSITY-HIMAMAYLAN CITY
CAMPUS AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Conversion. — The West Visayas State
University (WVSU)-Extension in the City of Himamaylan,
Province of Negros Occidental, is hereby converted into a regular
campus of the West Visayas State University to be known as the
West Visayas State University-Himamaylan City Campus
(WVSU-HCC).

SEC. 2. Curricular Offerings. — The WVSU-HCC shall
offer undergraduate and graduate degree programs in advanced
education, higher technological, professional instruction and

training in the fields of arts, science and technology, education,
short-term technical-vocational education and training (TVET),
and other related and relevant fields of study within its areas of
specialization to meet the needs of the province and of the region.
It shall also undertake research, extension services and production
activities in support of the socioeconomic development of the
province and of the region, and provide progressive leadership in
its areas of specialization: Provided, That the WVSU-HCC shall
retain its original primary mandate as an arts and science
institution: Provided, further, That the WVSU-HCC shall offer
master’s and doctorate degree programs and courses related to
food production.

 

SEC. 3. Board of Regents. — The governance of the
WVSU-HCC shall be vested exclusively in the Board of Regents
(BOR) created under Presidential Decree No. 2019 and Republic
Act No. 8292 that govern the WVSU. All policies, rules and
regulations approved by the WVSU-BOR shall be applied to
WVSU-HCC.

Sxc. 4. The Campus Administrator. — The administration
of the WVSU-HCC shall be the responsibility of the Campus
Administrator who shall be appointed by the WVSU President
and confirmed by the BOR.

The Campus Administrator shall serve on a full-time basis
and shall hold office for a term of two (2) years and shall be eligible
for reappointment for another term: Provided, That the Campus
Administrator shall not be over sixty-two (62) years old at the
time of appointment to qualify for reappointment or term
extension: Provided, further, That the Campus Administrator
shall not have reached the age of sixty-five (65) years old. He
must have at least an academic rank of associate professor and
atleast three (3) years of experience as Department Chair, Director
or Vice President of a College/Unit.

In case of vacancy in the Office of the Campus
Administrator by reason of death, compulsory retirement,
resignation, removal for cause or incapacity to perform the
functions of the office, the WVSU President shall have the authority
to designate a new Campus Administrator.

SEc. 5. Powers and Duties of the Campus Administrator.
— The powers and duties of the Campus Administrator of the
WVSU-HCC shall be similar to the powers and duties of the
Campus Administrators in other WVSU campuses.

The Campus Administrator of the WVSU-HCC shall
represent the WVSU-HCC in the Administrative Council and
Academic Council of the University.

Sc. 6. The Establishment of the West Visayas State
University-Himamaylan City Campus shall ensure that the
minimum requirements for its operation and program offerings
have been complied with as duly prescribed by the Commission
on Higher Education (CHED).

SEC. 7. The provisions of Republic Act No, 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997’, shall
form an integral part of this Act and together shall serve as the
governing charter of the University.

Src. 8. All other powers, functions, privileges,
responsibilities and limitations to state universities and/or its
officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to or imposed
upon the University anor its officials whenever appropriate.

 

 

 

 

Suc. 9. Assets, Liabilities and Personnel. — All assets,
real and personal, personnel and records of the WVSU-Extension
in Himamaylay, City, as well as liabilities or obligations, are
hereby transferred to the WVSU-HCC. The positions, rights and
security of tenure of faculty members and personnel therein
employed under existing laws prior to the conversion into a regular
campus shall be respected. !

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the WVSU-Extension in Himamaylan City are hereby
transferred to the WVSU-HCC, and shall be titled under that
name: Provided, That should the campus or the University
cease to exist or be abolished or should such aforementioned
parcels of land be no longer needed by the University, the same
shall revert to the local government units concerned.

SEc. 10. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to
carry out the initial implementation of this Act shall be charged
against the current year’s funding of the WVSU-Extension
provided by the City of Himamaylan, Negros Occidental. The
City of Himamaylan shall continue to provide the same funding
to the WVSU-Extension School corresponding to the funding
given before the same is integrated into the WVSU until such
time that the full funding requirement of the WVSU-HCC is
included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 11. Development Plan, Management Audit,
Organizational/Administrative/Academic Structure. — Within
one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of this Act, the
WVSU-HCC shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget to the CHED, for corresponding
recommendation to the Department of Budget and Management;

(b+) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the
CHED;

(© Set up its organizational, administrative as well as
academic structure, including the appointment/designation of the
WVSU-HCC officials; and 1

@ Set in motion the establishment of at least two (2)
separate degree-granting units, one of which is in the arts and
sciences, and another at the graduate level.

SEC. 12.. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the approval of this Act, the Board of the
WVSU shall, in consultation with the CHED, promulgate the
rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Act.
The implementing rules and regulations issued pursuant to
this Act shall take effect thirty (30) days after the effectivity of
this Act.

Sec. 13. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act or
provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 14. Repealing Clause. — All parts of Presidential
Decree No. 2019 and other laws or parts thereof inconsistent with
any provision of this Act shall be deemed repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEc.15. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in any
newspaper of general circulation.

 

VICENTHC.SOTTOUI GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on July 31, 2018,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on February 4, 2019,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 7, 2019.

Vitit—

   
 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

o|