S. No. 1354
H. No. 8268

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Kighteenth Congress

Chirk Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC Act No. 11594)

AN ACT INCREASING THE PENALTIES FOR PERJURY,
AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE ARTICLES 183 AND
184 OF ACT NO. 3815, AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS “THE REVISED PENAL CODE”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Article 183 of Act No. 3815, as amended,
otherwise known as “The Revised Penal Code”, is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“Article 183. False testimony in other cases and
perjury in solemn affirmation. — The penalty of
prision mayor in its minimum period to prision
mayor in its medium period shall be imposed upon
any person who, knowingly making untruthful
statements and not being included in the provisions.
of the next preceding articles, shall testify under

oath, or make an affidavit, upon any material
matter before a competent person authorized to
administer an oath in cases in which the law so
requires.

Any person who, in case of a solemn
affirmation made in lieu of an oath, shall commit
any of the falsehoods mentioned in this and the
three preceding articles of this section, shall suffer
the respective penalties provided therein: Provided,
That if the person responsible for the commission
of this felony is a public officer or employee, the
penalty shall be imposed in its maximum period:
Provided, finally, That the offender shall also suffer
a fine not to exceed One million pesos
(P1,000,000.00) and perpetual absolute
disqualification from holding any appointive or
elective position in the government or in any
agency, entity or instrumentality thereof.”

SEC. 2. Article 184 of the same Act, as amended, is
hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Article 184. Offering false testimony in
evidence. — Any person who shall willfully and
knowingly offer in evidence a false witness or
testimony in any judicial or official proceeding,
shall be punished as guilty of false testimony and
shall suffer the respective penalties provided in this
section.”

SEc. 3. If any provision of this Act is declared
unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity and
effectivity of the other provisions thereof.

SgEc. 4. All laws, rules and regulations that may be
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed
or amended accordingly.

 

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Philippines.

Approved,

   

of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1354
and House Bill No. 8268 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on
August 23, 2021 and August 31, 2021, respectively.

  
 

.MENDOZA —__, MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: 0CT 29 2024 ©

RODRIG A~DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

   
 
 

Office of the Preshtent
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY

a
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
peer InIk — MIRRAA