S. No. 1950
H. No. 8869 °

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines

Metro Manila
Seventeenth Congress

Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ RepupticActNo. 11371]

AN ACT REDUCING ELECTRICITY RATES BY
ALLOCATING A PORTION OF THE NET NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT SHARE FROM THE MALAMPAYA
NATURAL GAS PROJECT FOR THE PAYMENT OF THE
STRANDED CONTRACT COSTS AND STRANDED
DEBTS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Murang Kuryente Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to protect public interest by ensuring the
provision of reliable, secure, and affordable supply of electric
power to consumers. Towards this end, the State shall
implement policies and programs to ensure transparent and

Z

reasonable prices of electricity to consumers by minimizing the
universal charges for stranded contract costs and stranded
debts.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — For purposes of this Act,
the following terms shall be defined as stated below:

(a) Joint Congressional Energy Commission (JCEC) refers
to the congressional commission constituted under Section 62
of Republic Act No. 9136, otherwise known as the “Electric
Power Industry Reform Act of 2001”, as amended by Republic
Act No. 11285, otherwise known as the “Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Act”;

(b) Malampaya fund refers to the existing and future
government share from the net production proceeds of the
Malampaya Natural Gas Project pursuant to Presidential
Decree No. 87, otherwise known as “The Oil Exploration and
Development Act of 1972”, and Service Contract 38. This
government share forms part of a Special Account in the
general fund used to finance energy resource development and
exploitation programs pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 910,
entitled “Creating an Energy Development Board, Defining Its
Powers and Functions, Providing Funds Therefor, and For
Other Purposes”;

(c) Malampaya Natural Gas Project refers to Service
Contract 38 in offshore Northwest Palawan;

(d) Net government share refers to the sixty percent
(60%) share of the national government from the net
production proceeds of Service Contract 38 pursuant to
Presidential Decree No. 87, otherwise known as “The Oil
Exploration and Development Act of 1972”, after the deductions
provided by Presidential Decree No. 910, Creating the Energy
Development Board;

(e) Net national government share refers to the share of
the national government from the net government share after
the deduction from the net government share of the local

government share pursuant to Section 290 of Republic Act
No. 7160, otherwise known as the “Local Government Code
of 1991”;

(f) Net production proceeds refer to the balance of gross
proceeds from Service Contract 38 after deducting the Filipino
Participation Incentive, if any, and all operating expenses
pursuant to Section 8(1) of Presidential Decree No. 87,
otherwise known as “The Oil Exploration and Development Act
of 1972”;

(g) Stranded contract costs of the National Power
Corporation (NPC) refer to the excess of the contracted cost
of electricity under eligible independent power producer
contracts over the actual selling price of the contracted energy
output of such contracts in the market. Such contract shall
have been approved by the Energy Regulatory Board as of
December 31, 2000;

(h) Stranded debts of the NPC refer to any unpaid
financial obligations of the NPC which have not been liquidated
by the proceeds from the sales and privatization of NPC assets;
and

G) Universal charge refers to a non-bypassable charge
which shall be passed on and collected from all end users on
a monthly basis by the distribution utilities.

SEC. 4. Use of Malampaya Fund. — Two hundred eight
billion pesos (P208,000,000,000.00) of the proceeds of the net
national government share from the Malampaya fund, shall
be utilized for the payment of stranded contract costs and
stranded debts transferred to and assumed by the Power Sector
Assets and Liabilities Management Corporation (PSALM)
pursuant to Section 49 of Republic Act No. 9136, the “Electric
Power Industry Reform Act of 2001”, including all anticipated
shortfalls in the course of payment of such liabilities after
applying the PSALM’s collections from the privatization of the
NPC’s assets, independent power producers’ contracts, and
proceeds from operations of existing assets: Provided, That
annual allocations from the Malampaya fund for the payment


of stranded contract costs and stranded debts including all
anticipated shortfalls shall be included in the General
Appropriations Act consistent with the fiscal program of the
government, the procedure for which shall be provided in the
implementing rules and regulations of this Act: Provided,
further, That any remaining and future proceeds of the net
national government share from the Malampaya fund over and
above the amount indicated in this Act shall remain in the
Special Account in the general fund to finance energy resource
development and exploitation programs pursuant to Presidential
Decree No. 910, Creating the Energy Development Board:
Provided, finally, That this provision shall not impair in any
way the use or application of the remaining amount or future
proceeds of the net national government share of the
Malampaya fund to be used for energy resource development
and exploitation programs pursuant to Presidential Decree
No. 910.

The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) shall
ensure the timely release of the amounts allocated and
appropriated to the PSALM in accordance with its debt and
independent power producer payment schedule.

In the event the stranded contract costs, stranded debts,
and anticipated shortfalls in the course of the payment of such
liabilities are fully paid before the exhaustion of the amount
allocated in this Act, the remainder of the amount allocated
shall be utilized to finance energy resource development and
exploitation programs pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 910,
Creating the Energy Development Board.

The universal charges for stranded contract costs and
stranded debts currently being collected may be covered by the
allocated amount from the Malampaya fund subject to the
implementing rules and regulations of this Act.

 

SEC. 5. Regular Reports. - The PSALM shall submit an
annual projected cash flow statement and an annual actual
cash flow statement of the stranded contract costs, stranded
debts, and anticipated shortfalls as well as its debt payment

and independent power producer contract payment schedule to
the Department of Energy (DOE), Energy Regulatory
Commission (ERC), Department of Finance (DOF), DBM, and
the JCEC: Provided, That the submission of the annual
projected cash flow statement shall be on or before June 30
of the preceding year and that of the annual actual cash flow
statement shall be on or before June 30 of the succeeding year.
The PSALM shall regularly coordinate with the DOE, DOF,
and the DBM to ensure consistent recordkeeping of
disbursements from the Malampaya fund. The PSALM shall
make all reports available to the public through its website.

SEC. 6. Congressional Oversight. — Upon the effectivity
of this Act, the JCEC shall exercise oversight powers over its
implementation.

SEC. 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DOE and
DOF, in consultation with the DBM, the Bureau of the
Treasury, and the PSALM shall promulgate the necessary
rules and regulations for the proper disposition of the said
funds and the effective implementation of this Act. Upon the
effectivity of the implementing rules and regulations of this
Act, no new universal charges for stranded contract costs and
stranded debts shall be collected.

SEC. 8. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional or invalid,
the other parts or provisions hereof which are not affected
thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 9. Amendatory Clause. — Section 8 of Presidential
Decree No. 910, Creating the Energy Development Board
insofar as the use of the Special Account in the general fund
is hereby amended.

SEC. 10. Repealing Clause. - All laws, presidential
decrees, executive orders, issuances, rules and regulations
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby

, repealed, or modified accordingly.

CaP RR I EST EE PEE TERT ARE IES

 

SEC. 11. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 

GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO VICENTE C. SOTTO III
Speaker of the House PresidenkofAhe Senate
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1950
and House Bill No. 8869 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on May 28, 2019
and May 29, 2019, respectively.

    

ALING MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 011904