-

H. No. 6975

if Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meters Manila
Righteenth Congress

Third Regular Session
_—___-——_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

* [RepuBLIC AcT No. 11780]

AN ACT INTEGRATING THE PALAWAN STATE
UNIVERSITY-COLLEGE OF COMMUNITY RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT (PSU-CCRD) EXTERNAL CAMPUSES
IN THE PROVINCE OF PALAWAN AND IN THE CITY
OF PUERTO PRINCESA AS REGULAR CAMPUSES OF
PALAWAN STATE UNIVERSITY (PSU), AMENDING
FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7818, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: *

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “Palawan State
University-College of Community Resources Development
(PSU-CCRD) External Campuses Act”,

SEC. 2. The Palawan State University-College of
Community Resources Development (PSU-CCRD) External
Campuses in the following municipalities of the Province of
Palawan and in the City of Puerto Princesa, namely: PSU-Narra,
PSU-Quezon, PSU-Brooke’s Point, PSU-Roxas, PSU-Taytay,

PSU-Coron, PSU-Sofronio Espafiola, PSU-Rizal, PSU-Bataraza,
PSU-Balabac, PSU-Dumaran, PSU-San Vicente, PSU-Linapacan,
PSU-Araceli, PSU-El Nido and PSU-San Rafael located in
Barangay San Rafael in the City of Puerto Princesa shall be
integrated as regular campuses of the PSU.

The PSU Main Campus, the PSU-Cuyo Campus (formerly
Palawan College of Arts and Trade) in the Municipality of Cuyo,
Palawan, which was integrated into the main campus, and the
regular campuses of PSU established under this Act shall be
collectively referred to as the University.

SEc. 3. The PSU-CCRD External Campuses in the
Province of Palawan and in the City of Puerto Princesa shall
primarily provide short-term technical-vocational courses,
undergraduate, and graduate programs within its competency
and areas of specialization pursuant to its mandate and according
to its capabilities, as the Board of Regents may deem necessary
to carry out its objectives, and those which respond to the
human resource development needs of the Province of Palawan
and the Mindoro, Marinduque, Romblon, and Palawan

(MIMAROPA) Region. .

The PSU-CCRD External Campuses in the Province of
Palawan and in the City of Puerto Princesa are also mandated to
undertake research and extension services, and to provide
progressive leadership in these areas.

Src. 4. The governance of the Campuses shall be vested
exclusively in the Board of Regents of the PSU, hereinafter referred
to as the Board.

SEC. 5. The University President shall exercise overall
supervision and management of the campuses. The PSU-CCRD
External Campuses in the Province of Palawan and in the City of
Puerto Princesa shall each be headed by a Campus Administrator
who shall render full-time service and be appointed or
designated by the Board, upon the recommendation of the search
committee and the President, subject to the guidelines,
qualifications, and standards set by the Board: Provided, That
upoh the effectivity of this Act, the incumbent Campus Directors
of the existing campuses of the PSU shall continue to serve
as such,

Src. 6. All assets, real and personal, personnel, and records
of the PSU-CCRD External Campuses located in the municipalities
of Narra, Quezon, Brooke’s Point, Roxas, Taytay, Coron, Sofronio
Espafiola, Rizal, Bataraza, Balabac, Dumaran, San Vicente,
Linapacan, Araceli, El Nido, and San Rafael, as well as
liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred to thé University.
The positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members

--and personnel therein employed under exigting laws prior to their
conversion into regular campuses shall be respected: Provided,
That the incumbents occupying the positions shall remain in the
same status until otherwise provided by the Board: Provided,
further, That the University shall also accordingly upgrade or
increase its human resource component as may be deemed
appropriate by the governing Board.

All parcels of land belonging to the government ‘occupied
by the PSU-CCRD External Campuses in the Province of Palawan
and in the City of Puerto Princesa are hereby transferred to the
University, and shall be titled under its name: Provided, That
should the campuses or the University cease to exist or be
abolished, or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no
longer needed by the University, the same shall revert to the
local government units concerned.

SEc. 7. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations
Act (GAA).

The municipalities of Narra, Quezon, Brooke’s Point, Roxas,
Taytay, Coron, Sofronio Espafiola, Rizal, Bataraza, Balabac,
Dumaran, San Vicente, Linapacan, Araceli, El Nido, and San
Rafael shall provide the same financial support to the respective
external campuses until such time that the amount necessary
for the continued operation and maintenance of the campuses
shall be included in the annual GAA.’

Sc. 8. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997’, and
Republic Act Nos. 9832 and 11169 shall form an integral part
of this Act, and shall serve as part of the governing charter of
the University.

SEc, 9. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining
parts or provjsions not affected thereby shall remain in full force
and effect.

Sec. 10. All other laws, presidential decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

SEc. 11. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days
after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

 

VICENTEC. SOTTOT LO
President of the Senate

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on September 1, 2020,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 2, 2022.

Wheat.

MYRA MARIE D, VILLARICA A \MENDOZA
Secretary of the Senate

  

Approved: :

” Lapeed wnvd saw on ‘WAY 2.9 2022

without the gignature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Articfe VI, -
Section 87 (1) af the Constitution ~

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO