H. No. 8370
Republic of the Philippines
|

Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11396]

AN ACT REQUIRING STATE UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
(SUCs) TO PREPARE AND IMPLEMENT A LAND
USE DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN
THAT SHALL INCLUDE THE CONSTRUCTION OF
DORMITORIES FOR STUDENTS AND HOUSING SITES
FOR EMPLOYEES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “SUCs Land Use Development and Infrastructure Plan
(LUDIP) Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy of the
State to provide for a rational, holistic, efficient and just allocation,
utilization, development and management of the country’s land

 

and water resources that is consistent with the principles of equity,
social justice, environmental integrity and sustainable
development for the common good.

Src. 3. Preparation and Implementation of the
LUDIP in SUCs. — All state universities and colleges (SUCs),
through their governing boards, shall be required to prepare
and implement a LUDIP designed to improve and optimally
utilize their resources. All land use or infrastructure projects
of the SUCs shall also be required to follow the LUDIP, which
shall be linked with the land use plan and practice of the local
government units to ensure complementation of activities
across geographical boundaries.

The LUDIP shall be submitted by the SUCs to the
Commission on Higher Education (CHED) within two (2)
years after the approval of this Act: Provided, That, it shall
be updated periodically as the need arises: Provided, further,
That the CHED shall be informed of changes made thereof:
Provided, finally, That it should be reviewed by the governing
board ten (10) years after its approval to ensure that it
remains relevant and in consonance with current conditions
and realities.

The preparation and implementation of the LUDIP shall
be made a requirement for the approval of infrastructure projects
in SUCs. No new infrastructure project shall be approved and
implemented in any SUC unless the LUDIP has been implemented
and submitted to the CHED.

Sc. 4. Definition of Infrastructure Projects. —
Infrastructure project shall mean construction, improvement or
rehabilitation of roads and bridges, railways, airports, seaports,
communication facilities, irrigation, flood control and drainage,
water supply and sewerage system, shore protection, power
facilities, national buildings, school buildings, hospital buildings
and other related construction projects that form part of the
government capital investment.

Src. 5. Coverage. — The LUDIP of the SUCs shall
include the following:

(a) Campus planning framework, principles and processes,
including master development plans;

(b) Detailed geographical description and survey of
the site occupied by the SUCs, including all idle lands and
campuses, branches or extension sites titled under the name
of the SUCs, other sites occupied by the SUCs and adjacent
communities;

(c) Inventory of all existing buildings, facilities, and other
infrastructure within the compound or areas occupied by the SUCs
and other real estate assets;

@ Cadastral survey of land occupied by the SUCs,
including detailed geographical descriptions on land disputes,
natural and man-made hazards for climate change issues, zoning
projections, and process flow of how these are approved and
revised;

(©) Detailed description of the research core, academic
core, residential areas covering both housing for faculty
and staff, dormitories for students, and detailed geographical
description and survey of the site intended for dormitories
for students and housing sites for employees of the SUCs,
including the architectural design and estimated cost of
construction;

() Detailed geographical description of land used for
commercial, agriculture, fishery, forestry, and other activities,
including open and recreational spaces, landscape features, and
campus transportation system, among others;

(g) Design and estimated cost of construction, operation,
maintenance of other infrastructure needs of the SUCs; and

 

(b) Financial plan, which shall include the conduct and
submission of feasibility studies, sources of funds, income, loans,
public-private partnerships, and other financial schemes or
arrangements.

Sec. 6. Assistance of Government Institutions. — The
SUCs may seek assistance and cooperation from the Housing
and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB), the University of
the Philippines School of Urban and Regional Planning
(UP-SURP), the Department of Public Works and Highways
(DPWH), Land Management Bureau of the Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (LMB-DENR) and other
government offices or agencies in drawing up the LUDIP.
For this purpose, all government departments, agencies,
offices, and instrumentalities are hereby mandated to extend
all possible assistance and cooperation to all SUCs in the
preparation of their LUDIP.

The CHED, UP-SURP and HLURB shall design capacity
building programs for SUCs to enable the SUCs to develop and
prepare suitable land use plans.

SEc. 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days after the effectivity of this Act, the CHED, in
coordination with the Philippine Association of State Universities
and Colleges, the DPWH, HLURB, LMB-DENR and other relevant
government agencies and stakeholders, shall formulate the
necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation
of this Act.

Suc. 8. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the
law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid and
subsisting.

Src. 9. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations and other issuances or parts thereof which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed,
amended or modified accordingly.

 

 

Sec. 10. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

  

‘
VICENTE C.SOTTO TI GLORIA AGAL ARROYO

President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives
on November 26, 2018, amended by the Senate of the
Philippines on May 20, 2019, and which amendments
were concurred in by the House of Representatives on
June 3, 2019.

    
 

k MYRA RIED. VILLARICA — DANTE 3RY LING
Secretary of the Senate Actihg Secr
House of Representatives

Approved: ug 24

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

0 f eee

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

PRRD 2016 ~ 012059 i - -
SS 29-25 t :