SS

H. No. 8741

Republic of the Philippines
Gougress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Sesstan

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No.11664]

AN ACT RENEWING FOR ANOTHER TWENTY-FIVE (25)
YEARS THE FRANCHISE GRANTED TO FRANCISCAN
BROADCASTING CORPORATION UNDER REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 8736, ENTITLED “AN ACT GRANTING THE
FRANCISCAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION A
FRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALE, ESTABLISH,
OPERATE AND MAINTAIN RADIO*BROADCASTING
STATIONS ANYWHERE IN THE PHILIPPINES WHERE
FREQUENCIES AND/OR CHANNELS ARE STILL
AVAILABLE FOR RADIO BROADCASTING”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
regulations, the franchise granted to Franciscan Broadcasting
Corporation, hereunder referred to as the Grantee, its successors
or assignees, under Republic Act No. 8736, to construct, install,
establish, operate, and maintain for commercial purposes and in

the public interest, radio broadcasting stations, where frequencies
and channels are still available for radio broadcasting, through
microwave, satellite or whatever means, as well as the use of any
new technology in radio systems, with the corresponding
technological auxiliaries and facilities, special broadcast and other
program and distribution services and relay stations in the
Philippines, is hereby renewed for another twenty-five (25) years.

Sec. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. —
The stations or facilities of the Grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
any way diminishing its own privilége to use its assigned
wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission or
reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the Grantee’s
services and the availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The Grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) the appropriate permits
and licenses for the construction and operation of its stations or
facilities and shall not use any frequency in the radio spectrum
without authorization from the NTC. The NTC, however, shall
not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of any such
authority. . ”

In case of any violation of the provisions of this franchise,
the NTC shall have the authority to revoke or suspend, after due
process, the permits or licenses it issued pursuant to the franchise.
The NTC may recommend to Congress of the Philippines the
revocation of the franchise for any violation of the provisions of
this franchise.

SEc. 4. Responsibility to the Public. — The Grantee shall
provide, free of charge, adequate public service time which is
reasonable and sufficient to enable the government, through the
‘broadcasting stations or facilities of the Grantee, to reach the
pertirient populations or portions thereof, on important public
issues and relay important public announcements and warnings
concerning public emergencies and calamities, as necessity,
urgency, or law may require; provide at all times sound and

‘
balanced programming; promote public participation; assist in
the functions of public information and education; conform to the
ethics of honest enterprise; promote audience sensibility and
empowerment including closed captioning; and not use its stations
or facilities for the broadcasting of obscene or indecent language,
speech, act or scene, the dissemination of deliberately false
information or willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of
public interest, or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or
treasonable acts.

Public service time referred herein shall be equivalent toa
maximum aggregate of ten percent (10%) of paid commercials or
advertisements which shall be allocated based on need to the
Executive and Legislative branches, the Judiciary, Constitutional
Commissions, and international humanitarian organizations duly
recognized by statutes: Provided, That the NTC shall increase
the public service time in case of extreme emergency or calamity.
The NTC shall issue rules and regulations for this purpose, the
effectivity of which shall commence upon applicability with other
similarly situated broadcast network franchise holders.

SEc. 5. Right of the Government. — The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony, and
the use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the Grantee by the
State that may be withdrawn any time after die process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and order: to
temporarily take over and operate the stations or facilities of the
Grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any station or
facility in the interest of public safety, security, and public welfare;
or to authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by
any agency of the government, upon due compensation to the
Grantee, for the use of said stations or facilities during the Period
when these shall be so operated. 5

*

SEc. 6. Term of Franchise. —- This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of
this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall
be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event the Grantee fails to
operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 7. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of Grantee. —
The Grantee shal] not require any previous censorship of any
speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast from
its stations, but if any such speech, play, act or scene, or other
matter should constitute a violation of the law or infringement of
a private right, the Grantee shall be free from any liability, civil
or criminal, for such speech, play, act or scene, or other matter:
Provided, That the Grantee, during any broadcast, shall cut off
the airing of speech, play, act or scene, or other matter being
broadcast if the tendency thereof is to propose or incite treason,
rebellion, or sedition; or the language used therein or the theme
thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided, further, That willful
failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause for the cancellation
of this franchise.

SEc. 8. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The’ Grantee shall hold the national,
provincial, city, and municipal governments of the Philippines
free from all claims, liabilities, demands, or actions arising
out of accidents causing injury to persons or damage to
properties, during the construction or operation of the stations of
the Grantee.

SEC. 9. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. - The Grantee shall
create employment opportunities and accept on-the-job
trainees in the franchise operations: Provided, That priority
shall be accorded to the residents of the place where the principal
office of the Grantee is located: Provided, further, That the
Grantee shall comply with the applicable labor standards and
allowance entitlement under existing labor laws, rules and
regulations and similar issuances.

The employment opportunities or jobs created shall be
reflected in the General Information Sheet (GIS) to be submitted
to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) annually.

Src. 10. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. - The Grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity, nor

ay

merge with any other corporation or entity, nor shall the
controlling interest of the Grantee be transferred, simultaneously
or contemporaneously, to any person, firm, company, corporation,
or entity without the prior approval of Congress. The Grantee
shall inform Congress, through the Office of the Speaker of the
House of Representatives and Office of the Senate President, of
any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or assignment of
franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder, or of
the merger or transfer of the controlling interest of the Grantee,
within sixty (60) days after the completion of the said transaction.
Failure to report to Congress such change of ownership shall
render the franchise ipso facto revoked. Any person or entity to
which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be
subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.

SEC. 11. Reportorial Requirement. — The Grantee shall
submit an annual report on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations to the Congress
of the Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representatives and the Committee
on Public Services of the Senate, on or before April 30 of every
year during the term of its franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the roll-out,
development, operation or expansion of business; audited financial
statements; latest GIS officially submitted to the SEC, if applicable;
certification of the NTC on the status of its permits and operations;
and an update on the dispersal of ownership undertaking,
if applicable.

s

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

SEC. 12. Fine. - Failure of the Grantee to submit the”
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a fine-of a
Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of non¢ompliance.
The fine shall be collected by the NTC from the délinquent
franchise grantee separate from the reportorial penalties imposed
by the NTC and the same shall be remitted to the Bureau of the
Treasury.

SEC. 13. Equality Clause. — Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio
broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of Congress, shall
become part of this franchise and shall be accorded immediately
and unconditionally to the herein Grantee: Provided, That the
foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions of
broadcasting franchises concerning territorial coverage, the term,
or the type of service authorized by the franchise.

, SEC. 14. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —
This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal
by Congress when the public interest so requires and shall not
be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein
provided for.

SEc. 15. Sepqrability Clause. ~ If any of the sections
or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 16. Repealing Clause. — Sections 13 and 14 of
Republic Act No. 8736 are hereby repealed.

All laws, decrees, orders, resolutions, instructions, rules
and regulations, and other issuances or parts thereof which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed,
amended, or modified accordingly.

SEC. 17. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

LO

  

of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on March 2, 2021,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on December 6, 2021,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on December 14, 2021.

MYRA MARIE D, VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: MAR 2 9 2022

 

ROD ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 021563 7

  
   

 
 

omy

i

Faerun sential, tna coder