patna

H, No. 9323

.  _. Republic of the Philippines
Gangress of the Philippines
| Retro Mails
Kighteenth Congress

day of July, two thousand twenty-one.



[ Rerustic Act No. 11592 ]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
FOR THE SAFE OPERATIONS OF THE LIQUEFIED
PETROLEUM GAS INDUSTRY, DELINEATING
THE POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF VARIOUS
GOVERNMENT AGENCIES, DEFINING AND
PENALIZING CERTAIN PROHIBITED ACTS



Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be referred to
as the “LPG Industry Regulation Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is hereby declared the
policy of the State to protect the interests of end-consumers,
ensure their general welfare, and establish standards of conduct
for business. Towards this end, the State shall:

ae

Matte anetery Tae thn a And te anh rota

(a) Institute reforms in the existing standards of conduct
and codes of practice for the liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
industry;

(b) Ensure the health, safety, security, environmental,
and quality standards for the following:

(1) Importing, refining, storing, exporting, refilling,
transportation, distribytion, and marketing of LPG, and

\

(2) Importation, manufacture, requalification, repair,
exchange; swapping, improvement, and scrappage of LPG
pressure vessels, whichever is applicable;

t
() Promote awareness regarding the health, safety,
security, environmental, and quality standards for the proper
use of LPG, LPG pressure vessels, and ancillary equipment
through information dissemination and end-consumer education
campaigns;

@) Uphoid the right of end-consumers to freely choose
the trademark or trade name of LPG-filled cylinders they want
to purchase and improve competition in the LPG industry for
the benefit of end-consumers; and

) Be at the forefront of technological innovation, in

partnership with public and private stakeholders, by keeping .

abreast of and developing homegrown advancements and
breakthroughs in the LPG industry.

SEC. 3. Scope and Application. — This Act shall apply
to the followjng:

(a) Importing, refining, storing, exporting, refilling,
transportation, distribution, and marketing of LPG;

(b) Importation, manufacture, requalification, repair,
exchange, swapping, improvement, and scrappage of LPG
pressure vessels, whichever is applicable: and

(c) Safe operations of the entire LPG industry including
all LPG facilities and the residential, commercial, industrial,

and automotive use of LPG.

SEC. 4. Definition of Terms. ~ For purposes of this Act,

‘the following terms shall be defined as stated below:

{a) Activity refers to:
. Lf, , .
(1) Importing, refining, storing, exporting, refilling,
transportation, distribution, and marketing of: LPG for
residential, commercial, industrial, or automotive use, and

(2) Importing, manufacturing, distribution, selling,
requalifying, repairing, and scrappage of LPG pressure vessels,
whichever is applicable, authorized LPG seals, and other
ancillary equipment; x

(b) Adulterated LPG refers to the mixing of LPG with
any finished or unfinished petroleum product or stock or with
any non-petroleum substance or material that will result in
product quality change or in the failure of LPG to meet the
required product specifications under the Philippine National

(c) Ancillary equipment refers to parts, devices, and
accessories necessary and indispensable for the safe and proper
operation of an LPG pressure vessel such as seals, valves,
hoses, and regulators;

(@ Auto-LPG refers to LPG intended to fuel, propel, or
otherwise provide propulsion to motor vehicles;

(@) Auto-LPG container refers to any pressure vessel
filled with auto-LPG permanently attached to and is an
inherent and integral part of a motor vehicle;

() Auto-LPG dispensing station refers to a facility or
business establishment, which sells auto-LPG directly to
auto-LPG vehicle users. It may be a stand alone establishment,

or located within or operated within a liquid petroleum
products ‘retail outlet;

(@) Bulk consumer refers to a duly authorized natural
or juridical person who purchases LPG at large quantities for
its own use, requires bulk storage of LPG, and does not, in
any way, engage in the distribution or sale of LPG to the
end-consumer;

th) Bulk distributor refers to any duly authorized - -

natural or juridical person who purchases LPG in bulk in
tankers, barges, or tank truck trailers from bulk suppliers,
and who supplies the same to refillers or bulk consumers;

‘
i i ized natural or
(i) Bulk supplier refers to a duly authorize 3

juridical person who engages in the sale or distribution of LPG

in large quantities and requires bulk storage of LPG;

§) Centralized LPG piping system refers to a means of
distributing LPG through a closed system of pipelines within
a building from locally installed LPG pressure vessels;

(k) Cross-filling refers to the refilling of LPG cylinders
by a natural or juridical person duly authorized by the
trademark owner as evidenced by a written contract or similar
instrument;

@ Dealer refers to any duly authorized natural or
juridical person engaged in the trading or sale of LPG
cylinders to retail outlets or directly to end-consumers;

ctive pressure vessel refers to an LPG pressure
wenoel that os ancehifed, damaged, or dilapidated due to the
existence of corrosion or pitting, dents, cuts, gouges, digs,
bulges, leaks, and similar defects rendering such pressure
vessel unsafe, injurious, or dangerous for distribution or use,
and creating a substantial risk of injury to the general public.
It also refers to an injurious, unsafe, or dangerous LPG
pressure vessel;

(n) Durable marking refers to a marking of LPG
cylinders with water capacity of less than or equal to one (1)
liter and LPG cartridges such as stenciling by using ink or
paint, or labelling through other suitable methods. This
marking may be modified but shall remain legible for a limited
period;

(0) End-consumer refers to any person,.who purchases
LPG for own consumption. For purposes of this Act, an
end-consumer shall not include a bulk ‘constimey;

(p) Facility refers to LPG refining plants, terminals,
refilling plants, bulk depots, cylinder warehouses, and storage
areas and their corresponding logistical requirements such as
personnel and equipment:

(q) Generic LPG cylinder refers to an LPG eylinder
which is already circulating in the marketyprior to the
effectivity of this Act, bearing no trademark or trade name

embossed, engraved, or otherwise permanently indicated
thereon;

@) Hauler refers to a duly authorized natural or
juridical person involved in the transportation, distribution, and
delivery of LPG in cylinders and cartridges, and bulk LPG
through the use of authorized motor vehicles:

(s) Importer refers to a duly authorized natural or
Juridical person engaged in the importation of LPG, LPG

pressure vessels, or ancillary equipment for processing, sale,
or own use, whichever is applicable;

(t) License to operate refers to a certification issued by
the Department of Energy (DOE) to a natural or juridical
person intending to engage in business for a specific activity
as an LPG industry participant who has complied with all
the documentary requirements, quality and safety standards,
rules, and regulations prescribed by the DOE and other
pertinent government agencies for such an activity;

(a) LPG refers to liquefied petroleum gas which consists
ef commercial propane gas or commercial butane gas, or a
mixture of both gases, with properties conforming to the
standards set forth in the PNS;

\ v) LPG bulk storage tank refers to a refillable pressure
yessel, with water capacity of more than one hundred fifty
(150) liters, designed for the storage of LPG;

(w) LPG cartridge refers to a non-refillable receptacle“ -

having a, water capacity not exceeding. one thousand (1,000)

-milliliter (ml) for receptacles made of metal, and five hundred
(500) ml for receptacles made of synthetic material or glass,

containing under pressure a gas or mixture of gases. It shall
also refer to an LPG canister or LPG cassette;

(x) LPG cylinder refers to a transportable and refillable
pressure vessel with up to one hundred fifty (150) liters water
capacity, designed for the storage of LPG;

(y) LPG cylinder buyback refers to the activity wherein
an LPG cylinder owner purchases LPG-cylinders bearing its
trademark or trade name from an LPG industry participant
as part of the process of LPG cylinder swapping at a price
determined under the LPG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping

Program;

(2) LPG cylinder exchange refers to the purchase by the
end-consumer of an LPG-filled cylinder using an empty LPG
cylinder of a different trademark or trade name;

(aa) ERG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program
refers to a system that allows end-consumers to exercise their
freedom of choice in the purchase of LPG-filled cylinders
through LPG cylinder exchange and LPG cylinder swapping;

(bb) LPG cylinder improvement refers to activities such
as repair and requalification’ to ensure an LPG cylinder is
compliant with all applicable PNS that would render it fit for
use and circulation;

(cc) LPG Cylinder Improvement Program fund refers to
the amount set aside by LPG industry participants to defray
the cost of LPG cylinder improvement under the LPG Cylinder
Improvement Program;

(dd) LPG Cylinder Improvement Program refers to a
system that aims to ensure the quality of all LPG cylinders
in circulation with the goal of protecting the end-consumers,
by which: ' ’

(1) A fund is set aside by LPG industry participants for
the improvement of LPG cylinders, ,

(2) Trademark owners, dealers, marketers, and retail
outlete may avail of this fund whenever they send an LPG
cylinder for improvement, and

(3) Within a specific period of time, generic LPG
cylinders and LPG cylinders without trademark owners, which
are already in circulation in the market, were not illegally
imported, and are not defective, injurious, unsafe, or

dangerous:

G) May be received by trademark owners, dealers,
marketers, and retail outlets, without fear of penalty, and

Gi) Shall be requalified and permanently marked with
the trademark or trade name of the trademark owner last in
possession of it;

e) LPG cylinder owner refers to a natural or juridical
person whose trademark or trade name is embossed, engraved,
or otherwise permanently indicated on the LPG cylinder, or
marked through durable marking, if applicable, in the manner
prescribed by the applicable PNS;

() LPG cylinder swapping refers to the giving and
taking among industry players of LPG cylinders bearing other
trademarks or trade names at an accredited LPG cylinder
swapping center;



(gg) LPG cylinder swapping center shall refer to a
storage facility in a specific locality which serves as the drop
off point of empty LPG cylinders by LPG industry participants
in the LPG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program for the
purpose of LPG cylinder swapping;

(hh) LPG Industry Development Plan refers to a
comprehensive plan to ensure existing and projected LPG
supply levels will meet demand including concrete steps to
further develop the industry;

v " Gi) “LPG industry, participants refer to jiatural or
juridical persons engaged in the activities defined in Section
4(a) of this, Act;

(jj) LPG pressure vessel refers to an unfired and sealed
containment for LPG that has internal pressure more than
1.03 barg, and designed, fabricated, manufactured, examined,
and tested in accordance with prescribed standards and codes,
cartridges, auto-LPG containers, and other similarly designed
and tested containers; .

(kk) . LPG seal refers to the protective cover placed on
the gas outlet of an LPG cylinder of the type that necessitates
breaking or destroying before LPG can flow out of the cylinder.
It shall have’ a distinctive design, symbol, emblem, or mark,
identifying the LPG cylinder owner;

Ql) Marketer refers to a duly authorized natural or
juridical person engaged in the sale of LPG, whether in bulk
or in retail, under its own trademark or trade name;

(mm) Measuring devices refer to the equipment utilized
to determine the weight of LPG cylinders, which are
periodically calibrated and sealed by the concerned government
agency;

(nn) Permanent marking refers to the marking applied
to newly manufactured LPG cylinders by embossing, hard
metal stamping, engraving, casting, or other similar methods

OW, ee VEN

as prescribed by the applicable PNS, or as may be determined
by the DOE and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)
in the case of generic LPG cylinders. This marking shall
remain legible during the lifespan of the LPG cylinder;

(oo) Pilferage refers to the theft or unauthorized transfer
of LPG from an LPG pressure vessel to another receptacle;

(pp) PNS refers to the standards promulgated by the
Department of Trade and Industry-Bireau-of Philippine
Standards (DTI-BPS) pertaining to product specifications, test
methods, terminologies, procedures, or practices pursuant to
Republic Act No. 4109, otherwise known as “An Act to Convert
the Division of Standards Under the Bureau of Commerce into
a Bureau of Standards, to Provide for the Standardization
and/or Inspection of Products and Imports of the Philippines
and for Other Purposes”, and other-applicable laws, rules, and
regulations; we

(qq) Qualified service person refers to an individual who
has successfully completed an approved training course for LPG

. service persons by the DOE, the DTI, and other relevant

government agencies as specified in ‘this Act, or an
organization duly recognized and accredited by the government;

(rr) Refiller refers to a service provider authorized by the
trademark owner to refill LPG cylinders on the latter's behalf,
or any trademark owner which refills LPG into its own LPG
cylinders;

(ss) Refilling plant refers to a facility with LPG bulk
storage tanks and refilling equipment, used for refilling LPG
into cylinders;

(it) Refiner refers to a duly authorized natural or

juridical person who refines crude oil and other naturally

occurring petroleum hydrocarbons through distillation,
conversion, and treatment;

(uu) Requalification refers to the process by which an
_ LPG pressure vessel is inspected, tested, and re-evaluated in
accordance with the prescribed PNS and other accepted codes
and standards adopted by the DTI as PNS to determine its
viability for continued use, distribution, repair, or scrappage,
_ whichever may be applicable;

(vv) Regualifier refers to a natural or juridical person
engaged in the business of requalification duly accredited by
the DTI; %

, (ww) Repair refers to the removal and replacement of

parts of LPG pressure vessels, or the performance of any other
correctivé, and restorative measures in accordance with the
prescribed method under the PNS and other accepted codes
and standards as adopted by the DTI as PNS, with the end
goal of restoring the viability and fitness of LPG pressure
vessels for public use;

(xx) Repairer refers to a natural or juridical person
engaged in the business of repair duly certified by the DTI;

' (yy) Retail outlet refers to a duly authorized natural or
juridical person engaged in the direct and exclusive trade or
sale of LPG in cylinders to end-consumers whose maximum
floor stock is determined by the DOE;

(zz) Scrappage refers to the destruction of defective LPG
cylinders declared by a requalifier or repairer to be unfit for
use;

(aaa) Seal manufacturer refers to any duly authorized
natural or juridical person engaged in the production of LPG
seals;

(bbb) Substandard pressure vessel refers to any pressure
vessel which does not conform with the applicable PNS and
does not bear a safety and quality mark from the DTI;

ase nace ner eae

if

(ccc) Tare weight refers to the net weight of an LPG
cylinder excluding its contents as engraved in the collar and
painted in the body or permanently marked in the body
thereof. It shall be expressed in kilograms or grams in
accordance with the applicable PNS;

(ddd) Terminal refers to a facility used to import, receive,
unload, and load LPG from local or foreign sources. It is
equipped with a port, jetty, and other infrastructure;



(ee) Trademark owner refers to a duly authorized
natural or juridical person owning a duly régistered, valid, and
existing trademark or trade name with the Intellectual
Property Office of the Philippines pursuant to Republic Act
No. 8293, otherwise known as “Intellectual Property Code of
the Philippines”; and

(ff) Uncertified pressure vessel refers to an LPG
pressure vessel that did not undergo the certification process
of the DTI or is not in accordance with the standard adopted
as PNS by the DTI.

CHAPTER II
ROLE OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

SEC. 5. Lead Agency. — The DOE shall be the primary
government agency responsible for the implementation and
enforcement of this Act. The DOE shall regulate, supervise,
and monitor the LPG industry and all LPG industry
participants to ensure compliance with the health, safety,
security, and environmental standards, the applicable PNS, and
other accepted codes and standards as adopted by the DTI as
PNS.

SEC. 6. Powers and Functions of the DOE. - In addition
to its mandate under Republic Act No. 7638, otherwise known
as the “Department of Energy Act of 1992”, and Republic Act
No. 8479, otherwise known as the “Downstream Oil Industry



SI lnm indi Ant met ate mA NS PEA iL NOR 1 KARRI A OO SEIION Sot ch Sea te



Deregulation Act of 1998”, the DOE shall have the following
powers and functions:

(a) Prepare the LPG Industry Development Plan, in
consultation with public and private stakeholders, which shall
be integrated into the Philippine Energy Plan;

(b) Implement and ensure compliance with the quality
and safety standards prescribed in the PNS and other accepted
codes and standards a& adopted by the DTI as PNS for:

(1) Refining plants, refilling plants, depots, storage areas,
transportation facilities, retail outlets, auto-LPG dispensing
stations, and other related facilities or premises of LPG
industry participants,

(2) LPG, LPG pressure vessels including filled or
unfilled cylinders in circulation which are for distribution and
sale to dealers, retail outlets, and end-consumers, and other
ancillary equipment, and

3) Centralized LPG piping systems;
(c) Issue and enforce compliance with the following:

() Licenses to operate for qualified LPG industry
participants. The DOE shall have the power to suspend or
revoke these, after due notice and hearing, for any LPG
industry participant found to have committed any of the
prohibited acts under Chapter XI of this Act,

(2) Clasure or cease and desist orders, after due notice
and hearing, to any concerned LPG industry participant found
to have committed any of the prohibited acts under Chapter
XI of thie Act,

(3) Guidelines for:

@) Disposal of LPG, LPG contaminated water, and LPG
pressure vessels together with the Department of Environment
and Natural Resources (DENR), and

esa relapse OCR EIITEPOOAPE SA MIO PACD SCT AAT GATS TT TRUER ED SED DEPRES tees nnn FRI a te

(ii) Authorized motor vehicles used in the transportation
of LPG in bulk, LPG from one LPG industry participant to
another, and filled and unfilled LPG pressure vessels to other
LPG industry participants and end-consumers, and the
registration thereof, together with the Land Transportation
Office (LTO) and the Bureau of Fire Protection (BFP),

(d) Direct LPG trademark owners, to periodically submit
LPG pressure vessels for requalification’ pursuant to Section
7 of this Act;

(@) Convene technical working groups and technical
committees, comprised of public and private stakeholders, that
shall undertake the promulgation and review of policies, rules,
regulations, and guidelines, and t the development of standards,
respectively;

a
} Approve and authorize LPG seals of trademark
owners and marketers;

(g) Investigate motu proprio or upon report of any
person, impose and collect fines and penalties, initiate and
resolve the necessary administrative action, or initiate the
necessary criminal case against the responsible persons for any
violation of this Act by any LPG industry participant,
pursuant to Chapter XI of this Act;

(bh) Confiscate, recall, seize, impound, and prohibit the
following:

OQ) LPG seals that are noncompliant with standards,
rules, and regulations including those in illegal possession or
use of such LPG seals, and

(2) LPG that does not meet the PNS, defective, unsafe,
injurious, dangerous, generic, underfilled, illegally refilled,
defective, or substandard LPG pressure vessels in circulation,
and ancillary equipment, or those that are found in violation
of the provisions of this Act: Provided, That duly requalified

Wiritentia eA

generic LPG cylinders already in the market at the time of
the effectivity of this Act which were not illegally imported
shall only be confiscated, recalled, seized, impounded, and
prohibited after the lapse of the transition period of the LPG
Cylinder Improvement Program determined by the DOE

, Gi) Exercise visitorial powers to ensure the effective
implementation of this Act, which shall include the power to

scrutinize the recordsyof LPG industry participants, except.

trade secrets and proprietary information, and to inspect their
premised, LPG seals, ancillary equipment, and filled and
unfilled LPG pressure vessels, including those in transit, which
are for distribution and sale to dealers, retail outlets, and
end-consumers: Provided, That trade secrets and proprietary
information shall be defined in this Act’s implementing rules
and regulations;

@) Require LPG industry participants to submit written
or electronic forms or reports as it may deem necessary and
reasonable pursuant to Section 33 of this Act;

‘&) Create, maintain, and regularly update a central
database of LPG industry participants and an inventory of
existing and projected LPG supply levels pursuant to Section
84 of this Act;

@ Regularly publish in a newspaper of general
circulation or the DOE website the list of LPG industry
participants whose licenses to operate have been revoked;

(m) Formulate and publish, together with the DTI, the
guidelines, rules, and regulations for the LPG Cylinder
Exchange and Swapping Program, and the LPG Cylinder
Improvement Program pursuant to Sections 31 and 32 of this
Act;

(m) Undertake with the DTI, the Department of the
Interior and Local Government (DILG), and the BFP
information, education, and communication activities on health,

Re tO ne Me RRM Et ag

I5

safety, security, environmental, and quality standards for LPG,
LPG pressure vessels, auto-LPG vehicles, ancillary equipment,
and authorized motor vehicles transporting LPG and LPG
pressure vessels to enhance awareness among end-consumers,
local government units (LGUs), and the Philippine National
Police (PNP);

(©) Conduct, in collaboration with the Department of
Science and Technology, research and development towards
new LPG technologies and LPG preseutre vessel improvement
and more efficient methods of providing, safe, clean, and
hazard-free LPG to end-consumers; and

(p) Exercise such other powers and functions as may be necessary or incidental to attaining the objectives of this Act.

SEC. 7. Powers and Functions of the DTI. — In addition
to its mandate under existing laws such ag-Republic Act
No. 4109, the DTI shall have the following powers and
functions:

(a) In collaboration with the DOE and related
stakeholders, develop, formulate, promulgate, review and revise,
as may be necessary, the PNS for:

(1) Refining plants, refilling plants, depots, storage areas,
transportation facilities, retail outlets, installation of auto-LPG
containers, retrofitting of motor vehicles with auto-LPG
containers, auto-LPG conversion shops, auto-LPG dispensing
stations, and other related facilities of LPG industry
participants,

(2) LPG, LPG pressure vessels including LPG cylinders
in circulation, whether filled or unfilled, which are for
distribution and sale to dealers, retail outlets, and
end-consumers, and other ancillary equipment, and

(8) Centralized LPG piping system;
(b} Determine methods of requalification of LPG pressure

veesels and accredit requalifiers of LPG pressure vessels, if
applicable, through the issuance of the necessary certificate;

tate atte

Ait ach DP Vata EMA. habia 9

NeResai aC A MU NOIR Pee CRs Det Be Se eM

(© Certify manufacturers, importers, and repairers of
LPG pressure vessels and auto-LPG conversion shops pursuant
to its powers under Republic Act No. 4109;

(d) Determine the frequency of requalification of LPG
pressure vessels, if applicable;

@) Inspect, evaluate, and confirm compliance with the

PNS and other accepted codes and standards adopted by the

DTI as PNS, and fitness for sale and public distribution of

LPG pressure vessels and ancillary equipment through the

Jssuance'of the necessary licenses and certificates pursuant to
“its powers under Republic Act No. 4109;

& Grant and revoke, if warranted, the issued licenses
and certificates of LPG industry participants and their
respective LPG pressure vessels pursuant to Section 26 of this
Act; and j

{g) Undertake with the DOE, DILG, and BFP
information, education, and communication activities pursuant
to Section 6 of this Act.

SEC. 8. Powers and Functions of the DILG. ~ In addition
to its mandate under existing laws, the DILG shall have the
following powers and functions:

{a) Undertake with the DOE, DTI, and BFP information,
education, and communication activities pursuant to Section
6 of this Act;

(>) Coordinate and cooperate with the DOE for the
orderly and effective implementation of this Act, rules,
regulations, and other issuances promulgated pursuant thereto,
including LGU permitting and monitoring, together with the

(©) Extend all the necessary assistance to the DOE with
respect to the enforcement of measures to attain the objectives
of thie Act.



i7

SEC. 9. Powers and Functions of the BFP. — In addition
to its mandate under existing laws, the BFP shall strictly
implement the provisions of Republic Act No. 9514, otherwise
known as the “Fire Code of the Philippines of 2008”, and its
revised implementing rules and regulations, on the
manufacturing, storage, handling, use, and transportation of
LPG including fire safety devices and the issuance of all
relevant permits and certificates: Provided, That the guidelines
for the transportation of LPG and LPG pressuye vessels shall
be formulated together with the DOE and-LTO, pursuant to
Section 37 of this Act. The BFP shall also undertake with
the DOE, DTI, and DILG information, education, and
communication activities pursuant to Section 6 of this Act.

The BFP shall issue appropriate guidelines and
regulations governing the fire safety of LPG facilities and
safety measures in the manufacture, storage, handling, use,
and transportation of LPG. w

SEC. 10. Powers and Functions of the LTO and the
Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board
(LTFRB). — In addition to their mandates under existing laws,
the LTO and LTFRB, whichever is applicable, shall issue the
appropriate guidelines and regulations governing the following:

(a) Auto-LPG motor vehicles including those utilized as
public utility vehicles, related facilities, and inspection centers;
and

(b) Authorized motor vehicles used in the transportation
of LPG in bulk, LPG from one LPG industry participant to
another, and filled and unfilled LPG pressure vessels to other
LPG industry participants and end-consumers, together with
the DOE and the BFP, pursuant to Section 37 of this Act.

SEC. 11. Powers and Functions of Maritime Industry
Authority (MARINA). — In addition to its mandate under
existing laws, the MARINA shall, upon coordination with the
DOE and in consultation with public and private stakeholders,
issue the appropriate guidelines and regulations governing

vey

eeecagsttt poe sunen es oe!

WOR

imate one

CAAT RARE NRE TUT MSNA CII SATA Ste Ane EET mall Tena i

marine vessels transporting LPG and filled and unfilled LPG
pressure vessels.

SEC. 12. Powers and Functions of LGUs. — In addition
fo their mandate under existing laws, LGUs shall have the
following powers and functions:

{a) Assist the DOE in identifying LPG industry
participants in violation of the provisions of this Act;

(b) ,Assist the DOE in identifying an area forsimpounded

APG presaure vessels, motor vehicles, and other associated

equipment; ,

t
(©) Coordinate with the DOE in the transporting,
hauling, storing, decanting, and disposing of confiscated LPG,
LPG pressure vessels, and ancillary equipment;

(@) Suspend or revoke, upon due notice and hearing, the
business permit or license of an LPG industry participant upon
the issuance by the DOE of a notice of suspension or révocation
of its license to operate pursuant to Section 6 of this Act; and

@) Communicate to the DOE the suspension or
revocation of the business permit or license of an LPG industry
participant within five (5) days from such suspension or
revocation, —~

SEC. 13. Powers and Functions of the PNP and Other
Law Enforcement Agencies. — In addition to their mandates
under existing laws, the PNP and other law enforcement
agencies shall assist the DOE, upon its request, in the exercise
of its powers pursuant to Section 6 of this Act including
inspections of LPG facilities and motor vehicles transporting
LPG in bulk or in LPG cylinders and cartridges.

SEC. 14. Powers and Functions of the DENR. — In
addition to its mandate undef existing laws, the DENR shall
issue, together with the DOE, guidelines for the disposal of
LPG, LPG contaminated water, and LPG pressure vessels.

In Water see

‘
eaten

can MSN etme nn htt oahinM Ln epee a my sateen

CHAPTER III
RESPONSIBILITIES OF LPG INDUSTRY PARTICIPANTS

SEC. 15. LPG Industry Participants. — In addition to the
provisions under this Act, an LPG industry participant shall:

(a) Ensure the following it imports, procures, utilizes,
manufactures, constructs, operates, ang sells are compliant
with the PNS, standards adopted by the DTI as PNS, and
other standards, requirements, and guidelines ‘promulgated
pursuant to this Act:

(1) LPG, LPG pressure vessels, ancillary equipment,
facilities, auto-LPG conversion shops, auto-LPG dispensing
stations, and centralized LPG piping systems, and

(2) Marine vessels and motor vehicles used to transport
LPG and filled and ‘unfilled’ LPG pressure vessels which should
be in safe operating condition at all times;

(b) Observe safe LPG handling practices;

() Ensure the drivers and attendants of the motor
vehicles it utilizes to transport LPG and filled and unfilled
LPG pressure vessel have been oriented on their proper
handling; and

(@) Enter into contracts or agreements only with LPG
industry participants registered with the DOE or with a valid
license to operate, whichever is applicable.

SEC. 16. Bulk Supplier. — In addition to the provisions
under this Act, a bulk supplier shall:

{a) Ensure adequate and stable supply of LPG in bulk;
and :

&) Submit a certification to the DOE on the contracts
or agreements it has entered into with bulk consumers within
a reasonable period of time from the execution thereof,

ae

i
q
i
i
|

SEC. 17. Bulk Distributor. — In addition to the
provisions under this Act, a bulk distributor shall:

(a) Ensure adequate and stable supply of LPG in bulk;

\ (&) Submit a certification to the DOE on the contracts
or agreements it has entered into with LPG industry
participants Within a reasonable period of time from the
execution thereof, and.

XY *
(©) Ensure the periodic testing and requalification of

pregsure vessels and periodic calibration of its measuring

Ki devices by the concerned government agency or duly recognized

testing facility.

SEC. 18. Hauler. — In addition to the provisions under
this Act, a hauler shail:

(a) Submit to the DOE a list of all authorized motor
vehicles utilized for the transport of filled and unfilled LPG
cylinders or cartridges, and comply with the safety standards,
requirements, and guidelines for such pursuant to Section 37
of this Act; and 8

&) Submit a certification to the DOE on the contracts
or agreements it has entered into with LPG industry
participants within a reasonable period of time from the
execution thereof.

SEC. 19. Refiller. — In addition to the provisions under
this Act, a refiller shall:

a“
(a) Fill LPG cylinders under its own trademark or trade
name or its duly authorized trademarke or trade names;

(>) Fill LPG cylinders accurately as to the required exact
net content of the LPG cylinder;

(© Test the weight and conduct a leak test of every
LPG cylinder before it leaves the refilling plant:

2i

and bear the necessary safety and quality marks, whichever
is applicable;

() Refuse to refill the following:

(1) LPG cartridges, and

(2) Cylinders not designed. or intended ‘for refilling of
LPG due to noncompliance with the PNS, o¥ not certified or

allowed by the DTI and do not bear the neoessaty safety and
quality marks, whichever is applicable; and

( Periodically check compliance of dealers and retail
outlets with the following:

(1) Content requirements of LPG sold, and
we
(2) Proper calibration and sealing of measuring devices.
SEC. 20. Trademark Owner or Marketer. — In addition
to the provisions under this Act, a trademark owner or

marketer shall:

(a) Carry its own trademark or trade name of LPG
pressure vessel;

(b) Ensure the following:

Q) Adequate and timely supply of LPG to its dealers,
retail outlets, and end-consumers, and

Correct weight of LPG-filled cylinders or cartridges
delivered to its dealers, retail outlets, and end-consumers;

(c) Utilize a distinguishable color and marking scheme
for all of its LPG pressure vessels and register the same with
the DOE;

) Register its LPG seal and seal manufacturer with
the DOE;

|
|

@) Maintain and repair all LPG pressure vessels under
its own trademark or trade name through duly licensed
manufacturers and repairers, and accredited requalifiers;

() Provide servicing, delivery, and technical assistance
to all its dealers, retail outlets, and end-consumers; and

(g) Périodically check compliance of dealers and retail
outlets with the following:

”
ot

0) Content requirements of LPG sold, apd
\
(2). Proper calibration and sealing of measuring devices.

&
SEC. 21. Dealer. — In addition to the provisions under
this Act, a dealer shall:

(a) Carry only the trademark or trade name of LPG of
a refiller or marketer with whom it has a contract or
agreement;

(b) Sell only LPG in cylinders with an authorized LPG
seal of its refiller or marketer;

(© Provide appropriate measuring devices which shall
accurately measure LPG-filled cylinders;

{d) Ensure the correct weight of LPG-filled cylinders or
cartridges delivered to its retail outlets and end-consumers;

fe) Provide servicing, delivery, and technical assistance
for its retail outlets and end-consumers; and

) Periodically check compliance of retail outlets with
the following:

(1) Content requirements of LPG sold, and

(2) Proper calibration and sealing of measuring devices.

SEC. 22. Retail Outlet. — In addition to the provisions
under this Act, a retail outlet shall:

(a) Sell only the trademarks or trade names of
LPG-filled cylinders or cartridges it is authorized to carry by
virtue of ite contract or agreement with duly licensed
trademark owners, marketers, or dealers;

() Sell only LPG in cylinders with authorized LPG
seals of its duly licensed trademark owner, marketer, or
refiller; % *

(c) Provide appropriate measuring devices which shall
accurately measure LPG cylinders or cartridges; and

@ Request the trademark owner, marketer, or dealer
for a qualified service person to render services to its
end-consumers. ral

CHAPTER [IV
REGISTRATION, LICENSES, AND PERMITS

SEC. 23. Registration Prior to Commencement of
Construction. — In addition to other permits under existing
laws, bulk suppliers, refillers, and bulk consumers shall
register with the DOE before commencement of construction
of terminals and refilling plants.

SEC. 24. License to Operate. - In addition to other
permits, certifications, clearances, and licenses under existing
laws such as Republic Act No. 9514 and Republic Act
No. 4109, every LPG industry participant shall secure a
license to operate for a specific activity, which shail be specific
to the site, plant, or outlet, prior to the commencement of
commercial operation, and shall publicly post such license to
operate in its business establishment or premises. In the event
that the LPG industry participant intends to engage in a new
activity outside of its current license to operate, it shall secure
another license to operate for such new activity. All LPG

say

lem etneny er Sein EN MIR ODN Sn iim a ae al

f

industry participants shall conduct business only with LPG
industry participants with a valid license to operate for the
specific activity they are engaged in.

The DOE shall have the exclusive authority to issue the
jlicense to operate. It shall be valid for a period of three (3)
‘years or any such period as may be determined by the DOE.

Any person already engaged in any activity as defined
herein, at the time ofthe effectivity of this Act, shall obtain.
a license to operate within six (6) months. from the
promulgation of this Act's implementing rules and regulations.

SEC. ,25. Registration of Bulk Consumers and
Centralized LPG Piping Systems. — A bulk consumer, and the
owner and operator of a centralized LPG piping system shail
register with the DOE: Provided, That a bulk consumer, and
the owner or operator of a centralized LPG piping system-who
engages in another activity as an LPG industry participant
shall be required to secure another license to operate for such
activity: Provided, further, That registration does not exempt
the bulk consumer, and the owner and operator of the
centfalized LPG piping system from compliance with quality
and safety requirements and standards as provided under this
Act and existing laws such as Republic Act No. 9514 and
Republic Act No. 4109.

SEC. 26. DTI Certificates and Licenses. — An LPG
industry participant who engages in the importation,
requalification, manufacture, or repair of LPG pressure vessels,
whichever is applicable, shall obtain the applicable certificates
and licenses from the DTI prior to the commencement of
commercial operation, and as may be determined by the DTI.

Any LPG industry participant already engaged in the
importation, requalification, manufacture, or repair of LPG
pressure vessels, whichever is applicable, at the time of
effectivity of this Act shall seeure the required certificates and
licenses from the DTI within six (6) months from the
promulgation of this Act's implementing rules and regulations.

CHAPTER V
AUTO-LPG

SEC. 27. Auto-LPG Container Importers and
Manufacturers, Auto-LPG Conversion Shops, and Auto-LPG
Dispensing Stations. — Any LPG industry participant who
imports or manufactures auto-LPG containers, engines, and
accessories, installs auto-LPG containers, ,engines, and
accessories, retrofits motor vehicles with auto-LPG containers,
or operates an auto-LPG conversion shop shall comply with
the requirements, quality and safety standards, rules, and
regulations issued by the DTI and LTO pursuant to Sections
7 and 10 of this.Act and other pertinent ‘government agencies
including the BFP.

Any LPG industry participant who constructs and
operates an auto-LPG dispensing station shal] comply with the
requirements, quality and safety standards, rules, and
regulations issued by the DOE pursuant to Section 6 of this
Act and other relevant government agencies including the
BFP.

CHAPTER VI
OWNERSHIP OF LPG PRESSURE VESSELS

SEC. 28. Ownership of LPG Cylinders. — The trademark
owner whose permanent mark or durable marking, whichever
is applicable, appears on the LPG cylinder shali be the owner
thereof. LPG cylinders with water capacity of less than or
equal to one (1) liter shall comply with the durable marking
requirements as may be determined by the DOE and DTI.
The ownership shall apply to LPG cylinders sold, subject of
exchange or swapping, or which are in the possession of any
refiller, bulk distributor, marketer, dealer, retail] outlet, or
requalifier, or such other person duly authorized by the
trademark owner.

Hen

sievsrcinianacnipermninaaianil

Ate Ll FEN A yt SN NOIR HORE AR ENT ITM

The trademark owner who owns the LPG cylinder shall
have the obligation to ensure that all of its LPG cylinders
‘comply with all the required quality and safety standards
including requalification, and other rules and regulations before
‘they are released for distribution: Provided, That receipt by
the DOE of a notice or report from the trademark owner, as
‘verified by the DTI, regarding any lost, stolen, or missing LPG
‘cylinder shall prima facie relieve the trademark owner of the

obligation to ensure, the quality and safety of euch LPG

cylinder. "

- ° SEC. 29. Ownership of LPG Cartridges. - The. ‘trademark
“owner whose durable marking appears on the LPG cartridge
shall be considered the owner thereof.

SEC. 30, Ownership of Auto-LPG Containers. — An auto-
LPG container shall be permanently installéd inside the motor
vehicle and shall be an inherent and integral part of-the
vehicle. The ownership of the auto-LPG container shall be
with the owner of the motor vehicle to which the auto-LPG
container is permanently installed. The owner of the
auto-LPG container shall ensure its ‘compliance with the
quality and safety standards, rules, and‘regulations pursuant
to the provisions of this Act and existing laws.

CHAPTER VIE
LPG CYLINDER EXCHANGE, SWAPPING,
AND IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS

SEC. 31. LPG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program.
~ Within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act’s
implementing rules and regulations, the DOE shall, together
with the DTI and in consultation with all LPG industry
participants, consumer groups, and other public and private
stakeholders, formulate and publish an LPG Cylinder Exchange
and Swapping Program, which shall include, among others,
the procedure and timeline ‘for exchange, swapping, and
buyback of LPG cylinders, the computation of the depreciated
value of LPG cylinders, and the establishment of accredited
LPG cylinder swapping centers.

The LPG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program
shall be governed by the following principles:

(a) It shall be aligned with the LPG Cylinder
Improvement Program as specified in this Act;

(b) The safety of LPG cylinders shall be paramount
towards the protection of all end-consumers;

(c) The end-consumer shall have ‘the: freedom of choice
in the purchase of LPG-filled cylinders; *

(@) Alt LPG industry participants shall take part in the
LPG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program;

@® All arrangements, agreements, and contracts entered
into between participants shall be executed using fair,
reasonable, and nondiscriminatory terms; apd

(@) Any arrangement which may significantly increase
the retail price of LPG-filled cylinders shall be subject to
consultation with consumer groups and LPG industry
participants.

The DOE shall, together with the DTI and in coordination
with LPG industry participants, create a task force including
public and private stakeholders to assist in the implementation
of the LPG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program,

SEC. 32. LPG Cylinder Improvement Program. — Within
six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act’s implementing
rules and regulations, the DOE shall, together with the DTI
and in consultation with all LPG industry participants,
consumer groups, and other public and private stakeholders,
formulate and publish an LPG Cylinder Improvement Program
which shall include, among others, the entities responsible for
establishing and the amount to be set aside for the LPG
Cylinder Improvement Program fund, the allowed uses and

wen

PNET ONE NIN AS IOVS LR ODE REN MAD SAD NANO RN OL ATO A

reeemeionnee tine pent Tare atttnche yar

entities authorized to utilize the fund, and the procedures for

, access and audit of the fund.

The LPG Cylinder Improvement Program shall be

‘governed by the following principles:

i
i

oO

(a) It shall be aligned with the LPG Cylinder Exchange
and Swapping Program. as specified in this Act:

(b) The safety ‘ot LPG cylinders shall be paramount: ‘

towards, the protection of all end-consumers; - ~°,

(c) -All LPG industry participants shall take part in the
LPG Cylinder Improvement Program;

(d) A generic LPG cylinder or LPG cylinder without a
trademark owner shall first be requalified and then
permanently marked with the trademark or trade name of the
trademark owner who was last in possession of the LPG
cylinder, and such trademark owner shall be the owner of the
LPG cylinder exercising such rights and d obligations pursuant
to this Act: :

) The program shall not apply to generic LPG
cylinders or LPG cylinders without trademark owners which:

(3) Have been illegally imported, or
(2) Are defective, injurious, unsafe, and dangerous;

() All arrangements, agreements, and contracts entered
into between participants shall be executed using fair,
reasonable, and nondiscriminatory terms: and

{g) Any arrangement which may significantly increase
the retail price of LPG-filled cylinders shall be subject to
consultation with consumer groups and LPG industry
participants.

The DOE and DTI shall determine the transition period
for the permanent marking of all generic LPG cylinders and
LPG cylinders without a trademark or trade name in

t

circulation in the market which were not illegally imported
and are not defective, injurious, unsafe, and dangerous:
Provided, That such transition period shall not be beyond
three (3) years from the time of the effectivity of the LPG
Cylinder Improvement Program. The DOE shall, together with
the DTI and in coordination with LPG industry participants,
create a task force including the public and private
stakeholders to assist in the implementation of the LPG
Cylinder Improvement Program. j ‘

on

CHAPTER Vill £

MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS

SEC. 33. Reports and Disclosures to the DOE. - In
requiring LPG industry participants to submit written or
electronic forms or reports pursuant to Section 6 of this Act,
the DOE shall be prohibited from sharidg, disclosing, or
making available to the public and other LPG industry
participants any information, document, plan, and report
constituting trade secrets, proprietary data, and other
legitimate commercial information which are confidential or
privileged in nature.

SEC. 34. Central Database of LPG Industry Participants.
— The central database, which shall be open to the public,
created by the DOE pursuant to Section 6 of this Act shall
be updated on a monthly basis. It shall include the following
information:

(a) Corporate, business, or trade name of the LPG
industry participant;

(b} Registered trademark or trade name or logo of LPG,
LPG pressure vessels, facilities, and equipment;

() Certification from LPG industry participants as to
who they have contracted with when it comes to activities
within the scope of this Act pursuant to Section 4 hereof;

cae —

me as Me Aaa

|

@) List of lost, stolen, and missing LPG cylinders;

() Violations committed and incidents relating to such
violations; and
\ @ Other relevant information as may be determined by
ithe DOE: Provided, That it shal? not include trade secrets
‘and other proprietary information as may be determined in
this Act's implementing rules and regulations.
\

. CHAPTER IX

/ LPG CYLINDERS AND CARTRIDGES

SEC. 35. Declaration of LPG Cylinder or Cartridge as
Uncertified, Defective, Injurious, Unsafe; or Dangerous. —
When the DOE finds, motu proprio or upon complaint of any
person, that an LPG cylinder or cartridge is uncertified,
generic, substandard, defective, injurious, unsafe, or dangerous,
whichever is applicable, it shall, after due notice, issue the
appropriate order for its immediate confiscation, recall, seizure,
impoundment, or prohibition from publi sale or distribution:
Provided, That duly requalified generic LPG cylinders already
in the market at the time of the effectivity of this Act which
were not illegally imported shall be allowed until the lapse of
the transition period as may be determined by the DOE and
DTI pursuant to Section 32 of this Act. The concerned LPG
eylinder or cartridge owner shall be afforded an opportunity
to be heard from the issuance of such order, for the ptlrpose
of determining the propriety of the confiscation, recall, seizure,
impoundment, or prohibition from public sale or distribution
of the LPG Cylinders or cartridges. The DOE shall terminate
the proceedings and make a final determination on whether
the LPG cylinder or cartridge is uncertified, generic,
substandard, defective, injurious, unsafe, or. dangerous,
whichever is applicable, within thirty (30) calendar days from
the issuance of the order far confiscation, recall, seizure,
impoundment, or prohibition from public sale or distribution,

ee tN Ae Bk Pe Me ARCH als Atteipeednnseh “ea bbe A ayant

LPG-filled cylinders or cartridges which are confiscated,
recalled, seized, or impounded and found by the DOE to pose
an imminent threat to the public or in danger of exploding
shall be disposed of without serving prior notice to the owners
thereof. The DOE shail notify the owner of such fact within
five (5) calendar days after such disposition.

SEC. 36. LPG in Cartridges. - It shall be unlawful for
any person to refill an LPG cartridge or sell, trade, or
distribute cartridges not designed of intended for LPG, or

noncompliant with existing PNS. . © *

CHAPTER X

SEC. 37. Transport of LPG. — All motor vehicles utilized
in the transportation of bulk LPG and filled “ind unfilled LPG
cylinders and cartridges shall register with the LTO and shall
comply with the guidelines of the DOE, LTO, and BFP
pursuant to Sections 6, 10, and 9, respectively, of this Act.

CHAPTER XI
PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES

SEC. 38. Prohibited Acts. - Any natural or juridical
person, whether an LPG industry participant or otherwise,
shall be prohibited from the following acts:

{a} Engaging in activities without the required licenses,
permits, and certificates under this Act, specifically:

(1) Engaging in an activity without a valid license to
operate or registration from the DOE, whichever is applicable,
business permit, and other required licenses and certificates
issued by relevant agencies, and

(2) Manufacturing and repairing of LPG pressure
vessels, manufacturing of LPG seals, and requalifying of LPG

SR SERPS a AOR en tian

ERE A te SRL TREY 3K ANCA NY.

2 In SADR am ona rr

pressure vessels without a valid license, permit, and certificate
from the DTI;

(b) Engaging in activities with or as an unauthorized
-person, specifically:
i (1) Knowingly transacting with, or selling or distributing
'LPG, LPG présaure vessels, or LPG seals to an LPG industry
participant who does not have the required licenses,

certificates, clearance, or permits, whichever is applicable, ., . .

(2) + Manufacturing, distributing, refilling, or “selling LPG
/ cylinders carrying a trademark or trade name without the
express approval of the trademark owner,

(3) Selling, exchanging, bartering, distributing,
transferring, or possessing of empty LPG cylinders by any
LPG industry participant other than the trademark owner or
without its consent outside of the LPG Cylinder Exchange and
Swapping Program pursuant to Section 31 of this Act, and

(4) Possessing LPG seals, including the seals already
used“in LPG cylinders, without authority. from the trademark
or trade name owner or its duly authorized refiller;

© Failing to comply with the standards, requirements,
and guidelines under this Act, specifically:

(1) Failing to comply with the standards and
requirements on:

@ Safety design including fire safety requirements for
refining plants, refilling plants, depots, storage areas, motor
vehicles, retail outlets, warehouses, auto-LPG conversion shops,

auto-LPG dispensing stations, and other related facilities of

LPG industry participants,
(i) Safety practices,

@ii) LPG, and

kaa ineered neni

eet ERE a SAD NP BENT tan bare

(iv) Measuring devices,

(2) Fabricating and manufacturing of LPG pressure
vessels using substandard materials,

{3) Manufacturing of LPG pressure vessels without the
necessary markings and safety and quality marks as required
by the PNS, or the standard governing LPG pressure vessel
manufacture, requalification, and repair, whichever is
applicable, =

ve *

(4) Stamping or marking wrong, midleading, incorrect,
or inaccurate information on LPG pressure vessels, whichever
is applicable,

5) Creating or manufacturing of illegal or fake LPG
seals, and *

cae

(6) Failing to comply with the safety design and
requirements, permits, and clearances of motor vehicles
transporting LPG in bulk and LPG cylinders and cartridges;

d) Engaging in activities involving LPG and LPG
pressure vessels that are noncompliant with the standards,
requirements, and guidelines under this Act, specifically:

(1) Importing used or second-hand LPG pressure vessels,

(2) Importing brand new LPG pressure vessels
noncompliant with PNS and without a valid certificate or
license from the DTI,

(3) Selling and distributing defective, injurious, unsafe,
dangerous, noncompliant, or substandard LPG pressure
vessels,

(4) Selling or distributing refilled LPG cartridges,

(8) Selling or distributing LPG-filled cylinders without
a seal, with a tampered, fake, or broken seal, inappropriate
or unauthorized seal, or with a seal not belonging to the
trademark owner,

ote a eae we ooy

ect

(6) Selling or distributing LPG pressure vessels without
the necessary markings and safety and quality marks as
required by the PNS, or the standard governing LPG pressure
vessel manufacture, requalification, and repair, whichever is

applicable,

'

: (7) Selling or distributing LPG through means other
than in LPG pressure vessels, using tools other than ancillary
equipment compliant with the PNS, or through other
contractual arrangements not recognized in this Act, *

.” (8) ‘Filling LPG pressure vessels with LPG mixed with
another finished or unfinished petroleum or non-petroleum
product, substance, or material resulting in the failure of the
LPG to meet the required PNS. The possession of LPG
pressure vessels containing adulterated LPG shall be prima
facie evidence of violation of this provision,

9) Selling of adulterated LPG in bulk and in pressure
vessels, .

(10) Refilling LPG cartridges,

(11) Hauling, loading, transporting, or permitting the
loading and transportation of LPG in bulk, or LPG-filled
cylinders or cartridges in quantities greater than the rated
capacity of the motor vehicle or in such a manner that
endangers the life and safety of its passengers or the public,

(12) Storing LPG in pressure vessels more than the
volume prescribed in Republic Act No. 9514 and its revised
implementipg rules and regulations,

(13) Selling or storing empty LPG cylinders of other
trademark owners in excess of those allowed under the LPG
Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program guidelines upon its
effectivity pursuant to Section 31 of this Act, and

(14) Possessing illegal or fake LPG seals;

(e) Failing to comply with the responsibilities as an
LPG industry participant, specifically:

a

©

:
{
i
\

Failing to submit periodic reports as may be required pursuant to Section 6 of this Act,

(2) Refusing, preventing, or obstructing the inspection of
its premises and records pursuant to Section 6 of this Act,

(8) Refusing or failing to participate in the LPG
Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program, and LPG Cylinder
Improvement Program pursuant to Sections 31 and 32 of this
Act, 0 ya

J *
(4) Failing to submit the certification pursuant to
Section 34 of this Act, and

() Failing to comply with other responsibilities in
Chapter III hereof;

(} Engaging in the following: oe

(1) Destroying, tampering, altering, or modifying LPG.
pressure vessel through any means such as, but not limited
to, changing the LPG cylinder valve, repainting, and
relabeling, whichever is applicable: Provided, That this shall
not be prohibited if it is done by the trademark owner,

(2) Preventing end-consumers from purchasing LPG
from other trademark owners, marketers, refillers, dealers, or
retail outlets,

(3) Refusing to refund the deposit on the LPG cylinder
to any end-consumer, in the case of a trademark or trade
name owner and its duly authorized dealer or retail outlet in
accordance with the implementing rules and regulations of this
Act,

(4) Adulterating LPG,
(5) Pilfering LPG, and

(6) Utilizing the LPG Cylinder Improvement fund for
purposes other than what it is intended for.

SEC. 39. Underfilling. - The following acts undertaken

. by the following natural or juridical persons shail constitute

underfilling of LPG pressure vessels:

(a) The refiller when the net quantity of LPG contained

, in an LPG pressure vessel sold, transferred, delivered, or filled

is less than the LPG pressure vessel content required at the

" refilling plant; and

(b) The dealer‘or retail outlet when the net quantity of:

LPG ina pressure vessel sold, transferred, or delivered is less

“than the required LPG pressure vessel content quantity.

If applicable, a broken, tampered, absent, or removed
seal, or an LPG pressure vessel that does not have the proper
seal attached to it, shall be considered prima facie evidence
of underfilling. ,

SEC. 40. Illegal Refilling. — The following acts shall
constitute illegal refilling of LPG pressure vessels:

_ f) Filling or refilling of LPG, pressure vessels with
products or substances other than LPG. in an effort to achieve
the correct net weight;

&) Filling or refilling of LPG cylinders directly from
LPG bulk storage tank trucks;

(c) Unauthorized cross-filling;

, (@) Refilling of LPG from one LPG cylinder to another
cylinder; ..

@) Refilling of LPG cylinders other than in duly
licensed LPG refilling plants;

) Refilling of LPG cylinders:
(1) Bearing defaced, tampered, or illegible markings

contrary to the mandatory labeling and stamping requirements
under this Act,

(2) Noncompliant with the PNS,

(3) Due for repair, requalification or scrappage, or are
subject to a recall or prohibition order of the DOE or DTI,
and

(4) By auto-LPG dispensing stations;

(g) Unauthorized loading of LPG bullz storage tanks;
and -

iad z
(h) Any other filling or refilling of LPG pressure vessels
in violation of the requirements and standards under this Act.

SEC. 41. Penalties. - Any person found-in violation of
the following acts shall have the following administrative and
criminal penalties: *

al

{a} Section 38 (a)(1):

() First offense - Administrative penalty of fine
amounting to a minimum of Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00)
for each day of operation without the réquired license, permit,
certificate, or registration,

(2) Second offense - Administrative penalty of fine
amounting to 2 minimum of Ten thousand pesos {P10,000.00)
for each day of operation without the required license, permit,
certificate, or registration, and

(3) Third offense — Administrative penalty of fine
amounting to a minimum of Twenty thousand pesos
(P20,000.00) for each day of operation without the required
license, permit, certificate, or registration;

{b) Section 38 (a)(2):

Q@) First offense ~ Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Twenty-five thousand pesos

ee

cite RLS at Se RUIN

(P25,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel or seal and
confiscation of pressure vessels or seals,

(2) Second offense ~ Administrative penalties of fine
‘amounting to a minimum of Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00)
ifor every LPG pressure vessel or seal, confiscation of pressure
‘vessels or seals, and suspension of license to operate. Upon
conviction, the criminal penalty of imprisonment for at least
one (1) year but not,more than three (3) years, and

\ ’ ”

(3) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine
/Amounting to a minimum of One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel or seal,
confiscation of LPG pressure vessels or seals, closure, and
permanent disqualification from engaging in any activity as
an LPG industry participant. Upon conviction, the criminal
penalty of imprisonment for at least three (3) years and one
(1) day but not more than six (6) years;

(©) Section 38 (b):

Q) First offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Ten thousdnd pesos (P10,000.00)
for every LPG pressure vessel or seal and, if applicable,
closure until the required licenses and permits are secured,

(2) Second offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Twenty thousand pesos
(P20,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel or seal, whichever
is applicable, suspension of license to operate, and if applicable,
closure until the required licenses and permite are secured.
Upon conviction, the criminal penalty of imprisonment of at
least six (6) months but not more than one (1) year, and

(3) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to.a minimum of Thirty thousand pesos
(P30,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel or seal, closure,
and permanent disqualification from engaging in any activity
as an LPG industry participant. Upon conviction, the
criminal penalty of imprisonment of one (1) year and one (1)
day but not more than three (3) years;

©

@) Section 38 (c)(1) and (c)(6):

() First offense - Administrative penalty of fine
amounting to a minimum of Three hundred thousand pesos
(P300,000.00): Provided, That for retail outlets the fine shall
be a minimum of Ten thousand pesos (PI0,000.00),

(2) Second offense ~ Administrative. penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Five hundred thousand pesos
(P500,000.00) and suspension of licenge to dperate: Provided,
That for retail outlets the fine shall-be a minimum of Twenty
thousand pesos (P20,000.00). Upon conviétion, the criminal
penalty of imprisonment of at least one (1) year but not more
than three (3) years, and

(8) Third offense - Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of One ‘million pesos (P1,000,000.00),
closure, and permanent disqualification from engaging in any
activity as an LPG industry participant: Provided, That for
retail outlets the fine shall be a minimum of Thirty thousand
pesos (P30,000.00). Upon conviction, the criminal penalty of
imprisonment of at least three (3) years and one (1) day but
not more than six (6) years;

© Section 38 ()(2), (c)(3), (©(4), and (c)(5):

() First offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Twenty-five thousand pesos
(P25,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel or seal and
confiscation of the said LPG pressure vessel or seal,

(2) Second offense - Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) for every LPG
pressure vessel or seal, confiscation of said LPG pressure vessel
or seal, and suspension of license to operate. Upon conviction,
the criminal penalty of imprisonment for at least one (1) year
but not more than three (3) years, and

@) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) for
every LPG pressure vessel or seal, confiscation of said LPG

See NR HE WS

pressure vessel or seal, closure, and permanent disqualification

. from engaging in any activity as an LPG industry participant.
Upon conviction, the criminal penalty of imprisonment for at
least three (3) years and one (1) day but not more than six
(6) years;

Sections 38 (d) and 40:

(1) First offense - Administrative penalties of fine

amounting to a miitimum of Twenty-five thousand pesos.

(P25,090.00) for every LPG pressure vessel.or seal and

, confiscation of said LPG pressure vessel or seal: Provided,

That in-the case of broken seals, the fine shall be a minimum
of One thousand pesos (P1,000.00) for every LPG cylinder. In
the case of illegal refilling, wpon conviction, the criminal
penalty shall be imprisonment of six to twelve (6-12) years,

(2) Second offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00)
for every LPG pressure vessel or seal, confiscation of said LPG
pressure vessel or seal, and suspension of license to operate.
Upon conviction, criminal penalty of imprisonment for at least
one (1) year but not more than three'.(3) years. In the case
of broken seals, the administrative penalty of fine shall be a
minimum of Four thousand pesos (P4,000.00) for every LPG
cylinder and there shall be no criminal penalty. In the case
of illegal réfilling, upon conviction, the criminal penalty shall
be imprisonment of six to twelve (6-12) years, and

(8) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel or seal,
confiseation of said LPG pressure vessel or seal, closure, and
permanent disqualification from engaging in any activity as
an LPG industry participant. Upon conviction, the criminal
penalty of imprisonment for at least three (3) years and one
(1) day but not more than six (6) years. In the case of broken
seals, the administrative penalty of fine shall be a minimum
of Eight thousand pesos (P8,000.00) for every LPG cylinder
and there shall be no criminal penalty. In the case of illegal
refilling, upon conviction, the criminal penalty shall be
imprisonment of six to twelve (6-12) years.

The illegally refilled LPG cylinders in Section 40 (¢), (ad),
(e), (D, (g), and (h) shall be confiscated outright;

@® Section 38 (e)(1), (e)(4), and {e)(5):

(1) First offense — Administrative penalty of fine
amounting to a minimum of Twenty thousand pesos
(P20,000.00),

(2) Second offense — Administrative’ pemalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Fifty thougarid pesos (P50,000.00)
and suspension of license to operate, ands .

(3) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of One hundred thousand pesos
(P100,000.00), closure, and permanent disqualification from
engaging in any activity as an LPG industry participant;

{h) Section 38 {e)(2) and (e)(3): ww

(1) First offense — Administrative pénalty of fine
amounting to a minimum of Three hundred thousand peses
(P300,000.00),

2) Second offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Five hundred thousand pesos
{P500,000.00) and the suspension of license to operate, and

(3) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00),
closure, and permanent disqualification from engaging in any
activity as an LPG industry participant;

fi) Section 38 (f(1):

(1) First offense - Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Twenty-five thousand pesos
(P25,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel and confiscation
of said LPG pressure vessel,

Leper YSiOMTO RNA R S O NRN ad mapa niehem maim servant, mm

#

(2) Second offense — Administrative penalties of fine

_ amounting to a minimum of Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00)

for every LPG pressure vessel, confiscation of the said LPG
pressure vessel, and suspension of the license to operate. Upon

. conviction, the criminal penalty of imprisonment for at least

one (1) year but not more than three (3) years, and

(3) TKird offense ~ Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of One hundred thousand pesos

(P100,900.00) for every LPG pressure vessel, confiscation of the «__

said LPG pressuré vessel, closure, and,.permanent

. disqualification from engaging in any activity as an LPG

industry participant. Upon conviction, the criminal penalty
of imprisgnment for at least three (3) years and one (1) day
but not more than six (6) years;

G) Section 38 (2), (4), (5), and (H(): Administrative
penalties of fine amounting to a minimum of One million
pesos (P1,000,000.00), closure, and permanent disqualification
from engaging in any activity as an LPG industry participant.
Upon conviction, the criminal penalty of imprisonment for at
least six (6) months and one (1) day to six (6) years;

(k) Section 38 (f(3):

(1) First offense - Administrative penalties of a warning
and a fine of Five thousand pesos (P5,000.00) for the failure
or refusal to refund the deposit of each LPG cylinder,

(2) Second offense - Administrative penalties of fine of
Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00) for the failure or refusal to
refund the deposit of each LPG cylinder and the suspension
of license to operate, and

(3) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine of
Twenty thousand pesos (P20,000.00) for the failure or refusal
to refund the ‘deposit of each LPG cylinder, closure, and
permanent disqualification from engaging in any activity as
an LPG industry participant; and

@ Section 39:

(1) First offense — Administrative penalty of fine
amounting to a minimum of Twenty thousand pesos
(P20,000.00) for every LPG pressure vessel. Upon conviction,
the criminal penalty of imprisonment of six to twelve (6-12)
years,

(2) Second offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimum of Thirty thousand pesos
(P30,000.00) for every LPG pressure.yessel, and’ suspension of
license to operate. Upon conviction, the ériminal penalty of
imprisonment of six to twelve (6-12) years, and

(3) Third offense — Administrative penalties of fine
amounting to a minimwm of Forty thousand pesos (P40,000.00)
for every LPG pressure vessel, closure, and permanent
disqualification from engaging in any actiyity as an LPG
industry participant. Upon conviction, the criminal penalty
of imprisonment of six to twelve (6-12) years.

SEC. 42. Violations by Juridical Entities. — If the
violation is committed by a corpordtion, partnership,
association, or other juridical entity, the penalty of
imprisonment shall be imposed on the responsible directors or
officers thereof, and the lack of corporate personality cannot
be raised as a defense in case the juridical entity is
unregistered. Any new juridical entity formed by persons or
agents of auch persons previously found in violation of the
prohibited acts under this Chapter for the third time shall be
permanently disqualified from engaging in any activity as an
LPG industry participant.

SEC. 48. Suspension, Cessation, and Closure. — Nothing
in this Chapter shall preclude the DOE from ordering the
suspension or cessation of the operation of the facility, or the
closure thereof until such time that the mandatory
requirements or corrective measures directed by the DOE have
been met.

EA RR Te a Leta ee aces

SEC. 44. Initiation of Administrative Action by the DOE.
- An administrative action shall be initiated by the DOE

* through the issuance of a show cause order to the LPG

industry participant, giving the latter the opportunity to explain

, in writing within the period prescribed by the DOE from

/

receipt of the order: Provided, That the entire administrative
proceeding shall not exceed sixty (60) calendar days from the
issuance of 4 show cause order to the final resolution by the
DOE. The DOB shall have the discretion to conduct a hearing

pertaining to the viblation, or to impose an outright penalty.

based on the merits of the written explanation.

sre. 45. Imposition of Preventive Suspension Order. -
Without prejudice to other administrative remedies, the DOE
may, during the pendency of an administrative proceeding,
suspend the operations of the concerned business of an LPG
industry participant subject of the proceeding within a
maximum period of forty-five (45) calendar days to prevent
undue interference in the ongoing investigation and tampering
of evidence in accordance with the implementing rules and
regulations of this Act.

“ SEC. 46, Impoundment and Disposition of Impounded
Evidence. — Without prejudice to Section 35 of this Act, the
DOE shail, with the assistance of law enforcement agencies
prohibited LPG, LPG pressure vessels, ancillary equipment,
and motor vehicles used in the transportation of LPG and
LPG-filled pressure vessels as evidence of the violations under
this Act. The final disposal of the impounded items shall be
subject to the final resolution of the DOE or the court having
jurisdiction over the prohibited act.

CHAPTER XII
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 47. Sharing of Fines and Penalties. — The city or
municipality where the principal place of business of an LPG
industry participant is located shall be allotted a forty percent

(40%) share of the proceeds from fines and penalties collected
by the DOE from the concerned LPG industry participant:
Provided, That the remaining sixty percent (60%) shall be
utilized by the DOE to implement the provisions of this Act
including information dissemination, capacity building, and
regearch and development.

SEC. 48. Utilization of LGU Share. — The LGU shall
utilize its share from the fines and penalties collected
of transporting, hauling, storing,. decanting, ‘and disposing
confiscated LPG, LPG pressure vessdis, and ancillary
equipment. ,

SEC. 49. Permits and Licenses. — The procedure for all
permits and licenses issued pursuant to this Act shall be
governed by Republic Act No. 11234, otherwise known as the
“Energy Virtual One-Stop Shop Act”. The VOSS Steering
Committee shall streamline the permitting process for the LPG
industry and shall continue its mandate under Republic Act
No. 11234.

SEC. 50. Establishment of Dedicated Office. - The DOE
shall establish a dedicated office for the effective
implementation of this Act. The organizational structure and
staffing complement shall be determined by the Secretary of
the DOE, in consultation with the Department of Budget and
Management, and in accordance with existing civil service
rules and regulations. The budgetary requirements shall be
taken from the current appropriations of the DOE.
Thereafter, the funding for the dedicated office shall be
included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 51. Appropriations. — The amounts necessary for
the sustainable implementation of this Act shall be included
in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 52. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
DOE, shall, together with the DTI, and in consultation with

the concerned government agencies and stakeholders, including
consumer groups, promulgate the implementing tules and
regulations of this Act within sixty (60) days from its
effectivity. All guidelines, regulations, and other issuances
‘mandated to be promulgated in this Act shall be issued within
jsixty (60) days from the promulgation of this Act’s
:implementing rules and regulations except in the case of the
LPG Cylinder Exchange and Swapping Program and the LPG

Cylinder Improvement Program which shall be promulgated

pursuant to Sections 31 and 32 of this Act. *
C ‘SEC. 53, Transition Period. - Unless otherwise provided
in this Act, the DOE shall, upon prior consultation with the
LPG industry participants and other government agencies and
taking into account data obtained from LPG industry
participants and other sources, determine the appropriate
transition period for compliance by all LPG industry
participants with the objectives of this Act: Provided, That
such transition period shall not be beyond six (6) months from
the effectivity of this Act's implementing rules and regulations.

_ SEC. 54. Congressional Oversight. — The Joint Congressional
Energy Commission shall exercise oversight powers over the
implementation of this Act. :

SEC. 55. Construction and Interpretation. — Any doubt
in the interpretation of any provision in this Act shall be
interpreted in favor of the interest of the end-consumers and
the general public.

SEC. 56. Separability Clause. ~ If, for any reason, any
chapter, section, or provision, of this Act shall be declared
unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such parts not affected
thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 57. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, proclamations, and administrative regulations, or parts
thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

Caer Ab wan cease tafe ean Ne aan sii ema A Kaman ate me

ee cana mere neee SR Pert te

SEC. 58. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,
Na

. r
JAY Q. VELASCO VICENTE C. SOTTO IIL
Spe of the House = Prestdent of the Senate
of Representatives _ *

LO

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1955
and House Bill No. 9823 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on August 2,
2021 and A 2021, respectively.

. MENDOZA MYRA-MARIE D. VILLARICA
x cal Secretary of the Senate

RODRIGO ROA D

Presiden i

OF THE MALACAR/AHG RECORDS OFFICE

TTY.

PRED 2016 - 018789