H. No. 10169

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Righteenth Congress

_ Ohird Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

‘ [REPUBLIC Act No. 11835}

i

AN ACT GRANTING ASPIRE MEDIA TECHNOLOGIES
AND VENTURES INC., AFRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, ESTABLISH, OPERATE, AND MAINTAIN

TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN THE
PROVINCE OF BATAAN.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules
and regulations, there is hereby granted to Aspire Media
Technologies and Ventures Inc., hereunder referred to as the
Grantee, its successors or assignees, a franchise to construct,
install, establish, operate, and maintain for commercial purposes
and in the public interest, throughout the Province of Bataan,
wired and wireless telecommunications systems, including
internet access, through copper, fiber optics, satellite systems,
switches and all other telecommunications system or information
and communications technologies as are at present available or

will be made available through technolo gical advances or
innovations in the future, and offer telecommunications services,
value-added services, including internet access service, or other
electronic communication services, such as the transmission and
reception of voice, data, facsimile, control signs, audio and video
information services, or to construct, acquire, lease and operate,
or to manage transmitting and receiving stations, lines, cables
or systems as are convenient or essential to efficiently carry out
the purpose of this franchise.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. —
The stations or facilities of the Grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
any way diminishing its own right to use its assigned wavelengths
or frequencies and the quality of transmission or reception thereon
as should maximize rendition of the Grantee’s services or the
availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Authority of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The Grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) a Certificate of
Public Convenience and Necessity or the appropriate permits and
licenses for the construction, installation and operation of
its telecommunications systems or facilities. In issuing the
certificate, the NTC shall have the power to regulate and impose
such conditions relative to the construction, operation,
maintenance, or service level of the telecommunications systems
or facilities. Such certificate shall state the areas covered and
the date the Grantee shall commence the service. The Grantee
shall not use any frequency in the radio spectrum without
authorization from the NTC. The NTC, however, shall not
unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of such authority,
permit or license.

In case of any violation of the provisions of this franchise,
the NTC shall have the authority to revoke or suspend, after due
process, the permits or licenses it issued pursuant to the franchise.
The NTC may recommend to the Congress of the Philippines
(Congress) the revocation of the franchise for any violation of
the provisions of this franchise.

r

SEC. 4. Excavation and: Restoration Works. — For the
purpose of erecting and maintaining poles or other supports for
wires or other conductors, and for laying and maintaining of
underground wires, cables, or other conductors, it shall be lawful
for the Grantee, its successors or assignees, with the prior approval
of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
or the local government unit (LGU) concerned, as may be
appropriate, to make excavations or lay conduits in any of the
public places, roads, highways, streets, lanes, alleys, avenues,
sidewalks, or bridges of the province, cities, or munigipalities:
Provided, however, That a public place, road, highway, street,
lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge disturbed, altered, or
changed by reason of erection of poles or other supports or the
underground laying of wires, other conductors or conduits, shall
be repaired and replaced in workmanlike manner by the Grantee,
its successors or assignees, in accordance with the standards set
by the DPWH or the LGU concerned. Should the Grantee, its
successors or assignees, after the ten (10)-day notice from the
said authority, fail, refuse, or neglect to repair or replace any
part of public place, road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue,
sidewalk, or bridge altered, changed or disturbed by the Grantee,
its successors or assignees, then the DPWH or the LGU concerned
shall have the right to have the same repaired and placed in good
order and condition, and charge the Grantee, its successors or
assignees, at double the amount of the costs and expenses for
such repair or replacement.

Sc. 5. Responsibility to the Public. - The Grantee shall
conform to the ethics of honest enterprise and not use its stations
or facilities for obscene or indecent transmission, or for
dissemination of deliberately false information, or willful
misrepresentation; or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

The Grantee shall operate and maintain all its stations,
lines, cables, systems, and equipment for the transmission and
reception of messages, signals, and pulses in a satisfactory
manner at all times, and as far as economical.and practicable,
modify, improve, or change such stations, lines, cables, systems,
and equipment to keep abreast. with the advances in science
and technology.

The Grantee shall improve and extend its services in areas
not yet served, and in hazard- and typhoon-prone areas that shall

be identified by the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council, or its legal successor, in coordination with
the NTC.

The Grantee shall also improve and upgrade its equipment,
facilities and services, in order to ensure effective compliance with
the objectives of Republic Act No. 10639, or “The Free Mobile
Disaster Alerts Act”.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. — The charges and rates for
telecommunications services of the Grantee, except the rates and
charges on those that may hereafter be declared or considered as
nonregulated services, whether flat rates or measured rates or
variation thereof, shall be subject to the approval of the NTC or
its legal successor. The rates charged by the Grantee shall be
unbundled, separable and distinct among the services offered and
shall be determined in such a manner that regulated services do
not subsidize the unregulated services.

SEc. 7. Right of the Government. — The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony, and the
use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the Grantee by the
State that may be withdrawn any time after due process,

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster or disturbance of peace and order: to
temporarily take over and operate the stations, transmitters,
facilities, or equipment of the Grantee; to temporarily suspend.
the operation of any station, transmitter, facility, or equipment
in the interest of public safety, security, and public welfare; or to
authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency
of the government, upon due compensation to the Grantee for the
use of said stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment during
the period when these shall be so operated.

t
SEC. 8. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be
in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the date of
the effectivity of this Act, unless sooner cancelled. This franchise
shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event that the Grantee
fails to comply with any of the following conditions:

(a) Commencement of operations within three (3) years
from the approval of its operating permit by the NTC;

(b) Commencement of operations within five (5) years from
the effectivity of this Act; and

© Continuous operation for two (2) years.

SEC. 9. Bond. — The Grantee shall file a bond with the
NTC, in the amount that the NTC shall determine, to guarantee
compliance with and fulfillment of the conditions under which
this franchise is granted. If, after three (3) years from the date of
approval of its permit by the NTC, the Grantee shall Have fulfilled
the same, the bond shall be released by the NTC. Otherwise, the
bond shall be forfeited in favor of the government and the franchise
ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 10. Right of Interconnection. — The Grantee is
hereby authorized to connect or demand connection of its
telecommunications systems to other telecommunications systems
installed, operated, and maintained by any other duly authorized
person or entity in the Philippines for the purpose of providing
extended and improved telecommunications services to the public,
under the terms and conditions mutually agreed upon by the
parties concerned. This right shall be subject to the review and
modification of the NTC.

SEC. 11. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. - The Grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, liabilities, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of
accidents causing injury to persons or damage to properties, during
the construction or operation of the stations, transmitters,
facilities, or equipment of the Grantee.

SEC. 12. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. - The Grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation, or other commercial or legal entity, nor
merge with any other corporation or entity, nor shall the
controlling interest of the Grantee be transferred, simultaneously
or contemporaneously, to any person, firm, company, corporation,
or entity without the prior approval of Congress. The Grantee
shall inform Congress, through the Office of the Speaker of the
House of Representatives and the Office of the Senate President,

of any sale, lease, transfer, grant of usufruct, or assignment of
franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder, or of
the merger or transfer of the controlling interest of the Grantee,
within sixty (60) days after the completion of the said transaction.
Failure to report to Congress such change of ownership shall
render the franchise ipso facto revoked. Any person or entity
to which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned shall be
subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions, and limitations
of this Act.

SEC. 13. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in
public utilities, the Grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens at least
thirty percent (30%) of its outstanding capital stock, or a higher
percentage that may hereafter be provided by law, ‘in any
securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from
the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That in cases where the
public offer of shares is not applicable, other methods of
encouraging public participation by citizens and corporations
operating public utilities must be implemented. Noncompliance
therewith shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 14. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. - The Grantee shall
create employment opportunities and accept on-the-job trainees
in its franchise operations: Provided, That priority shall be
accorded to the residents of the place where the principal office of

the Grantee is located: Provided, further, That the Grantee .

shall comply with the applicable labor standards and allowance
entitlement under existing labor laws, rules and regulations, and
similar issuances.

The employment opportunities or jobs created shall be
reflected in the General Information Sheet (GIS) to be submitted
to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) annually.

‘
SEC. 15. Reportorial Requirement. —- The Grantee shall
submit an annual report on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations to the Congress
of the Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representativés and the Committee
on Public Services of the Senate, on or before April 30 of every
year during the term of its franchise.

i

;

The annual report shall include an update on the
commencement of activities, development, operation, and
expansion of business; audited financial statements; latest
GIS officially submitted to the SEC, if applicable; certification of
the NTC on the status ofits permits and operations; and an update
on the dispersal of ownership undertaking, if applicable.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC. :

SEC. 16. Fine.- The failure of the Grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized with a fine
in the amount of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) per working
day of noncompliance, the effectivity of which shall commence
upon applicability with other telecommunications franchise
grantees: Provided, That in the interim, the Grantee shall be
liable to pay the fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working
day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the NTC
from. the delinquent franchise Grantee separate from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC, and the same shall be
remitted to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEc. 17. Equality of Treatment in the Telecommunications
Industry. ~ Any advantage, favor, privilege, exemption, or
immunity granted under existing franchises, or which may
hereafter be granted for telecommunications, upon prior review
and approval of Congress, shall become part of this franchise and
shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the herein
Grantee: Provided, That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor
affect the provisions of telecommunications franchises concerning
territorial coverage, the term, or the type of service authorized by
the franchise.

SEC. 18. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal
by Congress when the public interest so requires and shall not
be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges herein
provided for.

SEC. 19. Separability Clause. ~ If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

>

SEC. 20. Repealing Clause. ~ All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, gmended, or
modified accordingly.

SEC. 21. Effectivity.— This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved, .

   

   

VICENTE C{/SOTTOME LORD ALL AY Q. VELASCO
President of the Senate Spe of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
‘was passed by the House of Representatives on September 20, 2021,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022,
and which amendment was concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 2, 2022.

Bd S S fe E
9 ary G"
olis¢ of Represyntatives

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
JUN 0 2 2022
vapsed mito 1aw On .

Secretary of the Senate
ecemecenecencen cane
vithout the signature of the Presi,»
dent, in accordance with Article ML
Yection 27 (1) of the Constitution

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

   
    

Approved:

oO