

H. No, 8097



Highteenth Congress

day of July, two thousand twenty-one.



[ RepusticActNo. 11861]

AN ACT GRANTING ADDITIONAL BENEFITS TO SOLO
PARENTS, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC
ACT NO. 8972, ENTITLED “AN ACT PROVIDING FOR
BENEFITS AND PRIVILEGES TO SOLO PARENTS AND
THEIR CHILDREN, APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 1 of Republic Act No. 8972, entitled
as “An Act Providing for Benefits and Privileges to Solo
Parents and Their Children, Appropriating Funds Therefor
and for Other Purposes”, is amended to read as’fallows:

“SECTION 1. Title, — This Act shall be known
as the ‘Expanded Solo Parents Welfare Act’.”

SEC. 2. Section 2 of Republic Act No. 8972 is amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is the policy
of the State to promote a just and dynamic social
order that ensures the prosperity and independence
of the nation and free the people from poverty
through policies that provide adequate social
services, promote full employment, a rising standard
of jiving and an improved quality of life. The State
shall also promote social justice in all phases of
national development, value the dignity of every
human person and guarantee full respect for human
rights. Towards these ends, the government shall:

{a) Support the natural and prim: ights and
duty of solo parents in rearing their chillren by
providing for their basic needs, and extending to
them assistance in. social services and welfare
benefits, with the end in view of uplifting their status
and circumstances; and

_ (b) Adhere to international agreements and
national laws on families.”

definition shall only apply for purposes of availing
the benefits under this Act:

(c) Flexible work schedule refers to a work
arrangement granted to a solo parent employee to
vary the arrival and departure time in the workplace
without affecting the core work hours as defined by
the employer; 4

(a) Parental care and support refer to the acts
of providing for the basic needs, health care, mental
and physical safety, emotional étipport and formation
of the personality of the child;

(e) Parental leave refers to leave benefits
granted to a solo parent to enable the performance
of parental duties and responsibilities where physical
presence is required or beneficial to the child; and

) Spouse refers to a husband or wife by virtue
of a valid marriage or a partner in a common-law
relationship as defined under Article 147 of Executive
Order No. 209, otherwise known as ‘The Family Code
of the Philippines’.” e

SEC. 4. Section 4 of Republic Act No. 8972 is hereby

SEC. 3. Section 3 of Republic Act No. 8972 is amended wee
repealed and a new provision is inserted to read as follows:

to read as follows:

Act: “SEC. 3. Definition of Terms ~ As used in this
et:

(a) Child minding! center refers to a facility or
area within the workplace or in accessible locations
to the solo parent or workplace of the guardian
provided by the employer where the children of a solo
parent employee aged seven (7) years old and below
are habitually received for purposes of care and
supervision during working hours;

_, &b) Children or dependents refer to those living
with and dependent upon the solo parent for support
who are unmarried, unemployed and twenty-two (22)
years old or below, or those over twenty-two (22)
years old but who are unable to fully take care or
protect themselves from abuse, neglect, cruelty,
exploitation, or discrimination because of a physical
or mental disability or condition: Provided, That thia

“SEC. 4. Categories of Solo Parent. — A solo
parent refers to any individual who falls under any
of the following categories:

- _ (a) A parent who provides sole parental care
and support of the child or children due to —

(1) Birth as a consequence of rape, even without
final conviction: Provided, That the mother has the
sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, further, That the solo parent
under this category may still he considered a solo
parent under any of the categories in this section:

(2) Death of the spouse;
(3) Detention of the spouse for at least three

(3) months or service of sentence for a criminal
conviction;

(4) Physical or mental incapacity of the spouse
as certified by a public or private medical
practitioner;

(5) Legal separation or de facto separation for
at least six (6) months, and the solo parent is
entrusted with the sole parental care and support of
the child or children;

(6) Declaration of nullity or annulment of
marriage, as decreed by a court recognized by law,
or due to divorce, subject to existing laws, and the
solo parent is entrusted with the sole parental care
and support of the child or children; or

(7) Abandonment by the spouse for at least six
(6) months;

(b) Spouse or any family member of an
Overseas Filipino Worker (OF W), or the guardian of
the child or children of an OFW: Provided, That the
said OFW belongs to the low/semi-skilled worker
category and is away from the Philippines for an
yninterrupted period of twelve (12) months: Provided,
further, That the OFW, his or her spouse, family
member, or guardian of the child or children of an
OFW falls under the requirements of this section;

(c) Unmarried mother or father who keeps and
rears the child or children;

(d} Any legal guardian, adoptive or foster parent
who solely provides parental care and support to a
child or children;

4,

(e) Any relative within the fourth (4) civil
degree of consanguinity or affinity of the parent or
legal guardian who assumes parental care and
support of the child or children as a result of the
death, abandonment, disappearance or absence of the
parents or solo parent for at least six (6) months:
Provided, That in cases of solo grandparents who are
senior citizens but who have the sole parental care
and support over their grandchildren who are
unmarried, or unemployed and twenty-two (22) years
old or below, or those twenty-two (22) years old or
over but who are unable to fully take care or protect
themselves from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation,

or discrimination because of a physical or mental
disability or condition, they shall be entitled to the
benefits of this Act in addition to the benefits granted
to them by Republic Act No. 9257, otherwise known
as the “Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2003’; or

(f) A pregnant woman who provides sole
parental care and support to her unborn child or
children.”

SEC. 5. Section 5 of Republic Act No. 8942 is amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 5. Comprehensive’ Package of Social
Protection Services. — A comprehensive package of
social protection services for solo parents and their
families shall be developed by the Secretary of the
Department of Social Welfare and Development
(DSWD) in coordination with the heads of the
Department of Health (DOH), Department of
Education (DepEd), Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), Technical Education and Skills Development
Authority (TESDA), Department of Labor and
Employment (DOLE), Department of Finance (DOF),
Department of Migrant Workers (DMW), Department
of Justice (DOJ), National Housing Authority (NHA),
Department of the Interior and al Government
(DILG), Department of Trade and Industry OT),
Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), Civil Service
Commission (CSC), Philippine Health Insurance
Corporation (PhilHealth), National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA), Philippine
Commission on Women (PCW), Union of Local
Authorities of the Philippines (ULAP), local
government units (LGUs) and other concerned
government agencies, civil society organizations, and
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) with
recognized credentials in providing services for solo
parents.

The DSWD shall coordinate with the concerned
agencies the implementation of the comprehensive
package of social protection services for solo parents
and their families. The package shall initially
include:

@ xxx;
ob) xxx;

@ xxx

@) x x x; and

(e) Targeted interventions for individuals in
need of protection which include tempora shelter,
counseling, legal advice and assistance, medical care,
self-concept or ego-building, crisis Management and
spiritual nourishment.”

SEC. 6. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 8972 is amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 7. Work Discrimination. — No employer
shall discriminate against any solo parent employee
with respect to terms and conditions of employment
on account of his or her status. Employers may
enter into agreements with: their solo parent
employees for a telecommuting program, as provided
in Republic Act No, 11165, otherwise known as the
‘Telecommuting Act’: Provided, That said solo parent
employees shail be given priority by their employer.”



Act No. 10687, otherwise known as the ‘Unified
Student Financial Assistance System for Tertiary
Education (UniFAST) Act’, Republic Act No. 10931,
otherwise known as the niversal Access to
Quality Tertiary Education Act’, and other laws
relating to education programs of the government.
Non-formal education programs appropriate for solo
parents and their children may, likewise, be
provided.

For purposes of this section, the children must
be dependent on the solo parent for support,
unmarried, unemployed, and twenty-two (22) years
of age or below.

The DepEd, CHED, and TESDA shall
promulgate rules and regulations for the proper
implementation of this program.”

SEC. 9. Section 10 of Republic Act No. 8972 is hereby

| repealed and a new provision is inserted to read as follows:
SEC. 7. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 8972 is hereby

amended to read as follows: “SEC. 10. Child Minding Centers. — The DOLE

“SEC. 8. Parental Leave. — In addition to leave
privileges under existing laws, a forfeitable and
noncumulative parental Jeave of not more than seven

and the CSC shall promote and encourage the
establishment of appropriate child minding centers
within the workplace, or in accessible locations to the
workplace or residence of the solo parent.”

(7) working days with pay every year shall be |
granted to any solo parent employee, regardless of
employment status, who has rendered service of at
least six (6) months: Provided, That the parental
leave benefit may be availed of by the solo parent
employees in the government and the private sector.”

SEC. 10. A new section to be denominated as Section 13
of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 13. Breastfeeding in the Workplace. ~ In
keeping with the policy of the State under Republic
Act No, 10028, otherwise known as the Expanded
Breastfeeding Promotion Act of 2000’, the DOLE and
the CSC shall continue to encourage working
mothers, who are solo parents, to practice
breastfeeding in the workplace.”

SEC. 8. Section 9 of Républic Act No, 8972 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 9. Educational Benefits. — The DepEd,
CHED, and TESDA shall provide scholarshi
programs for solo parents and a full schoo
scholarship for one fi) child of a solo parent in
institutions of basic, higher and technical vocational |

SEC. 11. A new section to be denominated as Section 14
of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

skills education: Provided, That the said solo parent
or child of a solo parent has all the qualifications
set for the scholarship program of the DepEd, CHED,
or TESDA: Provided, further, That the other
children, if any, of a solo parent shall be given
priority in the education programs under Republic

“SEC. 14. Social Safety Assistance. — During
disasters, calamities, pandemics and other public
health crises as may be declared by the DOH, the
solo parents and their children are entitled to social
safety assistance such as food, medicines, and
financial aid for domicile repair in the LGUs where

the solo parents and their children are residing,

subject to the guidelines of the DSWD. The LGUs

shall ensure that the budget for social safety

sesistance is included in the calamity funds of
8.

SEC. 12. A new section to be denominated as Section 15
of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 15. Additional Benefits. - A solo parent
shall be entitled to the following additional benefits:

(a) Means-, pension-, and subsidy-tested monthly
cash subsidy of One thousand pesos (P1,000.00) per
month per solo parent who is earning a minimum
wage and below, to be allocated by the concerned city
or municipal government in accordance with Section
17(b)(2){iv) of the Local Government Code: Provided,

at for fifth (5'*) class municipalities and lower, as
well as the five hundred (500) municipalities with
the highest poverty incidence based on the latest
municipal-level small area poverty estimates, cash
subsidy allocations may be taken from the Gender
and Development (GAD) budget and the amount of
cash subsidy per recipient may be dependent on the
amount of the GAD Budget: Provided, further, That
the solo parent under this section is not a recipient
of any other cash assistance or subsidy from any
other government programs: Provided, finally, That
a beneficiary who is also a senior citizen or a person
with disability (PWD) may continue receiving senior
citizen or PWD benefits without forfeiting the
benefits under this Act;

(b} A ten percent (10%) discount and
exemption from the value-added tax (VAT) on baby’s
milk, food and micronutrient supplements, and
sanitary diapers purchased, duly prescribed
medicines, vaccines, and other medical supplements
purchased from the birth of the child or children
until six (6) years of age of a solo parent who is
earning less than Two hundred fifty thousand pesos
(P250,000.00) annually, subject to adjustment in
accordance with the provisions on the exempt taxable
income under the National Internal Revenue Code
(NIRC), as amended by Republic Act No. 10968,
otherwise known as the ‘Tax Reform for Acceleration
and Inclusion (TRAIN)’: Provided, That nothing in

ceo

this section shall violate the provisions of Republic ,

Act No. 10028, otherwise known as the ‘Expanded
Breastfeeding Promotion Act of 2009’;

(c) Automatic coverage under the National
Health Insurance Program (NHIP) being
administered by the PhilHealth with premium
contributions to be paid by the National Gavernment:
Provided, That the premium contribution of solo
parents in the formal economy shall be shared
equally by their employers and the National
Government; ™

(@) Prioritization of solo parents, particularly solo
mothers in re-entering the work force, and their
children as applicable, in apprenticeships,
scholarships, livelihood training, reintegration
programs for OFWs, employment information and
matching services, and other poverty alleviation
programs of the TESDA, DTI, CHED, DepEd, DOLE,
DMW and other related government agencies, subject
to the standard eligibility and qualifications; and

(e) Prioritization and allogation in housing
projects with liberal terms of payment on government
jow-cost housing projects in accordance with housing
law provisions prioritizing applicants below poverty
line as declared by the Philippine Statistics Authority
(PSA).

To avail of the additional benefits under this
section, the solo parent shall present a Solo Parent
Identification Card (SPIC): Provided, That in
availing the additional benefits under paragraph (2)
of this section, the solo parent booklet shall also be
presented.”

SEC. 13. A new section to be denominated as Section 16
of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 16. Limitation and Termination of the
Benefits of a Solo Parent. - Only a solo parent
exercising sole parental care and support of the
child or children is entitled to claim the benefits of
a solo parent under this Act: Provided, That a solo
parent shall not lose his or her status as solo parent
if the other parent provides occasional assistance
and/or seasonal gifts that do not meet the legal
requirement of support under The Family Code of



the Philippines: Provided, further, That the absence
of a valid and legal marriage between the mother
and father of a child or dependent does not
automatically entitle either individual to the benefits
under this Act if the factual circumstances
demonstrate that parental care and support are
shared.

When a solo parent, as defined under this Act,
ceases to be such by reason of change of status and
circumstances, the said solo parent shall be ineligible
to avail of the benefits under this Act.”

SEC. 14. A new section to be denominated as Section 17
of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 17. The Solo Parents Office or Division.
— There shall be established a Solo Parent Office
(SPO) in every province and city and_a Solo Parent
Division (SPD) under the Municipal Social Welfare
and Development Office in every municipality.

The head of the SPO must be a licensed social
worker and the head of the SPD must possess a
bachelor’s degree.

_ The heads of the SPO and SPD shall hold
permanent positions with at least a Salary Grade 12
and Salary Grade 10, respectively, and shall be



appointed the governor or mayor, as the case may

a,
The SPO shall have at least three (3) staff
members while the SPD shall have at least one (1)
staff member.

The offices of the governor, mayor or social
welfare office, as the case may be, shall exercise
supervision over the SPO or SPD relative to their
plans, programs and activities. The SPO or SPD
shall establish linkages and work together with
accredited civil society and nongovernmental
organizations, political organizations, and the
barangays in their respective areas.

The SPO or SPD shall:

(a) Plan, implement, and monitor yearly work
programe in pursuance of the objectives of this Act;

() Draw up a list of available and required
services from the solo parents;

(c) Maintain and regularly updite, on a
quarterly basis, the list of solo parents and issue free
PIC;

*%
(a) Issue free booklets to solo parents;

(e) Serve as a general information and liaison
center for solo parents;

() Monitor compliance with the provisions of
this Act, particularly the grant of privileges and
additional benefits;

(g) Report to the governor, mayor or office of
the social welfare, any individual, establishment,
business entity, institution or agency that violates
any provision of this Act;

(h) Assist the solo parents in filing the
complaints against any individual, establishment,
business entity, institution or agency that refuses or
fails to provide the privileges and additional benefits
of solo parents granted under this Act; and

_  @ Provide such other services as may be
required under this Act.”



SEC. 15. A new section to be denominated as Section 18

of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 18. Recording and Maintaining a Solo
Parents Database. - The DSWD, in coordination
with the DILG, shall establish and maintain a
centralized database of all solo parents who have
been issued SPIC or booklets by the SPOs and SPDs
To this end, the LGUs shall submit the list of solo

arents receiving benefits under this Act to the
SWD on a quarterly basis.

In cases of multiple entries or other badges of
fraud, the DSWD shall notify the concerned LGU for
its appropriate action.”

SEC. 16. A new section to be denominated as Section 19

of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 19. Documentary Requirements. — For
purposes of registration and issuance of SPIC and
ooklet, the solo parent shall submit authenticated
or certified true copies of the following documents to

the SPO or SPD where the solo parent resides:

{a) For the solo parent with child or children
as a consequence of rape falling under Section
A{a)(1) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;
(2) Complaint affidavit;
(8) Medical record on the incident of rape; and

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
has the sole parental care and support of the child
or children at the time of the execution of affidavit:
Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, only the sworn affidavit
shall be submitted every year.

(b) For the sole parent on account of the death
of the spouse falling undgr Section 4(a)(2) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;
(2) Marriage certificate:
(3) Death certificate of the spouse; and

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has the sole parental care and support of the child
or children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance
of subsequent SPIC or booklet, only the sworn
affidavit shall be submitted every year.

(c) For the solo parent on account of the
detention or criminal conviction of the spouse falling
under Section 4{a)(3) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;
(2) Marriage certificate;

{3) Certificate of detention or a certification that
the spouse is serving sentence for at least. three (3)
months issued by the law enforcement agency having
actual custody of the detained spouse, or cmmitment
order issued by the court pursuant to a conviction
of the spouse; and

ms

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, requirement numbers
(3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be submitted
every year.

(a) For the solo parent on account of physical
or mental incapacity of the spouse falling under
Section 4(a)(4) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the‘ child or children;

(2) Marriage certificate or affidavit of
cohabitation;

(3) Medical record or medical abstract
evidencing the physical or mental state of the
incapacitated spouse issued not more than three (3)
months before the submission; and

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, requirement. numbers
(3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be submitted
every year.

(e) For the solo parent on account of legal or
de facto separation of spouse falling under Section
A(a)(5) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;

(2) Marriage certificate;

(3) Judicial decree of legal separation of the
spouses or, in the case of de facto separation, an
affidavit of two (2) disinterested persons attesting

to the fact of separation of the spouses; and

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, requirement numbers
(3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be submitted
every year.

(f) For the solo parent on account of declaration
of nullity or annulment of marriage falling under
Section 4(a)(6) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;
(2) Marriage certificate;

(3) Judicial decree of nullity or annulment of
marriage or judicial recognition of foreign divorce;

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, |
has the sole parental care and support of the child
or children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance
of subsequent SPIC or booklet, only the sworn
affidavit shall be eubmaltted every year.

(g) Por the solo parent on account of
abandonment by the spouse falling under
Section 4(a)(7) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;

(2) Marriage certificate or affidavit of the
applicant solo parent;

(3) Affidavit of two (2) disinterested persons
attesting to the abandonment of the spouse;

(4) Police or barangay record of the fact of
abandonment; and

(5) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has the sole parental care and support of the child

he

or children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance
of subsequent SPIC or booklet, only the sworn
affidavit shall be submitted every year.

¢h) For the spouse or any family member of an
OFW falling under Section 4(b) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of dependentg,
(2) Marriage certificate of the applicant;

. (3) Overseas Employment*€ertificate (OEC) or
its equivalent document;

{4) Copy of passport stamps showing continuous
twelve (12) months of overseas work;

(5) Employment contract; and

: (6) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, requirement numbers
(3), (4), (5), and (6) under this paragraph shall be
submitted every year.

G) For the unmarried father or mother who
keeps and rears the child or children falling under
Section 4(c) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;
(2) Certificate of No Marriage (CENOMAR);

(8) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that
the solo parent is a resident of the barangay and
that the children are under the parental care and
support of the applicant solo parent; and

. (4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, requirement numbers
(2), (8), and (4) under this paragraph shall be
submitted every year.

(j) For the solo parent who is a legal guardian,
adoptive or foster parent falling under Section 4(d)
of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child or children;

(2) Proof of guardianship, foster care or
adoption;

(3) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that
the solo parent is a resident of the barangay and
that the child or children are under the parental
care and support of the applicant solo parent; and

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co-parent, and
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, requirement numbers
(3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be submitted
every year.

(&) For any relative within the fourth (4") civil
degree of consanguinity or affinity of the parent or
legal guardian who assumes parental care and
support of the child or children falling under Section
4(e) of this Act:

(1) Birth certificate/s of the child ‘or children;

(2) Death certificate of the parents or legal
guardian, or police or garangay records evidencing
the fact of disappearance or absence of the parent
or legal guardian for at least six (6) months;

(8) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that
the children are under the parental care and
support of the applicant; and

(4) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children: Provided, That for purposes of issuance of
subsequent SPIC or booklet, requirement numbers
(3) and (4) under this paragraph shall be submitted
every year.

Q) For the solo parent who is a pregnant
woman falling under Section 4(f) of this Act:

(1) Medical record of her pregnancy;

(2) Affidavit of a barangay official attesting that
the applicant solo parent is a resident of the
barangay and that the applicant has no spouse; and

. (3) Sworn affidavit declaring that the solo parent
is not cohabiting with a partner or co- mt, and
has sole parental care and support of the child or
children.

(m) For a solo parent d¥uiling subsidy and
discounts provided for under Section 15, paragraphs
(1) and (2) of this Act, the following additional
documentary requirements shall be submitted:

(1) Affidavit of no employment;

(2) Income Tax Return (ITR);

(3) Social case study issued by the DSWD; or

(4) Any verifiable proof of income.
. Custodians of the documents, records, data or
information shall ensure the utmost confidentiality
of the same, in compliance with Republic Act

No. 10173, otherwise known as the Data Privacy Act
of 2012".”

SEC. 17. A new section to be denominated as Section 20

of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC, 20. SPIC and Booklet. — The SPO of
the (province or city, or the SPD of the municipality
shall review and verify the documents submitted by
the applicant and shall issue the SPIC and booklet,
if applicable, within seven (7) working days from
receipt of complete documents. In case of dispute, the
Municipal/City/Provincial Social Welfare and
Development Office (M/C/PSWDO), as the case may
be, shall resolve the same within five (5) working

lays.

The SPIC and booklet are valid for one (1)
year.

¥

SEC. 18. A new section to be denominated as Section 21

of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 21. National Solo Parents Day and
Week, — To commemorate the role and significance
of every solo parent in the Philippines, the third
week and third Saturday of April of every year are
hereby declared as Solo Parents Week and National
Solo Parenta Day, respectively.”

SEC. 19. A new section to be denominated as Section

22 of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

This is a placeholder for paragraph 1.

“SEC. 22. Abused, Abandoned, or Neglected
Solo Parents or Solo Parents Who are Victims of
Domestic Violence. — In cases where a solo parent
had been abused, abandoned, or neglected by his or
her co-parent, he or she may seek the help of the
DSWD, which, in turn, shall coordinate with the
respective barangay officials and/or police officers
assigned in the nearest Philippine National Police
station where the abused, abandoned, or neglected
parent resides, in order to provide immediate
assistance. If the co-parent is gainfully employed, the
abused, abandoned, or neglected parent shall have the
right to retain a portion of the former’s income, to
be agreed upon by both parents or by a valid order
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, for the
support of the child.”

SEC. 20, A new Section 23 is hereby inserted to read as

follows: '

“SEC. 23. Special Protections for Adolescent
Solo Parents. ~ In addition to the provisions of this
Act, adolescent solo parents, including victims of
child marriages, shall also be provided with
assistance from the DSWD and the DOH which may
include counseling and psycho-social services, and

from the DepEd, CHED, and TESDA in the form of

home-based, in-school, or technical education, as
warranted.”

SEC. 21. A new section to be denominated as Section 24

of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 24. Inter-Agency Coordinating and
Monitoring Committee. — An Inter-Agency
Coordinating and Monitoring Committee (IACMC) is
hereby established and is composed of the following:

(a) Chairperson — Secretary of Social Welfare
and Development;

(b} Vice-Chairperson -— Secretary of the Interior
and Local Government;

(c) Members: ™

(1) Secretary of Finance;

(2) Secretary of Health;

(3) Secretary of Education;

(4) Secretary of Labor and Employment;

(5) Secretary of Trade and Industry;

(6) Secretary of Justice;

(7) Secretary of DMW;

(8) Chairperson of CHED;

(9) Chairperson of CSC;

(10) Chairperson of PCW;

(11) Director General of NEDA;

(12) Director General of TESDA;

(13) General Manager of NHA;

(14) President of PhilHealth;

(15) Representative of ULAP; and

(16) Representative of civil society and
credentials in providing services to ealo parents to
be appointed by the Secretary of the DSWD.

The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
members of the IACMC shall meet quarterly and

This is a placeholder for paragraph 2.

shall submit a report to Congress on the
implementation of this Act every three (3) years from
the establishment of the IACMC. They may designate
their respective representatives who must have at
Jeast a rank of Assistant Secretary or its equivalent.

The IACMC shall accurately gather
demographic data on the solo parents and their
children, by utilizing the Community-Based
Monitoring System (CBMS) under Republic Act
No. 11315, otherwise known as the ‘Community-
Based Monitoring System Act’. The PSA shall
conduct every four (4) years an updated demographic
survey on solo parents and their children.”

SEC. 22. A new section to be denominated as Section 25

of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 25. Joint Congressional Oversight
Committee on Solo Parents. — There is hereby
created a Joint Congressional Oversight Committee
on Solo Parents (JCOCSP), to monitor the
implementation of this Act. The JCOCSP shall set
the overall framework for reviewing the
implementation of this Act, determining inherent
vulnerabilities in the law, and recommending the
necessary legislative or executive measures.

The JCOCSP shall be composed of five (5)
senators and five (5) representatives to be appointed
by the Senate President and House Speaker,
respectively. The JCOGSP shall be co-chaired by the
Chairpersons of the Committee on Revision of Laws
of the House of Representatives and the Committee
on Women, Children, Family Relations and Gender
Equality of the Senate.”

SEC. 23. A new section to be denominated as Section 26

of the same Act is hereby added to read as follows:

“SEC. 26. Prohibited Acts and Penalties. —
(a) Any person, corporation. entity or agency that
refuses or fails to provide the benefits granted to the
solo parent in violation of this Act shall suffer the
following penalties:

(1) For the first violation—a fine of not
less than Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00) but not
more than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) or
imprisonment of not less than six (6) months but

yp

not more than one (1) year, or both, at the discretion
of the court.

(2) For any subsequent violation — a fine of not
less than One hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00}
but not more than Two hundred thousand pesos
(P200,000.00) or imprisonment of not less than one
(1) year but not more than two (2) yeaxs, or both,
at the discretion of the court.

If the offender is a corpgration, partnership,
organization or any similar entity, the officials and
employees who directly participated in the

violation/s shall be held liable.

The proper authorities may, after due notice
and hearing, also cause the cancellation or revocation
of the business permit, permit to operate, franchise
and other similar privileges granted to any business
that fails to abide by the provisions of this Act.

If the offender is a foreigner, the foreigner shall
be deported immediately after service of sentence
without further deportation proceedings.

(b) Any persen who misrepresents status or
falsifies any document to avail of the benefits, or
cause another person to avail or be denied of the
benefits provided under this Act, or any person who
abuses the privileges and benefits granted herein
shall be punished with a fine of not more than Fifty
thousand pesos (P50,000.00) and imprisonment of
not less than six (6) months but not more than one
(1) year, or both, at the discretion of the court.

When the offender or the person responsible for
the offenses punishable under paragraphs {a) and (b)
of this section is a public officer or employee as
defined in Executive Order No. 292, or the
‘Administrative Code of 1987’, and the offense was
committed in the exercise of official duties, such
officer or employee shall suffer the penalty of
removal from office and perpetual disqualification
from holding public office, in addition to the penalty
provided in the preceding paragraph.

_ The penalties under this Act shall be without
prejudice to the imposition of higher penalties
existing under other caw.”

This is a placeholder for paragraph 3.

SEC. 24. Section 13 of the same Act is hereby amended
and renumbered as Section 27, to read as follows:

“SEC. 27. Imp ing Rules and Regulations. —
Within ninety (90) days from the approval of this
Act, the Secretary of Social Welfare and Development
shall, in consultation and coordination with the
members of the IACMC, as provided for under
Section 24 of this Act, issue the necessary rules and
regulations for the effective implementation of this

ct.”

SEC. 25. Section 14 of the same Act is hereby amended
and renumbered as Section 28, to read as follows:

“SEC. 28. Appropriations. — The amount
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act
shall be included in the budget of the concerned
government agencies in the General Appropriations
Act (GAA).

Government agencies and LGUs may also
utilize a portion of their respective GAD budget to
implement this Act anchored on the guidelines issued
by the Department of Budget and Management,
NEDA and PCW.”

v < + .
SEC. 26. Sections 15 and 16 of the same Act shall be
renumbered as hereby renumbered in this Act as Sections 29
and 30, respectively.

gq,
SEC. 27. Section 17 of the same Act is hereby amended
and renumbered as Section 31, to read as follows:

“SEC. 31. Effectivity. — This Act shall take
effect fifteen (25) days after its publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation.”

Approved,

LORD ALLA JAY Q. VELASCO VICENTE C, SOTTO HE
ker pf the House President of the Senate

This is a placeholder for paragraph 4.

b

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1411
and House Bill No. 8097, was passed by the Senate of
the Philippines and the House of Representatives on
January 24, 2022.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA

ullpeed a0 ua on
vithout the signature of the Presi
dent, in accordance with Article VI.
Seetion 27 (1) of the Constitution
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

FUN 0 4 2022