ne

Ww

H.No. 7615

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila
Righteenth Congress
Second Regular Session

—__

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the-twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

AN ACT GRANTING INSTANT DATA, ING., A FRANCHISE
TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, ESTABLISH, OPERATE
AND MAINTAIN TELE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws,
rules and regulations, there is hereby granted to Instant
Data, Inc., hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors
or assignees, a franchise to construct, install, establish,
operate, and maintain for commercial purposes and in the
public interest, throughout the Philippines and between the
Philippines and other countries and territories, wired and/or

+ tee,

wireless telecommunications systems including mobile,
cellular, fixed line, paging, trunked radio, fiber optics,
multi-channel multipoint distribution system (MMDS),
local multi-point distribution system (MDS), satellite
transmit and receive systems, switches, and value-added
services such as transmission of voice, data, images, facsimile,

control signs, audio and video, and all other telecommunications -

systems technologies as are at present available or will be made
available through technological advances or innovations in
the future; or construct, acquire, lease, and operate or
manage transmitting and receiving stations, landing stations
of submarine cables, lines, systems, or other cables as it may
consider necessary and convenient to efficiently carry out the
purpose of this franchise.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. —
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed
and operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the
minimum interference on the wavelengths or frequencies
of existing stations or other stations which may be established
by law, without in any way diminishing its own right to
use its assigned wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of
transmission or reception thereon as should maximize
rendition of the grantee’s services or the availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Authority of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) a Certificate of
Public Convenierice and Necessity or the appropriate permits
and licenses for the construction, installation and operation
of its telecommunications systems or facilities. In issuing
the certificate, the NTC shall have the power to regulate and
impose such conditions relative to the construction, operation,
maintenance, or service level of the telecommunications
. systems or facilities. Such certificate shall state the areas

covered and the date the grantee shall commence the service. .

The grantee shall not use any frequency in the radio
spectrum without authorization from the NTC. The NTC,
however, shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant
of such authority, permit or license.

In ease of any violation of the provisions of this
franchise, the NTC shall have the authority to revoke or
suspend, after due process, the permits or licenses it issued
pursuant to the franchise. The NTC may recommend to the
Congress of the Philippines (Congress) the revocation of the
franchise for any violationof the provisions of this franchise.

SEC. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. — For the
purpose of erecting and naintaining poles or other supports
for said wires or other conductors for the purpose of laying
and maintaining underground wires, cables, or other
conductors, it shall be lawful for the grantee, its successors
or assignees, with the prior approval of the Department of
Public Works and Highways (DPWH) or the local government
unit (LGU) concerned, as may be appropriate, te make
excavations or lay conduits in any of the public places, roads,
highways, streets, lanes, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, or bridges
of the province, cities, or municipalities: Provided, however,
That a public place, road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue,
sidewalk, or bridge disturbed, altered or changed by reason
of erection of poles or other supports or the underground
laying of wires, other conductors or conduits, shall be repaired
and replaced in workmanlike manner by the grantee,
its successors or assignees, in accordance with the standards
set by the DPWH or the LGU concerned. Should the grantee,
its successors or assignees, after the ten (10)-day notice from
the said authority, fail, refuse, or neglect to repair or replace
any part of public place, road, highway, street, lane, alley,
avenue, sidewalk, or bridge altered, changed or disturbed
by the said. grantee, its successors or assignees, then the
DPWH or the LGU concerned shall have the right to have
the same repaired and placed in good order and condition,
and charge the grantee, its successors or assignees, at double
the amount of the costs and expenses for such repair or
replacement.

SEC. 5. Responsibility to the Public. ~ The grantee
shall conform to the ethics of honest enterprise and not use
its stations or facilities for obscene or indecent transmission,
or for dissemination of deliberately false information,
or willful misrepresentation, or assist in subversive or
treasonable acts.

The grantee shall operate and maintain all its
stations, lines, cables, systems, and equipment for the
transmission and reception of messages, signals, and pulses
in a satisfactory manner at all times, and as far as economical
and practicable, modify, improve, or change such stations,
lines, cables, systems, and equipment to keep abreast with the
advances in science and technology.

The grantee shall improve and extend its services in
areas not yet served, and in hazard- and typhoon-prone areas
that shall be determined by the National Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Council, or its legal successor,
in coordination with the NTC.

/ The grantee shall also improve and upgrade its
equipment, facilities and services, in order to ensure effective
compliance with the objectives of Republic Act No. 10639,
or “The Free Mobile Disaster Alerts Act”.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. — The charges and rates
for telecommunications services of the grantee, except the
rates and charges on those that may hereafter be declared
or considered as nonregulated services, whether flat rates
or measured rates or variation thereof, shall be subject to
the approval of the NTC or its legal successor. The rates
charged by the grantee shall be unbundled, separable and
distinct among the services offered and shall be determined
in such a manner that regulated services do not subsidize
the unregulated ones.

SEC. 7. Right of the Government. — The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony,
and the use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the grantee
by the State that may be withdrawn any time after due process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster or disturbance of peace and order, to
temporarily take over and operate. the stations, transmitters,
facilities, or equipment of the grantee, or to temporarily suspend

the operation of any station, transmitter, facility, or equipment
in the interest of publiceafety, security, and public welfare, or to
authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency
of the government, upon due compensation to the grantee for the
use of said stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment during
the period when these shall be so operated.

SEC. 8. Term of Franchise. ~ This franchise shall be
in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the date
of the effectivity of this Act, unless sooner revoked or cancelled.
This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event
that the grantee fails to comply with any of the following
conditions:

(a) Commence operations within three (3) years from

the approval of its operating permit by the NTC;

(b) Commence operations within five (5) years from the
effectivity of this Act; and.

©) Operate continuously for two (2) years.

SEC. 9. Renewal or Extension of Franchise. ~ The
grantee shall apply for the renewal or extension of its
franchise three (3) years before its expiration which shall
be reckoned from fifteen (15) days after the publication of the
franchise in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general
circulation.

SEC. 10. Bond. - The grantee shall file a bond with
the NTC, in the amount that the NTC shall determine,
to guarantee compliance with and fulfillment of the
conditions under which this franchise is granted. If, after
three (8) years from the date of the approval of its permit by
the NTC, the grantee shall have fulfilled the same, the bond
shall be released by the NTC. Otherwise, the bond shall be

forfeited in favor of the government and the franchise ipso
facto revoked.

SEC. 11. Right of Interconnection. ~ The grantee is
hereby authorized to connect or demand connection of its
telecommunications systems to other telecommunications
systems installed, operated, and maintained by any other
duly authorized person or entity in the Philippines for the
purpose of providing extended and improved telecommunications
services to the public, under the terms and conditions mutually
agreed upon by the parties concerned. This right shall be
subject to the review and modification of the NTC.

SEC. 12. Mobile Number Portability. — The grantee
shall provide mobile number portability. (MNP) and
its implementing mechanism, including the required
infrastructure and processes, and shall interconnect,
directly or indirectly, with the infrastructure, facilities,
systems, or equipment of other telecommunications franchise
grantees. It shall not install network features, functions,
or capabilities that will impede the implementation of a
nationwide MNP system.

SEC. 13. Warranty in Favor of the National and
Local Governments. — The grantee shall hold the
national, provincial, city, and municipal governments of
the Philippines free from all claims, liabilities, accounts,
demands, or actions arising out of accidents causing
injury to persons or damage to properties, during the
construction or operation of the stations, transmitters,
facilities, or equipment of the grantee.

SEC. 14. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. - The grantee shall not sell,
lease, transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this
franchise or the rights and privileges acquired thereunder
to any person, firm, company, corporation or other commercial
or legal entity, nor merge with any other corporation or
entity, nor the controlling interest of the grantee be
transferred, simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any

person, firm, company, corporation, or entity without the prior
approval of Congress.

Congress shall be informed of any sale, lease, transfer,
grant of usufruct, or assignment of franchise or the rights
and privileges acquired thereunder, or of the merger or
transfer of the controlling interest of the grantee, within
sixty (60) days after the completion of the said transaction.
Failure to report to Congress such change of ownership
shall render the franchise ipso facto revoked. Any person or
entity to which this franchise is sold, transferred, or assigned
shall be subject to the same conditions, terms, restrictions,
and limitations of this Act.

SEC. 15. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation
in public utilities, the grantee shall offer to Filipino citizens
at least thirty percent (30%) of its outstanding capital stocks,
or a higher percentage that may hereafter be provided by law,
in any securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5)
years from the effectivity of this Act: Provided, That in
cases where the public offer of shares is not applicable,
other methods of encouraging public participation by
citizens and corporations operating public utilities must be
implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall render the
franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 16. Commitment to Provide and Promote
the Creation of Employment Opportunities. — The grantee
shall create employment opportunities and accept on-the-job
trainees in the franchise operations: Provided, That priority
shall be’ accorded to the residents of the place where the
principal office of the grantee is located: Provided, further,
That the grantee shall ensure that at least sixty percent
(60%) of its employees are regular employees and in no
case shall the percentage of contractual employees, job order
and casual employees, and independent contractors combined,
exceed forty percent (40%) of its total workforce: Provided,
finally, That the grantee shall comply with the applicable
labor standards and allowance entitlement under existing labor
laws, rules and regulations, and similar issuances.

The employment opportunities or jobs created shall
be reflected in the General Information Sheet (GIS) to be
submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
annually. In addition, the grantee shall include in its annual
report to Congress the number of trainees and workers
whose employment status are made regular, and append the
appropriate certificate from the Department of Labor and
Employment attesting that it has complied with the employment
requirement under this section.

Sec. 17, Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee
shall submit an annual report on its compliance with the
terms and conditions of the franchise and on its operations
to Congress, through the Committee on Legislative Franchises
of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Public
Services of the Senate, on or before April 30 of every year
during the term of its franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the
roll-out, development, operation and/or expansion of
business; audited financial statements; latest GIS officially
submitted to the SEC, if applicable; certification of the
NTC on the status of its permits and operations; and an
update on the dispersal of ownership undertaking, if applicable.

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by
Congress shall be required before any application for permit
or certificate is accepted by the NTC.

SEC. 18. Fine. - The failure of the grantee to
submit the requisite annual report to Congress shall
be penalized with a fine in the amount of One million
pesos (P1,000,000.00) per ‘working day of noncompliance,
the effectivity of which shall commence upon applicability
with other telecommunications franchise grantees:
Provided, That in the interim, the grantee shall be liable
to pay the fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per
working day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected
by the NTC from the delinquent franchise grantee separate
from the reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC, and the
same shall be remitted to the Bureau of the Treasury.

SEC. 19. Equality Clause. ~ Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for
telecommunications, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall
be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the herein
grantee: Provided, That the foregoing shall neither apply
to nor affect the provisions of telecommunications franchises
concerning territorial coverage, the term, or the type of service
authorized by the franchise.

SEC. 20. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. —
This franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration,
or repeal by Congress when the public interest so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the
privilege herein provided for.

SEC. 21. Separabilily Clause. — If any of the sections
or provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions
not affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 22. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 23. Effectivity. ~ This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazetie
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

[aud ba

VICENTE C. SOTTO Il LOR
President of the Senate Speakd
of Representatives

   

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on September.22,
2020, amended by the Senate of the Philippines on March 24,
2021, and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on March 25, 2021.

Ye) dln

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA M&4
Secretary of the Senate

   
  
 

Approved: “iy 5 8

oO

 

PRRD 2016 - 017302