H. No. 8281

Republic of the Philippines
Congress uf the Philippines
AMletrs Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Chick Regular Session

ool

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPuBLIC AcT No. 11439}

AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION AND
ORGANIZATION OF ISLAMIC BANKS

‘

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled: ,

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. — The State recognizes
the vital role of Islamic banking and finance in creating
opportunities for greater financial inclusion especially for the
underserved Muslim population, in expanding the funding base
for small and medium-sized enterprises as well as large
government infrastructure through financial arrangements with
risk sharing as their core element, and in contributing to financial
stability through the use of financial contracts and services
that are founded on risk sharing rather than speculation in
compliance with Shariah principles.

 

 

SEC. 2. Definition of Terms. —
(a) As used in this Act:

(1) Shariah refers to the practical divine law deduced from
its legitimate sources: the Qur’an, Sunnah, consensus of Muslim
scholars, analogical deduction and other approved sources of
Islamic law;

(2) Current account refers to the total deposits at an Islamic
bank which are repayable on demand and compliant with Shariah
principles;

(8) Investment account refers to the total funds placed
by an investor with an Islamic bank for a fixed period of time
under an agreement to share the profits and losses on the
investment of such funds in accordance with the principles of
Shari'ah;

(4) Islamic banking business refers to a banking business
with objectives and operations that do not involve interest (riba)
as prohibited by the Shari’ah and which conducts its business
transactions in accordance with Shari ‘ah principles; .

(8) Islamic banking unit refers to a division, department,
office or branch of a conventional bank that conducts business
in accordance with the principles of the Shari‘ah;

(6) Participation refers to any agreement or arrangement
under which the mode of joint investments or specific transactions
shall not involve the element of interest charge other than as
percentage share in profits and losses of businéss and which
is conducted in accordance with the principles of the Shari‘ah;

(7) Riba has the meaning assigned to it by Islamic law
and jurisprudence as expounded by authoritative sources;
in the context of banking business, the term refers to the
receipt and payment of interest, including in the various types
of lending and borrowing and in the exchange of currencies on
forward basis; and

(8) Savings account refers to an account reflecting the
total deposits at an Islamic bank which normally require the
presentation of passbooks or in lieu thereof, such other legally
acceptable documents approved by the Bangko Sentral ng
Pilipinas (Bangko Sentral) for deposit or withdrawal of money.

a

a

(&) The Monetary Board may, by regulation, further define
or clarify the terms used in this Act or commonly used in
Islamic banking transactions, consistent with the declared
State policy and taking into consideration the peculiar
characteristics of Islamic banking.

SEC. 3. Establishment of Islamic Banks. — (a) The
Monetary Board may authorize the establishment of Islamic
banks. It may also authorize conventional banks to engage in
Islamic banking arrangements, including structures and
transactions, through a designated Islamic banking unit
within the bank: Provided, That the bank shall have a system
for segregating the transactions of the Islamic banking unit

from its conventional banking business.

(b) The Monetary Board may, under such rules and
regulations as it may prescribe, authorize foreign Islamic
banks to establish Islamic banking operations in the
Philippines under any of the modes of entry provided for under
Republic Act No. 7721, as amended, otherwise known as The
Liberalization of Entry and Operations of Foreign Banks.
The Monetary Board may regulate the number of participants
in the Islamic banking system taking into account the
requirements of the economy, the preservation of the stability
of the system, and the maintenance of healthy competition.

© For purposes of this Act, the Al-Amanah Islamic
Investment Bank of the Philippines, other Islamic banks,
designated Islamic banking units of conventional banks, and
foreign banks that are authorized to conduct business in
accordance with the principles of Shari’ah shall be referred to
collectively as “Islamic Banks” or “Islamic banking system”.

_ SEC. 4. Supervision and Regulation by the Bangko
Seniral. — The Bangko Sentral shall exercise regulatory
powers and supervision over the operations of Islamic banks.
The Bangko Sentral shall issue the implementing rules and

regulations on Islamic banking.

Src. 5. Shari’ah Advisory Councils. — It shall be the
responsibility of an Islamic bank to comply with Shari’ah
principles. For this purpose, it shall constitute a Shari’ah
advisory council composed of persons who are qualified
in Shari’ah or who have knowledge or experience in Shari'ah

and in banking, finance, law or such other related disciplines.
The council shall render advice and review applications of
Shari’ah principles, but it shall not involve itself directly in
the operations of the Islamic bank or engage in any activity
which may give rise to conflict of interest. Nothing contained
herein precludes the establishment of a centralized Shari’ah
Supervisory Board to ensure that the Islamic banking
transactions and products comply with Shari’ah principles.

SEc. 6. Powers of Islamic Banks. — (a) In addition to the
general powers granted to corporations, Islamic banks shall
have such powers as shall be necessary and prudent to carry
out the business of a bank in accordance with Shari ‘ah principles.

(b) Islamic banks may perform the following banking
services:

(1) Accept or create current accounts;

(2) Accept savings accounts for safekeeping or custody
with no participation in profit and loss except unless otherwise
authorized by the account holders to be invested;

(8) Accept investment accounts;
(4) Accept foreign currency deposits;

(8) Act as correspondent of banks and institutions to
handle remittances or any fund transfers;

(©) Accept drafts and issue letters of credit or letters
of guarantee, negotiate notes and bills of exchange and
other evidence of indebtedness: Provided, That such financial
instruments are in accordance with the principles of Shari'ah;

(7) Act as collection agent insofar as payment orders,
bills of exchange or other commercial documents covering
Shariah compliant transactions; ‘

(8) Provide Shariah compliant financing contracts and
structures;

(9) Handle storage operations for goods or commodity
financing secured by warehouse receipts presented to the
Islamic banky

ot

(10) Issue shares for the account of institutions:-and
companies assisted by the Islamic bank in meeting
subscription calls or augmenting their capital and/or fund
requirements as may be allowed by law;

(11) Undertake various investments in all transactions
allowed by Shari‘ah principles; and

(12) Such other banking services as may be authorized.
by the Monetary Board.

(©) With prior Monetary Board approval, Islamic banks
may issue investment participation certificates, swkuk,
and other Shari’ah compliant funding instruments to be

_used by the Islamic banks in its operations or capital needs.

@ Islamic banks may carry out financing and joint
investment operations by way of mudarabah partnership,
musharakah joint venture or by decreasing participation,
murabahah purchasing on a cost-plus financing arrangement,
lease (ijara) arrangements, construction and manufacture
(istisna’a) arrangements, and other Shari’ah compliant
contracts and structures, and to invest funds directly in
yarious projects or through the use of funds whose owners
desire to invest jointly with other resources available to the
Islamic bank on a joint mudarabah basis in accordance with
the foregoing arrangements, contracts and structures.

© With prior Monetary Board approval, Islamic banks may
invest in equities of Shari’ah compliant undertakings
that directly support the delivery of Islamic banking and
financing services.

@® Islamic-banks may exercise the general powers of
a universal bank that are consistent with the principles of
Shariah.

Sc. 7. Ownership and Legal Existence. — Islamic
banks to be created under this Act shall comply with pertinent

_ laws, rules and regulations applicable to a private corporation

engaged in banking, such as “The Corporation Code of the
Philippines” (Batas Pambansa Blg. 68), as amended, and the
requirements of the respective regulatory agencies. Islamic

banking units shall be operated and managed pursuant to a
management and organizational structure which should be
properly disclosed and segregated from the operations of the
parent bank. .

The capitalization requirements of an Islamic bank
shall be equal to that prescribed by the Bangko Sentral
for a universal bank. Islamic banks may take the necessary
steps to have their shares of stock listed in any duly registered
stock exchange.

SEc. 8. Transfer and Acquisition of Substantial
Shareholdings. — No person shall acquire shares in an
Islamic bank that will result in ownership or control, directly
or indirectly, of more than ten percent (10%) of the voting
stock of such Islamic bank, without obtaining the prior
approval of the Monetary Board. Prior to the Monetary Board
approval, no such transfer or acquisition of shares shall
have legal effect nor shall the same be recognized in the stock
_and transfer books of the Islamic bank or in the records of
any government agency.

; SEC. 9. Fit and Proper Rule. — In order to maintain
the quality of bank management and afford better protection
to depositors, investors and the public in general, the Monetary
Board shall prescribe, pass upon and review the qualifications
of persons who are elected or appointed as directors or
officers of Islamic banks and disqualify those found unfit.
The Monetary Board shall prescribe the qualifications of
bank directors and officers for purposes of this Act.

SEC. 10. Regulatory Standards. — Islamic banks shall
be licensed and regulated in the same manner as a
universal bank. The Bangko Sentral shall prescribe
prudential regulations and standards of conduct to promote
the sound financial position of Islamic banks and to ensure
integrity, professionalism and expertise in the conduct of
their business, affairs and activities. These standards shall
take into consideration international best practices and
principles relating to, but not limited to:

(a) capital adequacy;

(b) liquidity;

(© corporate governance;

@ risk management;

© related party transactions;

@® maintenance of reserve funds;

(@ prudential reporting;

(b) investment ceilings and limitations;

@ prevention of an institution from being used,
intentionally or unintentionally, for unlawful activities; and

(j) consumer protection.

Sec. 11. Current Accounts of Islamic Banks. — The
Bangko Sentral is authorized to open current accounts for
Islamic banks for settlement and other purposes under such
rules and regulations as the Monetary Board may prescribe.
The Bangko Sentral may charge administrative and other
fees for the maintenance of such facilities as may be allowed
under Shari‘ah principles.

Sac. 12. Financial Facilities for Islamic Banks. — The
Bangko Sentral may, taking into consideration the peculiar
characteristics of Islamic banking, formulate rules and
regulations for the extension of financial facilities to Islamic
banks for purposes provided under Chapter IV, Articles IV
and V of Republic Act No. 7653, as amended, otherwise known
as the New Central Bank Act.

Subject to the availability of budgetary support and
other funding sources, the Philippine Deposit Insurance
Corporation (PDIC) may extend financial assistance to an
Islamic bank determined by the Monetary Board to be in
danger of closing in order to prevent such closing, or when
it is determined by the Monetary Board and the PDIC Board
of Directors that the continued operation of such Islamic
bank is essential to the stability of the economy.

SEC. 18. Monetary Stabilization Policy and Tools. —
The Bangko Sentral, pursuant to the authority of the
Monetary Board under Section 61 of Republic Act No. 7653,
to constantly assess price developments and outlook, and based
on its analysis and evaluation of inflationary pressures, and its
policy instruments to attain and maintain price stability, and
taking into consideration the peculiar characteristics of
Islamic banking, may require Islamic banks to maintain
reserves against their deposit accounts and funds held in trust
or under investment accounts. The Monetary Board may
further identify and authorize the issuance by the Bangko
Sentral of other appropriate instruments and measures
necessary to implement its monetary policy, including
instances of abnormal movements in the price level, taking
into account the peculiar characteristics of Islamic banking.

SEc. 14. Tax Neutrality. — The Government shall
endeavor to achieve neutral tax treatment between Islamic
banking transactions and equivalent conventional banking
transactions within the provisions of the National Internal
Revenue Code of 1997 (Republic Act No. 8424), as amended.

SEC. 15. Sanctions. — Any director, officer, employee,
auditor, or agent of an Islamic bank who is found guilty of
any act or omission in violation of any provision of this Act
and its implementing rules and regulations shall be subject
to the sanctions and penalties under Sections 34, 85, 86 and 37
of Republic Act No. 7653, and shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) or by imprisonment
of not more than five (5) years, or both, at the discretion of
the court, without prejudice to administrative and criminal
sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to existing banking
laws and regulations.

SEc. 16. Consumer Awareness and Capacity Building
Program, — The Government shall provide programs for
increased consumer awareness and capacity building required
by the expanded Islamic banking system.

 

SEC. 17. Nonapplicability of Selected Acts. — In order
to achieve the international and domestic objectives of
Islamic banking, the provisions of the following laws shall
not apply to Islamic banks to the extent as herein rendered
inoperative:

@) The provisions of Republic Act No. 7653, and
Republic Act No. 8791, otherwise known as “The General
Banking Law of 2000”, with particular reference to the
determination of bank interest rates, loans and discounts,
and interest-bearing instruments or charge: Provided, That
nothing contained herein shall be construed to impair the
powérs of the Bangko Sentral to supervise and regulate the
activities of Islamic banks and the Islamic banking system;

(b) The provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1445,

” otherwise known as the “Government Auditing Code of the

Philippines” and other enactments thereon inconsistent with
this Act: Provided, however, That nothing contairled herein
shall preclude the development of an appropriate framework
for the auditing of Islamic banks and the Islamic banking
system; and

(©) The provisions of Republic Act No. 8591, as amended,
known as the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC)
Charter, and all laws regulating insurance companies:
Provided, however, That nothing contained herein shall
preclude Islamic banks from the establishment of contemporary
Islamic takaful (solidarity services) free of riba, premiums or
interests.

SEC. 18. Separability Clause. — If any provision or
section of this Act or the application thereof to any person,
association, or circumstances is held invalid, the other
provisions or sections and their application to such person,
association, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

SEC. 19. Repealing Clause. — Alllaws, orders, issuances,
rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Act

- are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

* 10

 

SEC. 20. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 

VICENTE C. JOTTO II +GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO
President of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives |
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on November 20, 2018 and June 3, 2019,

    

respectively. \

{

Reve RIED. VILDARICA DANTER ALING
Secretary of the Senate General

Approved: AUG 2 2 2049

ROD YF, core

President of the Philippines

 

O

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES |
PRRD 2016 - 012279