o

H. No. 7693

4 Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Righteenth Cangress
Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one,

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11782]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A CAMPUS OF THE PHILIPPINE
MERCHANT MARINE ACADEMY (PMMA) IN CAGAYAN
DE ORO CITY, PROVINCE OF MISAMIS ORIENTAL, TO
BE KNOWN AS THE PMMA-CAGAYAN DE ORO CITY
CAMPUS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the~Philippine
Merchant Marine Academy (PMMA)-Cagayan de Oro
City Campus”.

SEC. 2. There is hereby established a campus of the
Philippine Merchant Marine Academy (PMMA), hereinafter
referred to as the Academy, in Cagayan de Oro City, Province of
Misamis Oriental, to be known as the PMMA-Cagayan de Oro
City Campus.

SEC. 3. The PMMA-Cagayan de Oro City Campus shall
primarily provide short-term, technical-vocational,
undergraduate, and graduate courses within its areas of
competency and specialization, pursuant to its mandate, and
according to its capabilities as the Board of Trustees, hereinafter
referred to as the Board, may deem necessary for the
accomplishment of its objectives, and those which respond to the
human resources development needs of Cagayan de Oro City, the
Province of Misamis Oriental, and Region X.

The PMMA-Cagayan de Oro City Campus is also mandated
to undertake research and extension services, and to provide
progressive leadership in these areas.

SEC. 4. The PMMA-Cagayan de Oro City Campus shall be
headed by a Campus Administrator who shall render full-time
service and shall be appointed or designated by the Board upon
the recommendation of the search committee and the President
of the Academy. Such appointment or desiguation shall be subject
to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board.

SEc. 5. The PMMA shall ensure that the minimum
requirements for the operation of the Cagayan de Oro City
Campus, including those related to its course offerings, are fully
complied with.

SEc. 6. All assets, real and personal, personnel, and
records of the PMMA-Cagayan de Oro City Campus, as well as
liabilities or obligations, shall be transferred to the Academy.
The positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members

and personnel employed at the PMMA-Cagayan de Oro City
Campus under existing laws prior to the integration to the
Academy shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the PMMA-Cagayan de Oro City Campus are hereby declared
to be the property of the Academy and shall be titled under that
name: Provided, That should the Academy gease to exist or be
abolished, or should such aforementioned parcels of land be no
longer needed by the Academy, the same shall revert to the
concerned local government unit or to the Republic of the
Philippines, as the case may be.

SEc. 7. The provisions of Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Modernization Act of 1997”,
shall form part of this Act, and together, shall serve as the
governing charter of the Academy.

Sec. 8. All other powers, functions, privileges,
responsibilities, and limitations to the Academy and its
officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to
or imposed upon the Academy and its officials, whenever
appropriate.

SEC. 9. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act.

SEc. 10. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts
or provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 11. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

4,

SEC. 12. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its
publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general aeealeaan. .

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on September 28, 2020 and January 17, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE'D, VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved:
wapeed 100 saw on MAY 2.9. 2022

without the signature of the Pres!
dent, in accordance with Article VI,
SeeHien 27 (1) of the Constitution
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO