nnd nara Shennan eee se

S. No. 1241
H. No. 3255

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress

Chirt Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ Repusiic AcrNo. 11706]

AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
TIMBANGAN NG BAYAN CENTERS IN PUBLIC AND
PRIVATE MARKETS, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
CHAPTER II, TITLE III OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7394,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “CONSUMER ACT OF
THE PHILIPPINES”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Chapter II, Title IIT of Republic Act No. 7394,
otherwise known as the “Consumer Act of the Philippines”, is
hereby amended to read as follows:

“CHAPTER IT

“Regulation of Practices Relative to Weights and
Measures

“General Provision
“ARTICLE 61. x x x
“ARTICLE 62. x x x

“ARTICLE 62-A. Establishment of Timbangan
ng Bayan Centers. — All provincial, city and
municipal governments shall establish accessible
Timbangan ng Bayan Centers in all public and
private markets, including supermarkets, and when
practicable, in flea markets or tiangges and grocery
stores, within their respective localities.

“These centers must have the necessary
instruments for determining weights and measures,
which shall be available, free of charge, to all persons
who need to confirm the accuracy of the quantity
or measurements of products purchased or about to
be purchased.

“The market supervisor shall be in charge of
the safekeeping and routine maintenance of the
Timbangan ng Bayan instruments and shall be
responsible for maintaining a record of every product
found to be deficient in quantity or is substandard
in dimension, as well as the establishment where the
same was bought including the name/s of the
proprietor/s or manager/s thereof. A certification duly
issued by the market supervisor or his/her authorized
representative reflecting the contents of such record
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of Article
64 of this Act. :

Ww.

N
\

“The prohibited acts provided under Article 64
of this Act shall likewise apply to Timbangan ng
Bayan instruments.”

“ARTICLE 62-B. Coverage. — The market
mentioned in Article 62-A of this Act, which refers
to a public place, building, or structure, where goods,
merchandise, foodstuff, commodities or articles of
commerce are displayed and offered for sale to the
general public, includes the following:

“a) Flea market or tiangge — a temporary
market where goods, merchandise, or food products
are sold;

“b) Grocery store — a retail shop that
primarily sells food and household items in a specific
community; and

“c) Supermarket — a market larger than a
grocery store in which shoppers serve themselves by
using baskets or pushcarts in selecting commodities
from shelves or cold display storages and paying for
their purchases at the exit.”

“ARTICLE 62-C. Assistance to Provincial, City
and Municipal Governments. — The Department of
Trade and Industry shall provide assistance to
provinces, cities and municipalities in the
establishment of Timbangan ng Bayan Centers
nationwide: Provided, That priority shall be accorded
to provinces, cities and municipalities belonging to
the fourth-, fifth- and sixth-income classifications.”

“ARTICLE 63. x x x
“Prohibited Acts
“ARTICLE 64. Fraudulent Practices Relative to

Weights and Measures. — The following acts relating
to weights and measures are prohibited:

«.

xX XxX

“h) for any person to fraudulently alter, tamper,
vandalize or destroy any scale, balance, timbangan
ng bayan instrument, weight or measure after it is
officially sealed;

«, ”

XXX.
“ARTICLE 65. Penalties. —

“a) Any person who shall violate the provisions
of paragraphs (a) to (g) and paragraph () of Article
64 of this Act or its implementing rules and
regulations shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00)
but not more than Three hundred thousand pesos
(P300,000.00) or by imprisonment of not less than
one (1) year but not more than five (5) years or both
upon the discretion of the court.

“b) The owner, possessor or user of instruments
of weights and measures enumerated in paragraphs
(h) to (k) of Article 64 of this Act shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) but not more than
Three hundred thousand pesos (P300,000.00) or by
imprisonment of not less than (1) year but not more
than five (5) years or both upon the discretion of the
court: Provided, That two (2) successive violations
of Article 64 of this Act shall, when applicable,
automatically result in the cancellation of the
business permit of the erring individual or business
establishment.” "

SEC. 2. Implementing Rules.and Regulations — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
Department of the Interior and Local Government and the

Department of Trade and Industry shall, in coordination with.

the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines, the League
of Provinces of the Philippines, the League of Cities of the

eat

Philippines, the League of Municipalities of the Philippines,
and other relevant government agencies and stakeholders,
promulgate the rules and regulations to effectively implement
the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 3. Appropriations. - The amount necessary to carry
out the provisions of the new Article 62-A of the Consumer
Act of the Philippines shall be charged against the national
tax allotment and other funds of the local government unit
concerned.

SEC. 4. Separability Clause. — If any provision, section,
or part of this Act shall be declared unconstitutional or
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, invalidate or impair
any other provisions, sections or parts hereof.

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause. - All laws, decrees, orders,
rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 6. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days following its publication in at least two (2)

newspapers of general circulation or in the Official Gazette.

Approved,

 

of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1241
and House Bill No. 3255 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on January 31, 2022
and February 2, 2022, respectively.

WOnbr

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARIC
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved: APR 1 3 2022

 

ROD O ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

 

PRRD 2016 - 021996