H. No. 7770

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
. Metra Manilx
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11770]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE KALINGA CULTURAL
CENTER AND MUSEUM IN THE PROVINCE
OF KALINGA, DEFINING ITS PURPOSES AND
OBJECTIVES, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR ¥

Be it enacted by the Senate and House’ of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There is hereby established a cultural center
and museum in the Province of Kalinga, to be known as the
Kalinga Cultural Center and Museum to promote culture and
the arts. It shall serve as the institutional medium for the
protection, preservation, presentation and promotion of the
cultural, artistic, archaeological, social, historical, religious and
philosophical heritage of the Kalinga land and its people in view
of the richness of their legacies and of their relevance to their
contemporary and future aspirations.

Src. 2. The Kalinga Cultural Center and Museum shall
be a collaboration between the Provincial Government of Kalinga
and the National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA)
with its concerned affiliated cultural agencies and pertinent
academic and private sector partners, and members of the
community, with its site, structures, governance, organization,
operations, and development to be provided for by mutual
agreement between the parties, to be executed and published
within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act.

Sec. 3. To fulfill its purposes and achieve its objectives,
the Kalinga Cultural Center and Museum shall:

(a) Compile musical notes and lyrics of Kalinga traditional

songs, ballads, and contemporary music compositions, and collect *

samples of musical instruments of Kalinga origin, design,
and creation;

(b) Publish and disseminate Kalinga literary works, epics,
stories, and historical accounts; :

© Compile Kalinga literature, film, or audio-visual -

recordings of cultural performances in music, dance, oral
literature, and festival celebration;

@ Compile Kalinga epigrams, proverbs, legends, and the
origin and etymology of Kalinga words, names of barangays,
municipalities and other places of interests and their
respective histories;

© Gather and document Kalinga religious practices and
traditions, and the background and origin of Kalinga fiestas
and festivals; :

() Compile photographs of and showcase by appropriate
exhibits, Kalinga landmarks, historical sites and scenic views,
and acquire and display varied range of Kalinga arts and artifacts;

(g) Gather specimens of archaeological findings, collect
stones, rocks, and other geological materials, and preserve by

appropriate methods samples of flora and fauna indigenous to the
Kalinga region; ‘

(h) Conduct performances on Kalinga music, dances,
arts, literary works, epics, stories, historical accounts and
legends; and

@) Carry out any other relevant and appropriate activities.

SEC. 4. The Provincial Government of Kalinga shall provide
the land necessary for the construction or establishment, or both,
ofthe main venue and ancillary offices and facilities of the Kalinga
Cultural Center and Museum.

Sec. 5. The amount necessary for the implementation of
this Act shall be charged against the current year’s budget of the
NCCA (Proper). Thereafter, such amount as may be necessary
for its continued implementation shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 6. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the NCCA, in coordination with the Provincial Government
of Kalinga, other concerned agencies of the government, and
private stakeholders, shall promulgate the necessary rules and
regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

Src. 7. Notwithstanding the non-issuance of the
implementing rules and regulations, this Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or
in a newspaper of general circulation.

 

This Act which originated in the House of
Representatives was passed by the House of Representatives
on November 25, 2020, amended by the Senate of the
Philippines on January 31, 2022, and which amendments
were concurred in by the House of Representatives on

February 2, 2022.
4K L/fAPRO L. MENDOZA
ye fretary\General
Huse of Reprpsentatives
Approved: MAY 2 4 2022

m ROA DUTERTE

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
President of the Philippines

    
    

Secretary of the Senate

oO

 

PRRD 2016 - 022283

 

11 enensy tems tebe,

catia) a. 3S a neh tre SB