H. No. 9936

Republic of the Philippines
- Gongress of the Philippines

Metro Manila
Righteenth Congress

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC Act No. 11809]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MULTI-SPECIES MARINE
HATCHERY IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BASEY,
PROVINCE OF SAMAR, AND APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the
supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of
the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a multi-species marine
hatchery in the Municipality of Basey, Province of Samar.

SEC. 2. Prior to the establishment of the multi-species
marine hatchery, the BFAR-DA shall conduct a full-scale
feasibility study in support of its construction to comply with the
requirements of the Department of Budget and Management.

Within two (2) years after the construction of the
multi-species marine hatchery, the BFAR-DA, through a
memorandum of agreement, shall transfer its management to
the local government of the Municipality of Basey. It shall
implementa training and phasing-in program for local government
personnel on the management and operation of the hatchery.

SEc. 3. The BFAR-DA shall conduct continuing research
and experimentation on the breeding and production of
marine species, especially as they apply to local conditions, to
discover new methods and technologies that will enhance the
fishing industry.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the
Department’s programs the conduct of the feasibility study and
the consequent establishment of the multi-species marine hatchery
in the Municipality of Basey, Province of Samar, the funding of
which shall be included in the General Appropriations Act. The
local government unit concerned shall set aside funds from any
available local revenue in an amount deemed appropriate for the
operationalization of the hatchery.

SEc. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the rules and
regulations on the establishment, supervision, operation,
monitoring, and the eventual transfer of the multi-species marine
hatchery to the local government of the Municipality of Basey.

: SEc. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of
the Philippines on September 14, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved:

FOUN 0 2 2022

witmat the sigue of Ba Pred
without ribet . -
dent, in docordance with Article Vi,
Seetien 27 (1) of the Constitintion

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 

oO