S.No. 1277
H.No. 8228

Republic of the Philippines

Gougress of the Philippines
Meteo Manils

Seventeenth Gaongress
first Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fifth
day of July, two thousand sixteen.

 

—s
[ RepusiicAcr No. 10929 |

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE FREE INTERNET ACCESS
PROGRAM IN PUBLIC PLACES IN THE COUNTRY
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
the “Pree Internet, Access in Public Places Act”

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. ~ The State hereby
recognizes the vital vole of information and communications
technology in nation-building, and declares its policy to
promote an environment for the development of structures
that wouid ensure the availability and accessibility to
reliable and secure internet access suitable to the needs
and aspirations of the nation.

Towards this end, the State shall establish a program

theb wit

   

provide free access to internet service in public
places throughout the country. to promote knowledge-
building among citizens and enable them to participate and
compete in the evolving information and comm

 
  

inication age

  

ree Public Inte
hereinafter referred to as the Progi

to connect

 

(b) The free internet service provided shall be separate
trom the internet service used for backend
systems and programs, databases, and/or management and
information systems in government offices: Provided, That

the shared use of infrastructure shall not be prohibited:
and

computer

(c) Technical solutions that may limit or restrict access
shall only be employed when there is clear and present
technical risk ov breach that cannot be remedied through
ordinary technical solutions: Provided. That technical
solutions that can likewise maintain or promote ease of
access shall be prioritized and pursued.

SEC. 4. Coverage of the Program. ~ Public places io
be covered by this Act shall include the following:

(a) National and local government offices:
‘b} Public basic education institutions

{ce} State universities and colleges, and Technical

e e
Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA)
technology institutions:

(d) Public hospitals. health centers, and rural health
unites:

o

 

oO
oo
a
im

a

 

(g) Public transport terminals

At the minimum, the Program shall be made available
in areas within the foregoing public places where maximum
use and access to the benefits shall be ensured such
but not limited to, computer laboratories and libraries in
public basic education institutions and state universities and
colleges. main lobbies and hallways of public buildings or
transport terminals. and at main assembly points in public
parks, hospitals, and health centers. Appropriate signage
shall be placed in conspicuous areas of sites with access
to the free internet service provided by the Program.

 

The Department of Information and Communications
Technology (DICT) shall be authorized to set standards and
qualifications in determining which public places shall be
included and prioritized for the rollout of the Program.

SEC. 5. Lead Implementing Agency. ~ The DICT shall
be the lead implementing agency that will oversee the
effective and efficient implementation of this Act

 

For purposes of administering the provisions of
Act. the DICT shall:

(a) Within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act,
develop a comprehensive plan for the timely and effective
implementation and propagation of the Program:

(b) Coordinate with national government agencies
(NGAs). local government units (LGUs). orivate
concerned organizations to ensure that 41

 

   

 

compreher

 

 
     

plan is integrated with of all
agencies mandated to t under

this Act:

(c¢) Prescribe policies and regulations, and coordinate
the timely and effective nnplementation of this Act:

(d) Enter into contracts to undertake the implementation
of this Act subject to existing laws and regulations:

‘e) Arrange funding for the Program from any source
whether private. government, foreign, or domestic including
official development assistance and bilateral and
multilateral loans. subject to existing laws and regulations:

 

() Ensure that the minimum internet speed per user
s two megabits per second (2 Mbps) or as prescribed by
the National Broadband Plan. whichever is higher:

(g) Undertake the creation, establishment, installation,
maintenance, and operation of infrastructure, equipment,
systems. platforms, applications, and such other Program
requirements necessary to effectively provide free internet
access in public places throughout the country:

th) Train its personnel, and institute accounting and
fiscal practices for the operation of the Program. including

in instances where the operation of the Program is
outsourced to a qualified private party: and

@) Prescribe regulations or subscribe to acceptable
standards in the installation. construction. maintenance
and operation of infrastructure and equipment.

Provided, however, That nothing in this Act shall

prohibit the DICT from providing internet connectivity by
installing equipment and establishing infrastructure

  

 

SEC. 6. Public-Private leipation. ~ To promot
efficient and cost-effective delivery of the free int

 

 

 

The excess capacity of private sect partners may
be offered to deliver supplemental internet access service
for a reasonable fee to the users in the areas where
Program facilities are located: Provided, That said
individuals or ities ational
Telecommunications Commi alue-added
roviders

 

 

 

        

servic

  

In order to lower costs. increase and improve the free
internet access for public places. private service providers
are encouraged to exchange data traffic at domestic
internet protocol (P) exchanges. which may be designated
by the DICT.

   

 

Internet service providers (ISPs) shall be allowed to
acquire and utilize internet connectivity directly from
satellites and other emerging technologies to ensure
universal coverage. which when used to provide internet
connectivity shall be considered value-added services,

SEC, 7. Exclusivity Arrangements. — Any unfair
methods of competition and exclusivity ar angements in
favor of a single telecommunications entity shall be
prohibited to promote the free and unrestricted access to
public places covered under this Act for the purpose of
installation and operation of broadband facilities. The DICT.
in coordination with the Philippine Competition Commission
(PCC), shall issue the appropriate rules and guidelines to
enforce this provision. Any violation of said prohibition shall
subject the concerned government officials and employees
to administrative penalties under existing civil service laws.
rules and vegulations

SEC, 8. Use of Available or Unassigned Spectrum. —
The DICT. in coordination with the NTC. shall be a signed
such frequencies it shall require for the
Provided, That this shall not ce

   

     

o

  

rogram. or hinder the
t. telecommunications. internet
service. ov value-added services authorized by or registered
with the NTC

 

The use of available or unassigned spectrum may be
granted io other agencies and private entities subject to
transparent. fair. reasonable, and nondiscriminatory terms
conditio: specified in the guidelines jointly issued
NTC. and

   
 
 
 

 

   

r public
ALLONS

Within one (1) year from the effectivity of this Act.
the DICT. in consultation with the NTC and the PCC. shall
issue the guiding neiples and policy direction for the
open and shared use of spectrum, especially for the
implementation of the Program.

 

 

     

  

SEC. 9. Data Collection and Monitoring. — Within one
(1) year from the effectivity of this Act, the NTC shall issue
rules on minimum standards for quality of service,
including. but not limited to, download speed, latency, packet
lo and jitter for public free internet service. The
minimum quality of service standards for the Program shall
not be lower than the minimum quality of service standards
provided for retail basic internet connectivity services
offered to the public.

 

The DICT shall periodically collect, update, and publish
such information on the cost. performance, service quality,
and compliance with the minimum standards on free public
internet access points set by the NTC.

 

The DICT shall impose penalties upon ISPs that do
not comply with the minimum standards set by the NTC
and the agreed quality of service as specified in their
contr with the DIC

      

   

The

who use

 

 

or manager of the said Program engage in the collection.
use, or disclosure of user data. including the collection of
anonymous traffic data. in accordance with the provisions
of Republic Act No. 10173. otherwise known as the “Data
@ Act of 2012

  

 

   

SEC. 10. Prohibition on Access te Pornography. —
Access £0 pornographic websites shall be prohibited
the Program

 

    

SEC. li. Protection of Children. — The DIC in
coordination with the Inter-Agency Council Against Child
Pornography, and in consultation with telecommunications
mpanies and civil society organizations. shall develop
standards and mechanisms for the protection of children
online, consistent with existing laws on the rights and
protection of the welfare of children

 

 

SEC. 12. Public Safety Warning. — The DICT and the
telecommunications companies shall ensure that facilities,
such as relay stations, repeaters, boosters, and
telecommunication towers shall, where warranted, bear
appropriate warning signage when close and constant
contact with such facilities may be harmful ov hazardous.

SEC. 13. Private Property Ownership. ~ The right to
private property shall be respected in the implementation
of the Program. In case the construction of any
infrastructure or installation of equipment should involve
or affect privately owned land or property, the DICT shall
ensure that the necessary public consultations are held with
affected or concerned parties, such as homeowners and
homeowners associations, nongovernment organizations and
people’s organizations, and LGUs. before the Program is
implemented in their respective jurisdiction. Such public
consultations shall conform to the manner as stated in
Republic Act No. 9904. otherwise known as the “Magna
Carta for Homeowners and Homeowne \ssociations’, and
as specified in Rule XI. Article 54 of the implementing rules

   

     

 

 

and regulations of Republic No. 7160, otherwise known
as the “Local Government Code of 1991”.

SEC. 14. Role of National Government Agencies and
Local Government Units. — For the purposes of this Act.

the concerned NGAs and LGUs shall:

(a) Coordinate with the DICT and the Department of
Interior and Local Government (DILG) in the
eamlining of application. renewal, and approval of
permits and certificates. and the vegulation.
standardization. and implementation of fees pertinent to
the effective implementation of the Program:

    

(b) Facilitate the access of telecommunications
companies in government or government-owned or
-controlled properties and facilities for the deployment
and temporary storage of equipment and property needed
to construct infrastructure or install equipment necessary
for the implementation of this Act:

(c) Align or enroll their respective programs providing
free access to internet service with that provided in this
Act:

(d) Ensure the security of installed equipment: and

(e) Assign a designated personnel who can act as site
coordinator as needed.

SEC. 15. Permitting and Certification. — The DICT
shall streamline the process for the application. renewal
and release of permits, licenses. and clearances needed for
the construction of infrastructure or installation of
equipment in coordination with concerned national and local
government agencies. instrumentalities. and departments
for the effective implementation of

 

The DICT shall also standardize ¢
the facilitation of permits. certificates

 

 

 

for the
ruction of infrastructure and installation of equipment
necessary for the immediate and effective implementation
of the Program: Provided, That the fees to be collected
should be just and reasonably sufficient to cover the costs
of supervision and regulation. The vevenue collected from
local fees. charges. and other local impositions shall inure
solely to the benefit of. and be subject to disposition by
the LGUs.

of government-owned or -controlled prope
cons

The shall coordinate with the concerned NGAs

and LGUs. eee conduct the necessary SGtzaTbehinnws wih
akeholder groups in

 

 

 

civil society organizations and other
e development of the implementing rules and policies
© permitting and certification proce

 

or

   

 

Failure on the part of the issuing agency to release
the applied license without informing the applicant business
entity of the errors, omissions, or additional documents
required shall mean automatic approval of the license or
permit applied for within seven (7) days after submission
of the applicant business entity of the complete
requirements and payment of the cor responding fees:
Provided, however, That in case where the cause of delay
is due to force majeure or natural or man-made disaster
which may result to damage or destruction of documents,
the prescribed processing time shall be suspended and
appropriate adjustments shall be made.

No additional steps, permits. certificates. or fees shall
be required from any applicant other than the requirements
stipulated by the DICT.

Initial issuances and agreements necessary to
facilitate the implementation of the streamlined proc
shall be issued or released within three (3) memths frora
the effectivity of this Act.

   

 

The DILG shall be ¢ nsible for

  

the Program


SEC. 16. Annual Report. — The DICT. in coordination
with other relevant NGAs and LGUs. shall prepare an
annual report on the status of the implementation of the
Program, and recommend necessary policies for the
effective implementation of this Act.

This report shall be submitted to the President of the
Philippines, the Senate President. the House Speaker, and
the Chairpersons of the Committee on Science and
Technology of the Senate of the Philippines, and the
Committee on Information and Communications Technology
of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 17. Free Public Internet Access Fund. — There
is hereby created a Free Public Internet Access Fund
(FPIAF) under the management of the DICT to provide
financing for the implementation of the Program. The
FPIAF shall be funded out of the Spectrum Users Fees
collected by the NTC and other sources to be identified
by the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 18. Appropriations. - The amount necessary for
the immediate and effective implementation of this Act
shall be charged against any available funds of the DICT,
the NTC, and the National Privacy Commission. Thereafter,
such sums as may be necessary for the implementation of
this Act shall be sourced from the FPIAF.

Any deficiency in the budgetary requirements for the
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 19. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the DICT,
in coordination with relevant agencies, shall promulgate the
necessary rules and regulations for the effective
implementation of this Act.

SEC. 20. Separability Clause. — Should any provision
herein be declared unconstitutional, the same shall not
affect the validity of the other provisions of this Act.

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

il

SEC. 21. Repealing C

  

se. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations or other issuances or parts
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 22. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in
any two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

 
  
 

 

 

PANTALEON D.’ALVAREZ — AQUILINO “KOKO” PIMENTEL III
Speaker of the-House President of the Senate
of Represéntatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1277
and House Bill No. 5225 was finally passed by the Senate
and the House of Representatives on May 24, 2017 and
May 23, 2017, respectively.

/ ON eG? A

CF fo ff ;
CESAR STRAIT PAREJA LUTGARDO B. BARBO

Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

  

Approved: AUG @ 2 2617

   
 

 

( LAA _

O ROA DUTERTE
Président of the Philippines

 

PRRD 2016 - 002965