5. No, 1216
H. No. 4851

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Highteenth Congress

Serond Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

AN ACT DECLARING MAY 18 OF EVERY YEAR AS THE
NATIONAL HIGHER EDUCATION DAY

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. National Higher Education Day. — The
eighteenth (18'") day of May of every year is hereby declared
as the “National Higher Education Day” in commemoration
of the founding anniversary of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED).

To ensure a meaningful observance of this special
working day as herein declared, all heads of government
agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned
and-controlled corporations, local government units, public
and private educational institutions, employers in the private
sector, and industry associations, shall encourage and afford
sufficient time and opportunities for their students or
employees to engage and participate in any activity conducted
within the premises of their schools, offices or establishments
in celebration of the “National Higher Education Day’.

SEC. 2. Lead Agency. — The CHED shall be the lead
agency in charge of the preparation and implementation of an
annual program of activities and advocacy campaign for the
observance of the “National Higher Education Day”.

All higher education institutions shall also provide full
support and assistance to the preparation of the annual
program of activities and events to be conducted by CHED in
observance of the event pursuant to this Act.

SEC. 3. Effectivity, — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least two (2) newspapers of general circulation, whichever
comes earlier.

Approved,

 
    

Y Q. VELASCO " Praalieall
Speaker s# the House
of Repres entatives

. SOTTO III
Peet ‘the Senate

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bil No.1216 on August 19, 2020 and adopted by the
House of Representatives as an amendment to House Bill

. MENDOZA = MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Segetary Gerteral Secretary of the Senate
tihise of Representatives
ee

 

MARK ES DRO

Approved: FEB 05

 

fae nh ia TR —_— se

RODRI ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippine office a @ of thagimss
MALACATIANG REL aah
ae ee ey ee _

|

A | ATTY. CONCEPCION ZER
i DIRECTOR Ty

a

sean iat nian EE Ei en ab a ee

 
  
 
  

5 OFFICE