sowie ner ay eeagn ara ringer sone wee omagesinge meen Sn rE ae

S. No. 1279
H. No. 5269

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila

Seuenteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand seventeen.

—__
[ Repustic Act No. 11037]

AN ACT INSTITUTIONALIZING A NATIONAL FEEDING
PROGRAM FOR UNDERNOURISHED CHILDREN
IN PUBLIC DAY CARE, KINDERGARTEN AND
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS TO COMBAT HUNGER
AND UNDERNUTRITION AMONG FILIPINO CHILDREN
AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as
“Masustansyang Pagkain para sa Batang Pilipino Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. - The State recognizes the
vital role of the youth in nation-building and shall promote
and protect their physical, moral, spiritual. intellectual, and
social well-being. In recognition of the demonstrated relationship
between food and nutrition, and the capacity of students to
develop and learn, the State shall establish a comprehensive

national feeding program that will address the problem of
undernutrition among Filipino children.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act, the
following terms shall be understood to mean as follows, to wit:

(a) Cycle Menu refers to standardized menus prepared by
the national government agencies (NGAs), in coordination with
the National Nutrition Council (NNC) and the Food and
Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI), which shall be
contextualized and drawn up, among others, according to
age range, location and/or type of school, and local cultural
and/or religious eating preferences: Provided, That such menus
shall have as many varieties and selections as may be
necessary taking into account its availability in the place or
locality where the day care center or school is located;

(b) Fortified Meal refers to a meal with deliberately
increased content of essential micronutrients so as to improve
the nutritional quality of the food and provide the level of
calories and protein as prescribed by the NNC which shall
consist of at least one-third, (1/3) of the daily requirement based
on the Philippine Dietary Reference Intake (PDRI);

(c) Health Examination refers to the examination
conducted by NGAs, in coordination with the Department of
Health (DOH) and local government units (LGUs) concerned,
on the overall condition of the program beneficiary which
shall, among others, include the program beneficiary's height,
weight and other ailments, defects or deformities that may
need special care or treatment;

(d) National Government Agencies (NGAs) refer to the
Department of Education (DepED) and the Department of Social
Welfare and Development (DSWD) which shall be the lead
agencies in the implementation of the Program for public
kindergarten and elementary schools and public day care
centers, respectively; and

(e) Undernourished Child refers to a child who has been
supplied with less than the minimum amount of foods essential

for sound health and growth. For purposes of this Act, it shall
include children who are suffering from chronic hunger and
malnutrition as well as those who are considered as wasted,
severely wasted or stunted under the World Health
Organization Child Growth Standards.

SEC. 4. National Feeding Program. — The National
Feeding Program, hereinafter referred to as the Program, is

hereby established to address undernutrition among Filipino
children.

The Program shall have the following components and
coverage:

(a) Supplemental Feeding Program for Day Care
Children. — The DSWD, in coordination with the LGUs
concerned, shall implement a supplemental feeding program
for undernourished children with ages three (3) to five (5)
years. The Program shall be administered in day care centers
or in any other facility which can be used for such purpose:
Provided, That the Program shall include the provision of at
least one (1) fortified meal for a period of not less than one
hundred twenty (120) days in a year: Provided, further, That
in the preparation of fortified meals, the DSWD shall work
in collaboration with recognized parents’ organizations;

(b) School-Based Feeding Program. — The DepED shall
implement a school-based feeding program for undernourished
public school children from kindergarten to grade six (6):
Provided, That the Program shall include the provision of at
least one (1) fortified meal to all undernourished public
elementary school children for a period of not less than one
hundred twenty (120) days in a year;

(c) Milk Feeding Program. — The NGAs shall coordinate
with the Department of Agriculture (DA), the National Dairy
Authority, the Philippine Carabao Center and the Cooperative
Development Authority for the incorporation of fresh milk and
fresh milk-based food products in the fortified meals and cycle
menu in accordance with Republic Act No. 8172, otherwise
known as the “Philippine Food Fortification Act of 2000”,


utilizing, as far as practicable, locally produced milk in order
to enhance its nutritional content and, at the same time, help
boost livelihood opportunities for local dairy farmers and the
local dairy industry;

(d) Micronutrient Supplements. — The NGAs, in
coordination with the DOH, shall provide micronutrient
supplements to the Program beneficiaries including the use of
iodized salt in accordance with Republic Act No. 8172,
otherwise known as the “Salt Iodization or ASIN” law;

(e) Health Examination, Vaccination and Deworming. —
The NGAs, in coordination with the DOH and LGUs
concerned, shall conduct simultaneous health examinations,
including, but not limited to, deworming and vaccination, as
the case may be, to Program beneficiaries;

(f) Gulayan sa Paaralan. — The NGAs shall encourage
their respective component units to devote a portion of their
land or space for the cultivation of vegetables and other
nutrient-rich plants as identified by the NNC: Provided, That
component units lacking in,land shall adopt modern gardening
technologies with the assistance of the DA, the Department
of Science and Technology (DOST) and the city or municipal
agricultural officers. Parents shall also be encouraged to
maintain a similar program in their own backyards;

(g) Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH). — The
NGAs, in coordination with the DOH and LGUs, shall
establish and maintain water and sanitation facilities, promote
good hygiene and safe food preparation in all of its component
units especially in areas devoted for the preparation of fortified
meals under the Program; and

(th) Integrated Nutrition Education, Behavioral
Transformation, and Social Mobilization. - The Program shall
be complemented by a public health, nutrition, and values
transformation campaign to promote a holistic and integrated
approach to health and nutrition education. Orientation-training
on the objectives and mechanics of the Program shall be held
among personnel of NGAs and LGUs concerned, parent

volunteers and the parent-teachers associations (PTAs) to
generate support for the Program. The NGAs concerned shall
also endeavor to mobilize community organizations to continue
nutrition education outside of the school.

SEC. 5. Prioritization in the Program Implementation.
— The NGAs shall create a five (5)-year plan to fully implement
the Program: Provided, That the NGAs concerned shall
prioritize the implementation of the Program in the LGUs and
public day care or elementary schools that meet any of the
following criteria:

(a) With the highest prevalence of undernutrition and
nutrient-deficiency among children aged three (3) years up to
grade six (6) level;

(b) With available facilities or capability to implement the
Program; or

(c) Which prioritize such Program in their locality and
are willing to provide counterpart resources for its
implementation.

SEC. 6. Creation of a National Nutrition Information
System. — The NNC shall harmonize all existing national and
local nutrition databases from NGAs, LGUs and other relevant
agencies of government in order to identify individuals, groups,
and/or localities that have the highest magnitude of hunger
and undernutrition. This system shall henceforth be utilized
in monitoring the health and nutrition of all Filipino children,
especially those covered by the Program.

SEC. 7. Local Government Assistance. - LGUs shall
assist the NGAs in the efficient and effective implementation
of the Program in accordance with Section 4 of this Act and
shall be authorized to use a portion of the Special Education
Fund (SEF) and/or their twenty percent (20%) development
fund as provided for in Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise
known as the “Local Government Code of 1991”, as amended,
to augment the appropriations available under the General
Appropriations Act (GAA).

SEC. 8. Private Sector Participation. - The NGAs shall
encourage the participation of the private sector in the
Program which shall include, among others, PTAs, private
corporations, peoples and nongovernment organizations and
such other groups or organizations, both foreign and local, that
may want to be partner in whole or in part with the
implementation of the Program.

SEC. 9. Monitoring and Annual Report. — The NGAs,
in coordination with the LGUs, the NNC and other
stakeholders, shall regularly monitor, review and assess the
impact and effectivity of the Program as well as ensure
compliance with the standards and guidelines of the Program
for food safety, quality, accountability, community participation
and the procurement and liquidation processes adopted. For
this purpose, the NGAs shall prepare and submit an annual
report on the status of the implementation of the Program to
the Office of the President and both Houses of Congress.

SEC. 10. Tax Exemption. — Any donation or bequest made
to the NGAs or any of the aforementioned government agencies
including LGUs for the Program shall be exempt from donor’s
tax: Provided, That donations in kind shall be approved by
the NGAs concerned upon the recommendation of the NNC,
in the case of food products, and the DOH, in the case of
vaccine and supplements, as the case may be, respectively.

SEC. 11. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to
carry out the initial implementation of this Act shall be
sourced from the current appropriations of the NGAs.
Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continuous
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
GAA under the respective budgets of the NGAs.

SEC. 12. Procurement of Goods and Services. — The
Department of Budget and Management, Government
Procurement Policy Board, and the Commission on Audit, in
consultation with the NGAs, are hereby mandated to
specifically establish and promulgate a community-based mode
of procurement, liquidation and audit that will ensure the

 

efficient and effective implementation of the Program: Provided,
That this provision shall apply solely to the implementation
of the Program by the NGAs and LGUs concerned.

SEC. 13. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the NGAs,
in consultation with the NNC, the FNRI, the DOH, the DA,
the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)
and concerned LGUs, and such other relevant government
agencies, nongovernment organizations, and development
partners shall promulgate their respective rules and regulations
for the efficient and effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 14. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the
law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid
and subsisting.

SEC. 15. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations or other issuances or parts inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 16. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

AQUILINO “KOKO” PIMENTEL III
President of the Senate

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1279
and House Bill No. 5269 was passed by the Senate and the
House of Representatives on March 20, 2018.

   

CESAR STRAIT@AREJA LUTGARDO B. BARBO
Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

Approved: JUN 2 0 2018

  

RODRI ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 

i iris
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 006048

   

          
 

rece ot rhe

ALAC A Ne?

Cc

President
( RECORDS OFFICE

bE COPY