H. No, 8131

Republic af the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metres Manila
Highteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

—_—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ RePuBLIC AcT No. 11754]

AN ACT RECOGNIZING THE CABIAO CAMPUS OF THE
POLYTECHNIC UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES
(PUP) LOCATED IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF
CABIAO, PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA, AS A
REGULAR CAMPUS OF THE PUP SYSTEM, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This,Act shall be known as the “Polytechnic
University of the Philippines (PUP)-Cabiao Campus Act”.
* s 7 eke,
SEC. 2. The Polytechnic University pf the Philippines
(PUP)-Cabiao Campus inthe Municipality of Cabiao,

+

“

Province of Nueva Ecija, is hereby integrated into the PUP”
System as a regular campus.

SEc. 3. The PUP-Cabiao Campus shall primarily provide
short-term, technical-vocational, undergraduate, and graduate
courses within its areas of competency and specialization,
pursuant to its mandate and according to its capabilities as
the Board of Regents of the PUP, hereinafter referred to as
the Board, may deem necessary for the accomplishment of
its objectives, and those which respond to the human resources
development needs of the Province of Nueva Ecija and
Region III.

The PUP-Cabiao Campus is also mandated te undertake
research and extension services, and to provide progressive
leadership in these areas. / é

Src. 4. The PUP-Cabiao Campus shall be headed by a
Campus Administrator who shall render:full-time service
and shall be appointed or designated by the Board, upon the
recommendation of the search committee ‘and the President
of the PUP. Such appointment or designatign- shall be subject
to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the Board.

Src. 5. The Board shall ensure that the minimum
requirements prescribed by the Commission on Higher
Education on course offerings and those pertaining to the
operation of the PUP-Cabiao Campus as a regular campus
are duly complied with.

Src. 6. Allassets, real and personal, personnel, and records
of the PUP-Cabiao Campus, as well as liabilities or obligations,
are hereby transferred to the PUP. The positions, rights, and
security of tenure of faculty members and personnel employed
at the PUP-Cabiao Campus under existing laws prior to its
designation as a regular campus shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the PUP-Cabiao Campus is hereby declared to be the
property of the PUP and shall be titled under its name:

   

Provided, That should the PUP cease to exist or be
abolished or should such aforementioned parcels of land be
no longer needed by the PUP, the same shall revert to the
concerned local government unit or to the Republic of the
Philippines, as the case may be.

Src. 7. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General
Appropriations Act. The Municipality of Cabiao shall
continue to fund the operation and maintenance of the
PUP-Cabiao Campus until such time that the funds needed
to carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in
the annual General Appropriations Act.

Sec. 8. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining
parts or provisions not affected shall remain in full force
and effect.

SEc. 9. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

; SEc. 10. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation.

Approved,

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on January 20, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively. ‘

MYRA MARIED. VILLARICA MARK, p x L. MENDOZA
Secretary of the Senate e

  
 

Approved: APR @ 7 2022

RODRI OA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

O-

 

   
 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES |---~ =
PRRD 2016 - 022185