ee

 

H. No. 7500

Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Seventeenth Congress

Ghird Regular Session
ee

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ REPUBLIC AcT No. 11401]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A FRESHWATER MULTISPECIES
HATCHERY AND RESEARCH CENTER IN THE
MUNICIPALITY OF BALO-I, PROVINCE OF
LANAO DEL NORTE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the
supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of
the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a freshwater
multispecies hatchery and research center, to be known as the
Lanao del Norte Freshwater Aquaculture Center in the
Municipality of Balo-i, Province of Lanao del Norte.

SEC. 2. The Lanao del Norte Freshwater Aquaculture
Center and the BFAR-DA shall conduct continuing research and
experimentation on the breeding and production of freshwater

 

 

species, especially as they apply to local conditions, to discover
new methods and technology that shall benefit the freshwater
aquaculture industry.

SEC. 3. There shall be established a Local Advisory Council
that shall provide policy direction for the Center and facilitate
the exchange of information among the Center and the
stakeholders. The Council shall be composed of the BFAR
Director for Region 10 as Chairperson, the Governor of the
Province of Lanao del Norte as Cochairperson, the President
of the Municipal Mayors League of Lanao del Norte, the Mayor
of the Municipality of Balo-i, and three (3) representatives from
the local fisheries sector to be appointed by the Governor as
members.

Sec. 4. The Center shall disperse fry and fingerlings in
public bodies of water in such intervals as may be recommended
by the Local Advisory Council. It may also sell such fry and
fingerlings to individual or organized fish farmers at prevailing
market prices.

Skc. 5, The BFAR-DA shall transfer the management of
the Center to the local government of the Municipality of Balo-i
within two (2) years after its establishment through a
memorandum of agreement. The BFAR-DA shall implement a
training and phasing-in program for local government personnel
on the management and operation of the Center.

SEC. 6. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the
Department's programs the establishment of the Lanao del
Norte Freshwater Aquaculture Center in the Municipality of
Balo-i, Province of Lanao del Norte, the funding of which shall be
included in the annual General Appropriations Act. The local
government of the Municipality of Balo-i shall set aside funds
from any available local revenue in an amount deemed
appropriate for the operationalization of the Center.

SEC. 7. Within sixty (60) days from the approval of
this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the rules and
regulations on the breeding, propagation, and distribution of
fries and fingerings, the supervision, monitoring, and the eventual

transfer of the Center to the local government of the Municipality
of Balo-i.

SEc. 8. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in any newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

 

Zz

VICENTHC. SOTTO III GLORIAMMACAPAGAL ARROYO
President\of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the
Philippines on May 28, 2018 and June 3, 2019, respectively.

YRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved: AUG 2 2

— |

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES (ie Lupa)
PRRD 2016 ~ 012062