H. No. 7488

Republic of the Philippines
Cougress of the Philippines
Metco Manila
. Highteenth Congress

Second Regular Session
—_——

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11538]

AN ACT GRANTING THE CITY GOVERNMENT OF DAVAO
AFRANCHISE TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, OPERATE,
AND MAINTAIN RADIO BROADCASTING STATIONS
IN DAVAO CITY

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject
to the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules
and regulations, there is hereby granted to the City Government
of Davao, hereunder referred to as the grantee, its successors or
assignees, a franchise to construct, install, operate, and maintain
for commercial purposes and in the public interest, radio
broadcasting stations in Davao City where frequencies or channels
are still available for radio broadcasting, through microwave,
satellite or whatever means, including the use of any new
technology in radio systems, with the corresponding technological

auxiliaries and facilities, special broadcast and other program
and distribution services and relay stations.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. —
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only inthe minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing stations
or other stations which may be established by law, without in
any way diminishing its own privilege to use its assigned
wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission or
reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantee’s
services and/or availability thereof.

SEC. 3. Prior Approval of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) the appropriate permits
and licenses for the construction and operation of its stations or
facilities and shall not use any frequency in the radio/television
spectrum without authorization from the NTC. The NTC, however,
shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of any such
authority.

In ease of any violation of the provisions of this franchise,
the NTC shall have the authority to revoke or suspend, after due
process, the permits or licenses it issued pursuant to the franchise.
The NTC may recommend to Congress the revocation of the
franchise for any violation of the provisions of this franchise.

SEc. 4. Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall
reach the pertinent populations or portions thereof on important
public issues and relay important public announcements and
warnings concerning public emergencies and calamities, as
necessity, urgency or law may require; provide at all times sound
and balanced programming; promote public participation; assist
in the functions of public information and education; conform to
the ethics of honest enterprise; promote audience sensibility and
empowerment including closed captioning; and not use its stations
or facilities for the broadcasting of obscene or indecent language,
speech, act or scene, the dissemination of deliberately false
information or willful misrepresentation, to the detriment of public
interest, or to incite, encourage, or assist in subversive or
treasonable acts.

SEC. 5. Right of the Government. ~ The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony, and the
use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the grantee by the State
that may be withdrawn any time after due process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster, or disturbance of peace and order, to
temporarily take over and operate the stations or facilities of the
grantee; to temporarily suspend the operation of any station or
facility in the interest of public safety, security and public welfare;
or to authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any
agency of the government, upon due compensation to the grantee,
for the use of said stations or facilities during the period when
these shall be so operated.

SEC. 6. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be in
effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years from the date of the
effectivity of this Act, unless sooner cancelled. This franchise shall
be deemed ipso facto revoked in the event that the grantee fails
to comply with any of the following conditions:

@ commence operations within three (3) years from the
approval of its operating permit by the NTC;

(b) commence operations within five (5) years from the
effectivity of this Act; and

. © operate continuously for two (2) years.”

SEC. 7, Renewal or Extension of Franchise. — The grantee
shall apply for the renewal or extension of its franchise three (3)
years before its expiration which shall be reckoned from fifteen

(15) days after the publication of the franchise in the Official
Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

SEC. 8. Self-regulation by and Undertaking of Grantee. —
The grantee shall not require any previous censorship of any
speech, play, act or scene, or other matter to be broadcast from
its stations, but if any such speech, play, act or scene, or other

~ matter should constitute a violation of the law or infringement of

a private right, the grantee shall be free from any liability, civil

or criminal, for such speech, play, act or scene, or other matter:
Provided, That the grantee, during any broadcast, shall cut off
the airing of speech, play, act or scene, or other matter being
broadcast if the tendency thereof is to propose or incite treason,
rebellion or sedition; or the language used therein or the theme
thereof is indecent or immoral: Provided, further, That willful
failure to do so shall constitute a valid cause for the cancellation
of this franchise.

The grantee shall guarantee that news and events are
reported accurately and truthfully, and that all parties involved
in such news or events are allowed equal time and opportunity
for information sharing.

The grantee shall ensure that all its programs, talents,
and the languages used by its talents are geared towards the
promotion of positive Filipino values.

The grantee shall allow all candidates, particularly those
seeking national elective positions, equal opportunity to present
programs of government to the electorate, subject to the
implementing guidelines, rules and regulations issued by the
Commission on Elections.

Willful failure to comply with the self-regulation by and
undertaking of the grantee as provided for in this section shall
constitute a valid cause for the cancellation of this franchise.

SEc. 9. Warranty in Favor of the National and Local
Governments. — The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, liabilities, demands, or actions arising out of accidents
causing injury to persons or damage to properties, during the
construction or operation of the stations of the grantee.

Sec. 10. Commitment to Provide and Promote the
Creation of Employment Opportunities. - The grantee shall
create employment opportunities and accept on-the-job trainees
in the franchise operations: Provided, That priority shall be
accorded to the residents of the place where the principal office of
the grantee is located: Provided, further, That the grantee shall
ensure that at least sixty percent (60%) ofits employees are regular

employees and in no case shall the percentage of contractual
employees, job order and casual employees, and independent
contractors combined, exceed forty percent (40%) of its total
workforce: Provided, furthermore, That the grantee shall follow
the applicable labor standards and allowance entitlement under
existing labor laws, rules and regulations and similar issuances:
Provided, finally, That the grantee shall follow applicable civil
service rules and regulations and other similar issuances.

SEc. 11. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruet, or
Assignment of Franchise. - The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other commercial or legal entity.

SEC. 12. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report on its compliance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise and on its operations to the Congress
of the Philippines, through the Committee on Legislative
Franchises of the House of Representatives and the Committee
on Public Services of the Senate, on or before April 30 of every
year during the term of its franchise.

The annual report shall include an update on the roll-out,
development, operation or.expansion; audited financial
statements; and certification of the NTC on the status of its
permits and operations.

+

The reportorial compliance certificate issued by Congress
shall be required before any application for permit or certificate
is accepted by the NTC.

SEC. 13. Fine. — Failure of the grantee to submit the
requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized by a fine of
Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per working day of noncompliance.
The fine shall be collected by the NTC from the delinquent
franchise grantee separate from the reportorial penalties imposed
by the NT'C and the same shall be remitted to the Bureau of the
Treasury.

SEc. 14. Equality Clause. - Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under existing

franchises, or which may hereafter be granted for radio and
television broadcasting, upon prior review and approval of
Congress, shall become part of this franchise and shall be accorded
immediately and unconditionally to the herein grantee: Pro vided,
That the foregoing shall neither apply to nor affect the provisions
of broadcasting franchises concerning territorial coverage, the
term, or the type of service authorized by the franchise.

SEC. 15. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so requires
and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the privileges
herein provided for.

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not affected
thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
resolutions, instructions, rules and regulations, and other
issuances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended, or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 18. Effectivity.—This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

 

VICENTE C. SOTTO III LORD ALL AY Q. VELASCO
President of (he Senate Speakerof the House
of Representatives

pony.

   

 

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on September 9, 2020,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on March 24, 2021, and
which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on March 25, 2021.

el VLA SS

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

    

duse of Representatives
Approved: Way 18 2021

ROD ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 017305