H. No. 8287

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Sessian

—_s—

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPuBLIC Act No.41771)

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE CAGAYAN DE ORO CITY
CULTURAL CENTER AND MUSEUM IN CAGAYAN
DE ORO CITY, PROVINCE OF MISAMIS ORIENTAL,
DEFINING ITS PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There is hereby established a cultural
center and museum in Cagayan de Oro City, Province of
Misamis Oriental, to be known as the Cagayan de Oro City
Cultural Center and Museum, to promote culture and the arts.
Tt shall serve as the institutional medium for the protection,
preservation, presentation and promotion of the cultural,
artistic, archaeological, social, historical, religious and
philosophical heritage of the city and its people in view of
the richness of their legacies and their relevance to their
contemporary and future aspirations.

SEc. 2. The Cagayan de Oro City Cultural Center and
Museum shall be a collaboration between the City Government
of Cagayan de Oro and the National Commission for Culture
and the Arts (NCCA) with its concerned affiliated cultural
agencies and pertinent academic and private sector partners,
and members of the community, with its site, structures,
governance, organization, operations, and development to be
provided for by mutual agreement. between the parties, to be
executed and published within one (1) year from the effectivity
of this Act.

SEC. 3. To fufill its purposes and achieve its objectives,
the Cagayan de Oro City Cultural Center and Museum shall:

(a) Compile musical notes and lyrics of Higaonon and
other tribes’ ancestral songs, traditional songs and ballads,
and modern and contemporary music compositions, and
collect samples of musical instruments of local origin, design,
and creation;

(b+) Publish and disseminate Cagayan de Oro City’s
literary works, epics, stories, and historical accounts;

(© Compile Cagayan de Oro City’s literature, film, or
audiovisual recordings of cultural performances in music,
dance, oral literature, and festival celebration;

(@ Compile Cagayan de Oro City’s epigrams, proverbs,
legends, and the origin, history and etymology of the city,
its words, names of barangays, and other places of interest
and their respective histories;

© Gather and document Cagayan de Oro City’s religious
practices and traditions, and the background and origin of the
local fiestas and festivals;

() Compile photographs of and showcase by appropriate
exhibits, local landmarks, historical sites and scenic views, and
acquire and display varied range of local arts and artifacts;

(g) Gather speciméns of archaeological findings, collect
stones, rocks, and other geological materials, and preserve by
appropriate methods samples of flora and zune indigenous
to the city and its environs;

(hb) Conduct performances on local music, dances,
arts, literary works, epics, stories, historical accounts and
legends; and

@ Carry out any other relevant and appropriate activities.

Sc. 4. The City Government of Cagayan de Oro shall
provide the land necessary for the construction or
establishment, or both, of the main venue and ancillary
offices and facilities of the Cagayan de Oro City Cultural
Center and Museum.

SEc. 5. The amount necessary for the implementation
of this Act shall be charged against the current year’s budget
of the NCCA (Proper). Thereafter, such amount as may be
necessary for its continued implementation shall be included
in the annual General Appropriations Act. .

SEc. 6. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of
this Act, the NCCA, in coordination with the City Government
of Cagayan de Oro, other concerned agencies of the government,
and private stakeholders, shall promulgate the necessary rtles
and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act.

Sec. 7. Notwithstanding the nonissuance of the
implementing rules and regulations, this Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in a newspaper of general circulation.

  
 
   

JAY Q. VELASCO
er jof the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives on February 3, 2021,
amended by the Senate of the Philippines on January 31, 2022,
and which amendments were concurred in by the House of
Representatives on February 2, 2022.

Whithirrt
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MARK If
Secretary of the Senate ,

   
  

Approved: MAY 2 4 2022

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

   

ol
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 022265

ee 7 “ memati te A