Metra Manila
Highteenth Congress
Chirk Regular Session

day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

AN ACT AMENDING COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 146,
OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE PUBLIC SERVICE ACT,
AS AMENDED

Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy. — The State recognizes
the role of the private sector as one of the main engines for national
growth and development. It is hereby declared the policy of the
State to encourage private enterprise and expand the base of
investment in the country, with the goal of providing efficient,
reliable and affordable basic services to all. These policies
are fulfilled by: (a) ensuring effective regulation of public services;
(b) providing reasonable rate of return to public services;
(©) rationalizing foreign equity restrictions by clearly defining
the term “public utilities”; and (d) instituting processes for
the protection of national security.

SEC. 2. Definition of Terms. — For the urposes of thi
Act, the terms below shall be defined as follows: Poses of this

(a) Administrative Agency or Administrative Agencies, as
the case may be, refers to relevant government agencies, to which
the powers and duties of the Public Service Commission were
transferred pursuant to existing laws. All mention of the word

Commission” in this Act shall now refer to this term;

() Certificates refer to any franchise, certificate of public
convenience, certificate of public convenience and nece. ssity,
concession, or any other appropriate form of authorization for the
operation of a public service, including a public utility, as may be
applicable; ,

© Concession refers to a contract granting a private

concessionaire the privilege to, among others, finance, construct,
manage, operate and/or maintain concession assets:

. @ Concessionaire refers toa person, corporation, firm or
association awarded a concession;

; €) Critical Infrastructure refers to any public service
which owns, uses, or operates systems and assets, whether
physical or virtual, so vital to the Republic of the Philippines that
the incapacity or destruction of such systems or assets would
have a detrimental impact on national security, including
telecommunications and other such vital services as may be
declared by the President of the Philippines;

o Distribution of Electricity refers to the conveyance of
electric power by a distribution utility through its distribution
system as defined by Section 4(n) of Republic Act No. 9136
otherwise known as the “Electric Power Industry Reform Act of
2001”, as amended;

(g) Foreign State-owned Enterpri. i
: | prise refers to an
in which a foreign State: saty

th @ sealer indirectly owns more than fifty percent (50%)
of the capital taking into account both the voti i
beneficial ownership; © Young wienis and

Gi) controls, through ownership interests, the exercise of
more than fifty percent (50%) of the voting rights; or

Gii) holds the power to appoint a majority of members of
the board of directors or any other equivalent management body;

(h) National Security refers to the requirements and
conditions necessary to ensure the territorial integrity of the
country and the safety, security, and well-being of Filipino citizens;

@ Petroleum and Petroleum Products Pipeline
Transmission Systems refer to the operation and maintenance of
pipeline transmission systems to ensure an uninterrupted and
adequate supply and transmission of petroleum and petroleum
products to the public; and excludes petroleum pipeline systems
operated exclusively for private or own use, or incidental to the
operations of a distinct business;

G) Philippine National refers to citizens, partnerships,
associations, and corporations defined by Section 3(a) of Republic
Act No. 7042, otherwise known as the “Foreign Investments Act
of 1991”, as amended;

«&) Public Utility Vehicles (PUVs) refer to internal
combustion engine vehicles that carry passengers and/or
domestic cargo for a fee, offering services to the public, namely
trucks-for-hire, UV express service, public utility buses (PUBs),
public utility jeepneys (PUJs), tricycles, filcabs, and taxis:
Provided, That transport vehicles accredited with and operating
through transport network corporations shall not be considered
as public utility vehicles;

@) Seaport refers to a place where ships may anchor or
tie up for the purpose of shelter, repair, loading or discharge of
passengers or cargo, or for other such activities connected with
water-borne commerce, and including all the land and water areas
and the structures, equipment and facilities related to these
functions, as defined by the charters of relevant authorities or
agencies, such as the Philippine Ports Authority, Subic Bay
Metropolitan Authority, PHIVIDEC Industrial Estate Authority,
Cebu Port Authority, local government units, and other similar
agencies or government bodies;

(m) Telecommunications refers to any process which
enables a telecommunications entity to relay and receive voice,
data, electronic messages, written or printed matter, fixed or
moving pictures, words, music or visible or audible signals or
any control signals of any design and for any purpose by wire,
radio or other electromagnetic, spectral, optical or technological
means, as defined by Section 3(a) of Republic Act No. 7925,
otherwise known as the “Public Telecommunications Policy
Act of the Philippines”, as amended, except passive
telecommunications tower infrastructure and components, such
as, but not limited to, poles, fiber ducts, dark fiber cables, and
passive telecommunications tower infrastructure, as defined by
the Department of Information and Communications Technology
(DICT), and value-added services, as defined in Section 3(h) of
Republic Act No. 7925, as amended;

(a) Transmission of. Electricity refers to the conveyance of
electricity through the high voltage backbone system, as defined
by Section 4(ccc) of Republic Act No. 9136, as amended;

© Water Pipeline Distribution Systems and Wastewater
Pipeline Systems refer to the operation and maintenance of water
pipeline distribution systems to ensure an uninterrupted and
adequate supply and distribution of potable water for domestic
and other purposes and the operation and maintenance of
wastewater pipeline systems, except desludging companies and
septic tanks, to ensure public health and safety, as regulated by
Republic Act No. 6234, entitled “An Act Creating the Metropolitan
Waterworks and Sewerage System and Dissolving the National
Waterworks and Sewerage Authority: and for Other Purposes”,
as amended, and Presidential Decree No. 198, otherwise known
as the “Provincial Water Utilities Act of 1973”, as amended; and

(p) Sewerage Pipeline Systems refer to the operation and
maintenance of sewerage pipeline systems to ensure public health
and safety, as regulated by Republic Act No. 6234, as amended,
and Presidential Decree No. 198, as amended.

SEC. 3. Recognition of Transfer of Jurisdiction to Various
Administrative Agencies. — All references to the Public Service
Commission in Commonwealth Act No. 146, as amended, shall
pertain to any Administrative Agency to which the powers and

: ner tN NEI Esser ners

duties of the Public Service.Commission were transferred by
subsequent laws, such as but not limited to: :

(a) Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB);
() Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP);
(©) Department of Energy (DOE);

@) Department of Environment and Natural Resources
@ENR);

@) DICT;
) Department of Transportation (DOTr);
(g) Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC);

th) Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory
Board (LTFRB);

G) Land Transportation Office (LTO);
G) Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA);
(k) Maritime Industry Authority (MARINA);

Q) Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage
System (MWSS);

(m) National Telecommunications Commission (NTC);
(n) National Water Resources Board (NWRB);

(0) Philippine National Railways (PNR);

(p) Philippine Ports Authority (PPA); and

(q) Toll Regulatory Board (TRB).

SEc. 4. Section 13 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as

amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 13. (a) The Commission shall have
jurisdiction and supervision over all public services,
including public utilities, and their franchises,
equipment, and other properties, and in the exercise
of its authority, it shall have the necessary powers
and the aid of public force: Provided, That public
services, including public utilities, owned or operated.
by government entities or government-owned or
-controlled corporations shall be regulated by the
Commission in the same way as privately-owned

public services.

“Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted to
diminish, limit, or restrict the authority of Congress
from granting franchises to public services, including
public utilities, and other activities, as may be
provided by law. Any franchise or certificate
necessary for the operation of a public service
shall be granted by Congress unless otherwise
previously delegated by law to the relevant

Administrative Agencies.

“xxx

“@) Public Utility, — Public utility refers to
a public service that operates, manages or controls

for public use any of the following:
“(l) Distribution of Electricity;

“@) Transmission of Electricity;

“3) Petroleum and Petroleum Products

Pipeline Transmission Systems;

“(4) Water Pipeline Distribution Systems and
Wastewater Pipeline Systems, including sewerage

pipeline systems;

* : theese nent crate Fennel tactnaneem eon
eosin pene, sew 8 waren myers eed nen rpatangetnsisenyeieeapitnepreeniancummpanneanansenausnppe

“(5) Seaports; and
“(6) Public Utility’ Vehicles.

“All concessionaires, joint ventures and other
similar entities that wholly operate, manage or
control for public use the sectors above are
public utilities.

“Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted asa
requirement for legislative franchise where the law
does not require any. No other person shall be deemed
a public utility unless otherwise subsequently
provided by law.

“(e) Upon the recommendation of the National
Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), the
President may recommend to Congress the
classification of a public service as a public utility on
the basis of the following criteria:

“(l) The person or juridical entity regularly
supplies and transmits and distributes to the
public through a network a commodity or service of
public consequence;

“@) The commodity or service is a natural
monopoly that needs to be regulated when the common
good so requires. For this purpose, natural monopoly
exists when the market demand for a commodity or
service can be supplied by a single entity at a lower
cost than by two or more entities;

“(3) The commodity or service is necessary
for the maintenance of life and occupation of the
public; and

“(4) The commodity or service is obligated to
provide adequate service to the public on demand.

“All public services, including those classified
as public utilities under this Act, shall continue to

be regulated and supervised by the relevant
Administrative Agencies under existing laws.

“A public service which is not classified as a
public utility under this Act shall be considered a
business affected with public interest for purposes of
Sections 17 and 18 of Article XII of the Constitution.

“Notwithstanding any law to the contrary,
nationality requirements shall not be imposed by the
relevant Administrative Agencies on any public
service not classified as a public utility.

“The NEDA shall provide periodic advice to
Administrative Agencies on the proper application of
the constitutional and other legal restrictions to local
and foreign-owned subcontractors, without putting
operational resiliency at risk.”

SEC. 5. Section 15 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 15. xxx

“The Commission shall prescribe as a condition
for the issuance of the certificate or authorization
provided in the preceding paragraph that the service
can be acquired by the Republic of the Philippines or
any instrumentality thereof, or the issuing local
government unit, upon payment of just compensation
regulations on expropriation; and likewise, that the
certificate or authorization shall be valid only for a
definite period of time and that the violation of. any of
these conditions shall, after hearing, result in the
immediate cancellation of the certificate or
authorization without the necessity of any express
action on the part of the issuing authority.

SEc. 6. Section 16 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 16. Proceedings of the Commission,
upon notice and hearing. — The Commission shall
have the power, upon proper notice and hearing in
accordance with the rules and provisions of this Act:

“@) To issue certificates authorizing the
operation of public service within the Philippines
whenever the Commission finds that the operation of
the public service proposed and the authorization to
do business will promote the public interest in a
proper and suitable manner: Provided, That any
certificate authorizing the operation, management or
control of a public service shall only be issued to
corporations, partnerships, associations or joint stock
companies that are constituted and organized under
the laws of the Philippines.





“©) To fix and determine the fair and reasonable
individual or joint rates, tolls, charges, classifications,
tariffs or schedules thereof, as well as commutation,
mileage, kilometrage, and other special rates which
shall be imposed, observed, and followed thereafter
by any public service when the public interest so
requires: Provided, That the Commission may, in
its discretion, approve rates proposed by publicservices
provisionally and without necessity of any hearing;
but it shall call a hearing thereon within fifteen (15)
days, thereafter, upon publication and notice to the
affected parties in the territory affected, to ratify its
prior provisional approval or change, modify or alter
the approved rate based on public interest: Provided,
further, That in case the public service equipment of
an operator is used principally or secondarily for the
promotion of a private business, the net profits of said
private business shall be considered in relation with
the public service of such operator for the purpose of

fixing the rates: Provided, finally, That when the
public interest requires, the Administrative Agency
may establish and enforce a methodology for setting
rates, taking into account all relevant considerations,
including the efficiency of the regulated public service.
The rates must be such as to allow the recovery of
prudent and efficient costs and a reasonable rate of
return to enable the public service to operate viably
and efficiently. The Administrative Agency may adopt
alternative forms consistent with internationally
accepted rate-setting methodology. The adopted
rate-setting methodology shall ensure a reasonable
price of the commodity or service and that the rates
prescribed shall not be discriminatory.

“This provision shall not be interpreted as
mandating rate regulation nor amending or repealing:
(1) laws providing a deregulation policy, such as
Republic Act No. 7925, otherwise known as the ‘Public
Telecommunications Policy Act of the Philippines’,
as amended; Republic Act No. 8479, otherwise known
as the ‘Downstream Oil Industry Deregulation Act of
1998’, as amended; Republic Act No. 9136, otherwise
known as the Electric Power Industry Reform Act of
2001’, as amended; Republic Act No. 9295, otherwise
known as the ‘Domestic Shipping Development Act
of 2004’, as amended; and Republic Act No. 6957,
otherwise known as the ‘BOT Law’, as amended; and
(2) regulations promulgated by these Administrative
Agencies to deregulate rates.



x XX

“@ To fix and determine proper and adequate
rates of depreciation of the property of any public
service which will be observed in a proper and
adequate depreciation account to be carried for the
protection of stockholders, bondholders or creditors,
of accounts as the Commission may prescribe. Said
rates shall be sufficient to provide the amounts
required over and above the expense of maintenance
to keep such property in a state of efficiency

corresponding to the progress of the industry. Each
public service shall conform its depreciation accounts
to the rates so determirféd and fixed, and, as may be
required by the proper Administrative Agency, shall
set aside the moneys so provided for out of its earnings
and carry the same in a depreciation fund. The income
from investments of money in such fund shall likewise
be carried in such fund. This fund shall not be
expended otherwise than for depreciation,
improvements, new constructions, extensions or
additions to the property of such public service.

“x x

“(@) Tosuspend or revoke any certificate issued
under the provisions of this Act when the holder
thereof has failed for three (8) consecutive years
the annual performance audit conducted by an
independent evaluation team in accordance with the
metrics to be set by the Administrative Agency.”

SEc. 7. Section 17 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 17. Proceedings of Commission without
previous hearing. — The Commission shall have
power, without previous hearing, subject to
established limitations and exceptions and saving
provisions to the contrary:

“(a) To investigate, upon its own initiative, or
upon complaint in writing, any matter concerning
any public service as regards matters under its
jurisdiction; to require any public service to furnish
safe, adequate, and proper service as the public
interest may require and warrant; to enforce
compliance with any standard, rule, regulation, order
or other requirement of this Act or ofthe Commission,
and to prohibit or prevent any public service as herein
defined from operating without having first secured
a certificate and require existing public services to
pay the fees provided for in this Act for the issuance
of the certificate, under the penalty, at the discretion

12°

ofthe Commission, of the revocation and cancellation
ofany acquired right.

“(&) To require any public service to pay the
actual expenses incurred by the Commission in any
investigation if it shall be found in the same that
any rate, toll, charge, schedule, regulation, practice,
act or service thereof is in violation of any provision
of this Act or any certificate, order, rule, regulation
or requirement issued or established by the
Commission. The Commission may also assess
against any public service reasonable costs with
reference to such investigation.





“(g) To require any public service to keep its
books, records, and accounts so as to afford an
intelligent understanding of the conduct of its
business and to that end to require every such public
service of the same class to adopt a uniform system
of accounting. Such system shall conform to any
system approved and confirmed by the Commission
on Audit.

SEC. 8. Section 18 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 18. It shall be unlawful for any
individual, partnership, association, corporation
or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees, or
receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, or any
municipality, province, or other department of the
Government of the Philippines, to engage in any public
service business without having first secured from
the Commission a certificate as provided for in this
Act, except grantees of legislative franchises expressly
exempting such grantee from the requirement of
securing a certificate from this Commission, as well
as concerns at present existing expressly exempted
from the jurisdiction of the Commission, either totally

or in part, by the provisions of section thirteen of
this Act.”

SEC..9. Section 19 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 19. Unlawful acts. — It shall be
unlawful for any public service:



KKK

“© To refuse or neglect, when requested by the
Postmaster General or his authorized representative,
to carry public mail on the regular trips of any public
land transportation service maintained or operated
by any such public service, upon such terms and
conditions and for a consideration in such amounts
as may be agreed upon between the Postmaster
General and the public service carrier or fixed by the
Commission in the absence of an agreement between
the Postmaster General and the carrier. In case the
Postmaster General and the public service carrier are
unable to agree on the amount of the compensation to
be paid for the carriage of the mail, the Postmaster
General shall forthwith request the Commission to
fix a just and reasonable compensation for such
carriage and the same shall be promptly fixed by the
Commission in accordance with section sixteen of this
Act.

“(d) To refuse or neglect, when requested by
the Administrative Agency to urgently use, deliver
or render the public service for the purpose of avoiding
further loss on human, material, economic, or
environment during a state of calamity.”

SEc. 10. Section 20 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 20. Acts requiring the approval of the
Commission. — Subject to established limitations
and exceptions and saving provisions to the contrary,

14.

it shall be unlawful for any public service or for the
owner, lessee or operator thereof, without the approval
and authorization of the Commission previously had:

“(a) To adopt, establish, fix, impose, maintain,
or collect or carry into effect any individual or joint
rates, commutation, mileage or other special rate,
toll, fare, charge, classification or itinerary. The
Commission shall approve only those that are prudent
and efficient and not any that are unjustly
discriminatory or unduly preferential, only upon
reasonable notice to the public services and other
parties concerned, giving them a reasonable
opportunity to be heard, and the burden of the proof
to show that the proposed rates or regulation are
prudent and efficient shall be upon the public service
proposing the same.

“() To establish, construct, maintain, or
operate new units or extend existing facilities or make
any other addition to or general extension of the
service: Provided, That only assets that are useful
and necessary for the provision of the public service
shall form part of the rate base as determined and
approved by the Administrative Agency: Provided,
further, That construction of such asset and
implementation of such project may be allowed for
emergency and other extraordinary cases: Provided,
finally, That the public service provider files for
approval of such extension or construction of facilities
within sixty (60) days from implementation of
the project, and without prejudice to the final
determination by the Administrative Agency if the
said asset is useful and necessary for inclusion in the
rate base. -

“The Administrative Agency may issue
regulations prescribing a shorter period than that
provided in the preceding paragraphs only in cases of
emergency, as may be certified by such Administrative
Agency, requiring the installation, construction or
maintenance of units, facilities or equipment.



XXX

“(e) To issue anyshare of stock without par
value: Provided, That it shall be the duty of the
Commission, after hearing, to approve any such issue
when satisfied that the same is to be made in
accordance with law.

“

XXX

“@) Tosell, alienate, mortgage, encumber or
lease its property, franchises, certificates, privileges,
or rights, or any part thereof, or merge or consolidate
its property, franchises, privileges or rights, or any
part thereof, with those of any other public service.
The approval herein required shall be given, after
notice to the public and after hearing the persons
interested at a public hearing, if it be shown that
there are just and reasonable grounds for making
the mortgage or encumbrance, for liabilities of more
than one year maturity, or the sale, alienation, lease,
merger, or consolidation to be approved, and that the
same are not detrimental to the public interest, and
in case of a sale, the date on which the same is to be
consummated shall be fixed in the order of approval:
Provided, however, That nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prevent the transaction from
being negotiated or completed before its approval or
to prevent the sale, alienation, or lease by any public
service of any of its property in the ordinary course of
its business: Provided, finally, That the need for
approval of the sale, alienation, mortgage,
encumbrance or lease will be required only for
properties of the public service that are used and
useful in the delivery of the required public service.

«

x xX xX

“@) To sell, alienate or in any manner transfer
shares of its capital stock to any alien if the result
of that sale, alienation, or transfer in itself or in
connection with another previous sale shall be the
reduction to less than sixty percent (60%) of the

capital stock belonging to Philippine Nationals in the suspension of the certificate of said public service until
operation of a public utility as required by the payment shall be made or the order is complied with.
Constitution. Such sale, alienation or transfer shall Payment may also be enforced by appropriate action
be void and of no effect and shall be sufficient cause brought in a court of competent jurisdiction. The
for ordering the cancellation of the certificate. ? remedy provided in this section shall not be a bar to,
or affect any other remedy provided in this Act

“x x x.” \ but shall be cumulative and additional to such remedy

. or remedies.”

SEC. 11. Section 21 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows: SEC. 12. Section 23 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 21. In the absence of any specific fine

or penalty imposed under the Charter of the “SEC. 23. Any public service corporation that
Administrative Agency or the special law governing shall perform, commit, or do any act or thing herein
the particular public service, any public service forbidden or prohibited or shall neglect, fail, or omit
violating or failing to comply with the terms and . to do or perform any act or thing herein required to
conditions of any certificate or any order, decision or be done or performed, shall’ be punished, after notice
regulation of the Commission shall be subject to and hearing, by afine not exceeding Two million pesos
a fine of not lower than Five thousand pesos (P2;000,000.00), or by imprisonment of nét lower than
(P5,000.00) but not exceeding Two million pesos six (6) years and one (1) day and not higher than
(P2,000,000.00) per day for every day during which twelve (12) years, or both, at the discretion of the
such default or violation continues; and the court.
Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to
impose such fine, after due notice and hearing: “In case the services of any entity engaged
Provided, That should a lesser fine or penalty be in the operation and management of critical
imposed under the Charter of the Administrative infrastructure are interrupted, it shall act on
Agency or the special law governing the public service, customer complaints within ten (10) days, or provide
the amount of fine or penalty provided for under this an action plan to be accomplished within a reasonable
section shall apply. period, from the date the complaint, written or
. otherwise, was received. For this purpose, entities

“In cases where rates collected by the public engaged in the operation and management of critical
service exceed the rates authorized by the infrastructure shall file a monthly report to the
Administrative Agency, the Administrative Agency ? appropriate regulatory agency detailing the service
may order a refund to consumers in lieu of or in interruptions that occurred during the covered period,
addition to the fine or penalty imposed under this Act 3 the complaints lodged before it, and the actions taken
or the special law governing the public service. , on each complaint.”

“The fines so imposed shall be paid to the SEC. 13. Section 24 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
Government of the Philippines through the amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Commission, and failure to pay the fine or comply
with the order to réfund in any case within the time “SEC. 24. Any person, including juridical
specified in the order or decision of the Commission persons whether foreign or domestic, who shall

shall be deemed good and sufficient reason for the knowingly and willfully perform, commit, or do, or

participate in performing, committing, or doing, or
who shall knowingly and willfully cause, participate,
or join with others in causing any public service
corporation or company to do, perform, or commit, or
who shall advise, solicit, persuade, or knowingly and
willfully instruct, direct, or order any officer, agent,
or employee of any public service corporation or
company to perform, commit, or do any act or thing
forbidden or prohibited by this Act, shall be punished,
after notice and hearing, by a fine not exceeding
Two million pesos (P2,000,000.00), or imprisonment
of not lower than six (6) years and one (1) day and not
higher than twelve (12) years, or both, at the discretion
of the court.

“When the entities involved are juridical
persons, the penalty of imprisonment shall be imposed
on its officers, directors, or employees holding
managerial positions, who are knowingly and willfully
responsible for such violation.”

managerial positions, who are knowingly and willfully
responsible for such violation.”

SEC. 15. Section 26 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 26. Any person who shall destroy, injure,
or interfere with any apparatus or appliance owned
or operated by or in charge of the Commission or its
agents, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished, after notice and
hearing, by a fine of the amount equivalent to the
actual market value of the apparatus or appliance
destroyed or injured plus a fine not exceeding
Two million pesos (P2,000,000.00) or imprisonment
of not lower than six (6) years and one (1) day and not
higher than twelve (12) years, or both, at the discretion
ofthe court.”

. SEC. 16. Section 28 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
SEC. 14. Section 25 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 25. Any person, including juridical
persons whether foreign or domestic, who shall
knowingly and willfully neglect, fail, or omit to door
perform, or who shall knowingly and willfully cause
or join or participate with others in causing any
public service corporation or company to neglect, fail,
or omit to do or perform, or who shall advise, solicit,
or persuade, or knowingly and willfully instruct,
direct, or order any officer, agent, or employee of any
public service corporation or company to neglect, fail,
or omit to do any act or thing required to be done by
this Act, shall be punished, after notice and hearing,
by a fine not exceeding Two million pesos
(P2,000,000.00) or by imprisonment of not lower than
six (6) years and one (1) day and not higher than
twelve (12) years, or both, at the discretion of the
court. When the entities involved are juridical
persons, the penalty of imprisonment shall be imposed
on its officers, directors, or employees holding

“SEC. 28. Violations of the orders, decisions,
and regulations of the Commission and of the terms
and conditions of any certificate issued by the
Commission and violations of the provisions of this
Act shall prescribe in accordance with Act No. 3326,
entitled ‘An Act to Establish Periods of Prescription
for Violations Penalized by Special Acts and Municipal
Ordinances and to Provide When Prescription Shall
Begin to Run’, as amended.”

SEC. 17. Section 29 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 29. All hearings and investigations before
the Commission shall be governed by rules adopted
by the Commission, and in the conduct thereof the
Commission shall not be bound by the technical rules
of legal evidence: Provided, That the Hearing Officer
may summarily punish for contempt by’ a fine not
exceeding Two thousand pesos (P2,000.00) or by

imprisonment not exceeding ten days, or both, any “() The officials and Hearing Officers of
person guilty of misconduct in the presence of the the Commission shall have the power to administer
Hearing Officer or so near the same as to interrupt oaths in all matters under the jurisdiction of
the hearing or session or any proceedings before them, the Commission. -

including cases in which a person present at a hearing, ~ .

session, or investigation held by the Hearing Officer “EEX

refuses to be sworn as a witness or to answer as such

when lawfully required to do so. To enforce the “(e) Witnesses appearing before the

provisions of this section, the Commission may, if Commission in obedience to subpoena or subpoena
necessary, request the assistance of the municipal or duces tecum shall be entitled to receive the same fees
city police for the execution of any order made for . and mileage as witnesses attending regional trial
said purpose.” : courts in civil cases.
SEC. 18. Section 30 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as “(f) Any person who shall obstruct the
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows: Commission or either of the Hearing Officers while
engaged in the discharge of official duties, or who
“SEC. 30. (a) The Commission may issue ‘ shall conduct himself in a rude, disrespectful or
subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, for witnesses disorderly manner before the Commission or either
in any matter or inquiry pending before the of the Hearing Officers, while engaged in the
Commission and require the production of all books, discharge of official duties, or shall orally or in writing
papers, tariffs, contracts, agreements, and all other be disrespectful to, offend or insult either of the
docunients, which the Commission may deem Hearing Officers on occasion or by reason of the
necessary in any proceeding. Such process shall be performance of his official duties, upon conviction
issued under the seal of the Commission, signed by thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be
one of the Hearing Officers, and may be served by punished for each offense by a fine not exceeding
any person of full age, or by registered mail. Thirty thousand pesos (P30,000.00), or by
Disobedience to or failure to comply with such imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both,
subpoena, shall constitute indirect contempt, and may at the discretion of the Court.” .
be instituted in the manner as provided in the Rules
of Court before the appropriate court. : SEC. 19. Section 32 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as

amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:
“(b) Any person who shall neglect or refuse to

answer any lawful inquiry or produce before the “SEC. 32. The Commission may, in any
Commission, books, papers, tariffs, contracts, investigation or hearing, by its order in writing cause
agreements, and documents or other things called « the deposition of witnesses residing within or without
for by said Commission, if in his power to do so, in the Philippines to be taken in the manner and under
obedience to the subpoena or lawful inquiry of the the conditions prescribed by the Rules of Court, Where
Commission upon conviction thereof by a court of witnesses reside in places distant from Manila and it
competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by a fine would be inconvenient and expensive for them to
not exceeding Thirty thousand pesos (P30,000.00) appear personally before the Commission, the
or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or Commission may, by proper order, commission any

both, at the discretion of the court. clerk of the Regional Trial Court of the Philippines to

take the deposition of witnesses in any case pending
before the Commission. It shall be the duty of the
official so commissioned, to designate promptly a date
or dates for the taking of such deposition, giving timely
notice to the parties, and on said date to proceed
to take the deposition, reducing it to writing. After
the depositions have been taken, the official so
commissioned shall certify to the depositions taken.
and forward them as soon as possible to the
Commission. It shall be the duty of the respective
parties to furnish stenographers for taking and
transcribing the testimony taken.

“The Commission may also, by proper order,
authorize any of the attorneys of the legal division or
division chiefs of the Commission, if they be lawyers,
to hear and investigate any case filed with the
Commission and in connection therewith to receive
such evidence as may be material thereto. At the
conclusion of the hearing or investigation, the attorney
or division chief so authorized shall submit the
evidence received by him to the Commission to enable
the latter to render its decision.”

SEC. 20. Section 35 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEc. 35. Any order, ruling, or decision of the
Administrative Agency may be appealed in the
manner and within the period prescribed under the
Rules of Court and other pertinent laws.”

SEC. 21. Section 38 of Commonwealth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 38. The chief of the legal division or any

other attorneys of the Commission shall represent the

‘same in all judicial proceedings. It shall be the duty

of the Solicitor General to represent the Commission

in any judicial proceeding if, for special reasons, the
Hearing Officer shall request his intervention.”

<é

SEC. 22. Section 40 of Commonwéalth Act No. 146, as
amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

- . “SEC. 40. Administrative Fees and Charges. -
Administrative Agencies may colléct from any public
service, including any public utility, reasonable fees
and charges, and impose appropriate penalties and
fines as provided by law: Provided, That such fees,
charges, penalties and fines may be adjusted to its
present value every five (5) years using the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) as published by the Philippine
Statistics Authority (PSA).”

SEC. 23. Powers of the President to Suspend or Prohibit
Transaction or Investment. ~ In the interest of national security,
:the President, after review, evaluation and recommendation
of the relevant government department or Administrative
Agency, may, within sixty (60) days from the receipt of such
recommendation, suspend or prohibit any proposed merger or
acquisition transaction, or any investment in a public service
that effectively results in the grant of control, whether direct or
indirect, to a foreigner or a foreign corporation.

The Philippine Competition Commission (PCC) may be consulted on all matters relating to mergers and acquisitions.

The NEDA shall promulgate rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of this section.

SEC. 24. Investments by an Entity Controlled by or Acting
on Behalf of the Foreign Government, or Foreign State-owned
Enterprises. — An entity controlled by or acting on behalf of the
foreign government or foreign state-owned enterprises shall be
prohibited from owning capital in any public service classified as
public utility or critical infrastructure: Provided, That the
prohibition shall apply only to investments made after the
effectivity of this Act: Provided, further, That foreign state-owned
enterprises which own capital prior to the effectivity of this law
are prohibited from investing in additional capital upon the
effectivity of this Act: Provided, finally, That notwithstanding
the immediately preceding clause, the sovereign wealth funds

24-

and independent pension funds of each state may collectively own
up to thirty percent (30%) of the capital of such public services.

In the interest of national security, an entity controlled by
or acting on behalf of the foreign government or foreign-owned
enterprises shall not make any data or information disclosure,
nor extend assistance, support or cooperation to any foreign
government, instrumentalities or agents.

The NEDA shall promulgate rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of this section.

SEC. 25. Reciprocity Clause. — Foreign nationals shall not
be allowed to own more than fifty percent (50%) of the capital of
entities engaged in the operation and management of critical
infrastructure unless the country of such foreign national accords
reciprocity to Philippine Nationals as may be provided by foreign
law, treaty or international agreement. Reciprocity may be satisfied
by according rights of similar value in other economic sectors.
The NEDA shall promulgate rules and regulations for this purpose.

Unless otherwise provided by law, or by any international
agreement, a public service shall employ a foreign national only
after the determination of non-availability of a Philippine
National who is competent, able and willing to perform the services
for which the foreign national is desired.

Any foreign national seeking admission to the Philippines
for employment purposes and any public service which desires to
engage a foreign national for employment in the Philippines must
obtain an employment permit pursuant to Presidential Decree
No. 442, otherwise known as the “Labor Code of the Philippines”,
as amended.

Public services employing foreign nationals issued
employment permits in industries to be determined by the
Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) shall implement
an understudy/skills development program to ensure the transfer
of technology/skills to Filipinos, whether next-in-rank or otherwise,
with the potential of succeeding the foreign national in the same
establishment or its subsidiary, within a specific period as may
be determined by the DOLE, upon consultation with relevant
government agencies and industry experts.

SEC. 26. Information Security. — Persons and companies
engaged in the telecommunications business shall obtain and
maintain certifications from an accredited certification body
attesting to compliance with relevant ISO standards on
information security, as prescribed by the DICT: Provided, That
the maintenance of these certifications shall be a continuing
qualification for retention of franchise or other authority to
operate: Provided, further, That this section shall not apply to
micro, small and medium enterprises under Republic Act
No. 6977, otherwise known as the “Magna Carta for Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)”, as amended.

SEC. 27. Conduct of Regular Studies and Comprehensive
Baseline Survey. — The NEDA shall conduct regular studies on
whether regulatory reform is warranted ina public service sector
to improve consumer welfare and to submit its recommendation
to Congress.

The NEDA, in coordination with the relevant government
agencies and local government units, shall conduct a
comprehensive baseline survey of public services governance
within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Act. Copies of
the results of said survey shall be furnished to the Congress, the
NEDA and the PCC.

SEC. 28. Congressional Oversight and Periodic Review. —
A Congressional Oversight Committee shall be created that will
monitor and evaluate the implementation of this Act every
five (5) years commencing from the effectivity of this Act. The
Congressional Oversight Committee shall be composed of the
Chairperson of the Senate Committee on Public Services, the
Chairperson of the House of Representatives Committee on
Economic Affairs, and representatives of other relevant
congressional committees.

SEC. 29. Performance Audit. — Administrative agencies
must ensure the annual conduct of performance audit by an
independent evaluation team to monitor cost, the quality of services
provided to the public, and the ability of the public service provider
to immediately and adequately respond to emergency cases:
Provided, That in the case of critical infrastructure and public
utilities, the performance audit shall include risk assessment,
emergency response, and cybersecurity, among others. Metrics

for various types of services must be established to sustain
reliability, security, and safety of the public.

SEC. 30. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — All
Administrative Agencies under Section 3 of this Act shall, in
coordination with the NEDA, promulgate rules and regulations
to implement the provisions of this Act within six (6) months
from the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 31. Interpretation, — This Act shall be subject to
and consistent with the regulatory powers of the State to promote
public interest in Article IX-C, Section 4 and Article XII,
Section 17 of the Constitution.

No franchise, certificate, concession, or authorization
granted by the appropriate Administrative Agencies pursuant to
this Act shall be: (a) exclusive in character; (b) for a longer period
than fifty (50) years: Provided, That if a public service has
maintained an exemplary record in the delivery of services, and
has made substantial investments on infrastructure, technology
or equipment for its operations, such performance and size of
investment shall be taken into consideration, and the application
for renewal of the franchise, certificate, concession or authorization.
of the public service shall be given priority by the appropriate
Administrative Agencies; and (c) granted except under the
condition that it shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or
repeal by Congress when the public interest so requires.

SEc. 32. Non-Impairment of Existing Agreements. — The
application and implementation of the pertinent provisions of this
Act shall not impair vested rights or obligations of contracts.
Current and subsisting concession agreements and other similar
contracts of juridical persons with government agencies or
government-owned and -controlled corporations covering activities
hereunder classified as public utilities shall remain valid and in
force in accordance with the existing terms and conditions the
parties agreed to thereunder until the expiration or termination
thereof.

SEc. 33. Separability Clause. — Should any portion or
provision of this Act be declared unconstitutional, the remainder

This appears to be nonsensical text and cannot be accurately translated. It may be a transcription error.

This appears to be nonsensical text and cannot be accurately translated. It may be a transcription error.

of this Act or any provision not affected thereby shall remain in
force and effect.

Sc. 34. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
rules and regulations, or other issuances or parts thereof,

inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed
or modified accordingly.

The provisions on limitation on foreign ownership in the
following laws are hereby amended or modified:

(a) Republic Act No. 6957, entitled, “An Act Authorizing
the Financing, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of
Infrastructure Projects by the Private Sector, and for Other
Purposes”, as amended;

; @) Republic Act No. 9295, otherwise known as the
‘Domestic Shipping Development Act of 2004”, as amended;

a © Republic Act No. 9497, otherwise known as the
Civil Aviation Authority Act of 2008”, , a8 amended;

@ Republic Act No. 776, otherwise known as “The Civil
Aeronautics Act of the Philippines”, as amended;

©) Presidential Decree No. 1112, otherwise known as the
“Toll Operation Decree”, as amended;

@ Department of Transportation Department Order
No. 2018-13, as amended, on the classification of the Transport
Network Companies and Transportation Network Vehicles Service
as public utilities; and

{g) Republic Act No. 7925, otherwise known as the
“Public Telecommunications Policy Act of the Philippines”,
as amended, on the classification of all telecommunications entities
as public utilities.

Nothing herein shall be construed as amending or repealing
laws and administrative regulations deregulating or delisting
services, industries and/or rates.

SEC. 35. Effectivity.—This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

Approved,

.C.SQTTOHI LORD ALLAN PAY Q. VELASCO
bf the House

This Act which is a consojidation of House Bill No. 78
and Senate Bill No. 2094 was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on
February 2, 2022.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA MAR}

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

OF THE PHILIPPINES

I, ATTY. CONCEPCION, Director