S. No. 1534
I. No. 8734

Republic of the Philippines
Gongress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Seventeenth Congress

Third Regular Sessian

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

—

[ Repustic Act No. 11312 ]

AN ACT STRENGTHENING THE MAGNA CARTA FOR
SCIENTISTS, ENGINEERS, RESEARCHERS AND
OTHER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PERSONNEL
IN THE GOVERNMENT, AMENDING FOR THE
PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8439

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 7 of Republic Act No. 8439 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

|
|

“SEC. 7. Other Benefits. — Notwithstanding
laws and issuances on Compensation and Position
Classification System, and Salary Standardization in
the Government, science and technology personnel
defined under Section 5 of Republic Act No. 8439
shall receive the following:

~~

“(a) Honorarium. — S & T personnel who
rendered services beyond the established regular
workload of scientists, technologists, researchers and
technicians whose broad and superior knowledge,
expertise or professional standing in a specific field
contributes to productivity and innovativeness shall
be entitled to receive honorarium subject to rules to
be set by the Department.

“The government shall not impose a limit on
the amount of additional honoraria sourced from
externally funded grants that may be received by
S & T personnel.

SEC. 2. Section 8 of Republic Act No. 8439 is hereby
amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8. Non-DOST S &-T Personnel. —
S & T personnel not employed by the Department,
who are involved in STA may avail of the benefits
under this Act upon certification of the Head of their
agency that they are involved in research and
development or other scientific and technological
activities: Provided, That the Heads of agencies shall
abide by the guidelines promulgated by DOST for the
certification of non-DOST personnel involved with
research and development or scientific and
technological activities and their entitlement to
benefits provided in this Act.”

SEC. 3. Section 16 of Republic Act No. 8439 is hereby
amended to read as follows: |

“SEC. 16. Hiring of Retired Scientists and
Technical Personnel. — An employee retired under
any existing law, who, in the judgment of the
governing board or head of a research agency,

possesses technical qualifications and the capability
to undertake specific scientific research activities,
may be rehired on contractual basis without
refunding the unexpired portion of the gratuity and
accumulated leave benefits received by him from the
Government: Provided, That no qualified science and
technology expert is available to undertake said
scientific activities.

The services of a scientist who is due for
compulsory retirement may be extended for a
maximum period of five (5) years: Provided, That
the research project is within the priority research
and development programs of the DOST and is
identified as strategic to the national development as
certified by the DOST Secretary: Provided, further,
That the scientist is still mentally and physically fit
to complete the project: Provided, finally, That the
request for extension of services shall be submitted
to the Civil Service Commission for approval at least
three (3) months prior to the date of the compulsory
retirement of the scientist.

“Services rendered during the period of
extension shall be credited as part of government
service, and such extension shall entitle the employee
to leave credits and other benefits.”

SEC. 4. Separability Clause. — If any provision of this
Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining
provisions shall remain valid and effective.

Src. 5. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, orders,
and issuances, or portions thereof, which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act, are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

[ETE en EMSS DAES SER

 

SEC. 6. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in two
(2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

 

GLORIK MACAPAGAL-ARROYO VICENTE C/ SOTTO III
Speaker of the House President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1534
and House Bill No. 8734 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on February 6,

lt _)

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

     
  

ROD. O ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

 

ac
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 011255

 

Office of the President
MALACARANG RECORDS OFFICE