H. No. 8912

Republic of the Philippines
Cangress of the Philippines
Metres Manila
Seventeenth Congress
Thick Regular Session

Begun and held in Métro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11398]

AN ACT AUTHORIZING HIGHER EDUCATION
CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND GRADUATE
TRAINING IN ADVANCED ENERGY AND
GREEN BUILDING TECHNOLOGIES, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be known as
the “Advanced Energy and Green Building Technologies
Curriculum Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — Itis hereby declared the
policy of the State to give priority to education, science and
technology, and other similar fields, as well as to support the
country’s educational institutions in their efforts at initiating

 

 

and implementing curriculum development activities that will
lead to socioeconomic progress and technological advancement.

Towards this end, the State shall endeavor to provide
assistance to higher education institutions (HEIs) in preparing
the next wave of design and construction professionals, as well as
the existing pool of architects, engineers, landscape engineers,
landscape architects, and planners all over the country, to become
adept in the incorporation of advanced energy and green building
technologies in the design and construction of green or high
performance buildings.

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Advanced energy refers to the technologies and
services, both emerging and established, which are delivering an
energy system for the 21 century, and which are recognized as
being secure, clean and affordable;

(b) Green building refers to a building which, in its design,
construction or operation, reduces or eliminates the negative
impact on the climate and natural environment of a particular
area and the country in general and can create positive impact.
Green buildings preserve precious natural resources and improve
the quality of life;

(c) Green building technology refers to the technology or
the application of processes which are environmentally responsible
and resource-efficient throughout a building’s life cycle: from
planning to design, construction, operation, maintenance,
renovation and demolition. This requires close cooperation of the
contractors, architects, engineers and the clients at all project
stages. The green building practice expands and complements
the classical building design concerns of utility, economy,
durability and comfort; and

) High performance building refers to a form of green
building with a singular focus on its energy performance and
which integrates and optimizes all major high-performance

building attributes, including energy efficiency, durability,
life-cycle performance, and occupant productivity.

SEC. 4. Features of a Green Building or High-Performance
Building. — A green building or high-performance building shall
have the following features:

(a) Uses all forms of renewable energy, such as solar
energy;

(b) Efficiently uses energy, water and other resources;
(c) Provides good indoor or environmental air quality;

@) Uses materials which are sustainable, ethical and
nontoxic;

(e) Adopts pollution and waste reduction measures, and
promotes reuse and recycling of materials;

@® Employs a design that adapts to a changing
environment; and

(g) Considers environment-friendly design, construction
and operation.

Sec. 5. Advanced Energy and Green Building
Technologies Curriculum Development. — The Commission on
Higher Education (CHED), in consultation with the Department
of Energy (DOE) and CHED-recognized higher education
institutions (HEIs), shall develop a curriculum on advanced
energy and green building technologies at the undergraduate
and graduate levels which shall focus on design resilience,
natural resource conservation, and sustainable design and
building practices, among others, to prepare students for future
careers in advanced energy and green building technologies
to enable future engineers, architects and urban planners
toincorporate advanced energy and green building technologies
in the design of high-performance buildings.

 

 

Src. 6. Graduate Training in Energy Research and
Development. - The CHED, in consultation with the DOE,
is hereby mandated to develop graduate education curriculum
related to advanced energy technology research, development,
demonstration, and commercial application activities pertaining
to energy research and development.

SEC. 7. Role of the DOE in Curriculum Development for
High Performance Building Design. — The DOE shall assist the
CHED in curriculum development activities in advanced energy
and green building technologies for the purpose of improving
undergraduate and graduate interdisciplinary studies involving
the design and construction of high-performance buildings,
including the development of higher education curricula in
engineering, architecture, fine arts, and other related courses,
laboratory activities, training programs and practicums, and
design projects.

For this purpose, the DOE shall contribute funds to
the curriculum development activities of the CHED, especially
in the conduct of research, development, demonstration, and
commercial application activities endorsed by the DOE in relation
to high-performance buildings.

In awarding grants with respect to which the DOE has
contributed funds under this section, the CHED shall give priority
to applications from the following:

(a) HEIs whose departments, programs, centers, or
schools of engineering are considered strong or prominent in
engineering and architecture education, including city, regional,
or urban planning; and

(b) HEIs whose departments, programs, centers, or
schools of engineering have partnered with other
departments, programs, centers, or schools of engineering
which are considered strong or prominent in engineering
and architecture education, including city, regional, or
urban planning.

SEC, 8. Project Grants, ~ The Chairperson of the CHED
shall consult with the Secretary of the DOE when preparing
solicitations and awarding grants for projects described in this
Act.

SEC. 9. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry
out, the provisions of this Act shall be charged against the current
year’s appropriations of the CHED and the DOE. Thereafter, the
amount necessary for the continued implementation of this Act
shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Suc. 10. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act, the CHED shall,
in consultation with the DOE and concerned stakeholders,
promulgate the implementing rules and regulations necessary to
ensure the efficient and effective implementation of this Act.

Sec. 11. Separability Clause. — If any provision, or part
hereof, is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this
Act or the provisions not otherwise affected shall remain valid.

SEC. 12. Repealing Clause. — Any law, presidential decree
or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction, administrative
order, or regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act is hereby repealed, modified, or amended accordingly.

SEC. 13. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 

VICENTH C. SOTTO II GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO
Presidenj of the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

 

 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the
Philippines on February 4, 2019 and June 3, 2019, es

=p 5
p fy
/ MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Ai use of Representatives

Approved: AUG 2 2 2019

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

O

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 012164

Sef 2) -225

Sebaetly