sms ences roe necrteneeineeeteeneer eer nnn

H. No. 7385

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metra Manila

Seventeenth Congress
Chird Regular Session
a

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

rRepuBLic Act No. 11226}

AN ACT RENEWING THE FRANCHISE GRANTED
TO PHILIPPINE COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE
CORPORATION (PHILCOMSAT) TO CONSTRUCT,
INSTALL, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE IN THE
PHILIPPINES GROUND SATELLITE TERMINAL
STATIONS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION WITH
SATELLITE FACILITIES AND DELIVERY TO
COMMON CARRIERS

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Nature and Scope of Franchise. — Subject to
the provisions of the Constitution and applicable laws, rules and
regulations, the franchise granted to Philippine Communications
Satellite Corporation (PHILCOMSAT) under Republic Act
No. 5514, as amended by Republic Act No. 7949, and hereunder
referred to as the grantee, its successors or assignees, to establish,
construct, maintain, operate, own, manage, lease and purchase,
in the Philippines, or in such places as the grantee may select
station or stations, telecommunication satellite systems, satellite
terminal stations, lines, cables or systems, and associated

bo

equipment and facilities for international and domestic
communications including satellite transmissions, for any and
all forms or types of telecommunications services with authority
to receive and transmit messages, facsimile, impressions, pictures,
music, data, and voice, without however engaging in broadcasting,
telecasting and cable television services, throughout the
Philippines and between the Philippines and other countries and
territories, ships at sea, aircrafts and other conveyances, stations,
and telecommunications systems of other countries, is hereby
extended for twenty-five (25) years from the effectivity of this Act.

 

 

This franchise includes the right and privilege of
cable and wireless operations, such as telephone, mobile, cellular
and wired or wireless telecommunications systems, fiber optics,
multi-channel transmission distribution system, satellite
transmit, receive and other telecommunications systems and their
value-added services, control signals, audio and video, information
service bureau and other telecommunications systems/technologies
as are at present available or be made available through
technological/technical advances or innovations in the future, and
to purchase any or all of the equipment and materials needed in
its operations; and to establish, construct, maintain, operate, own,
manage, lease and purchase transmitting and receiving stations,
switching stations and gateway facilities, for local and
international services, lines, cables or systems as may be
convenient to efficiently carry out the purpose of this franchise.
The grantee, its successors or assignees, are further authorized
to connect and keep connected its telecommunications systems
in the Philippines and other countries and territories. The grantee
shall be authorized to lease or acquire facilities, channels or circuits
in the pursuance of its business.

SEC. 2. Manner of Operation of Stations or Facilities. —
The stations or facilities of the grantee shall be constructed and
operated in a manner as will, at most, result only in the minimum
interference on the wavelengths or frequencies of existing
stations or other stations which may be established by law,
without in any way diminishing its own privilege to use its assigned.
wavelengths or frequencies and the quality of transmission or
reception thereon as should maximize rendition of the grantee’s
services or the availability thereof.

SEC. 8. Authority of the National Telecommunications
Commission. — The grantee shall secure from the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC) a Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) and the appropriate permits
and licenses for the construction, installation and operation of
its telecommunications systems or facilities. In issuing the
certificate, the NTC shall have the power to impose such conditions
relative to the construction, operation, maintenance, or service
level of the telecommunications system. The NTC shall have
the authority to regulate the construction and operation of its
telecommunications systems. The grantee shall not use any
frequency in the radio spectrum without authorization from the
NTC. Such certificate shall state the areas covered and the date
the grantee shall commence the service. The NTC, however, shall
not unreasonably withhold or delay the grant of such authority,
permit or license.

Src. 4. Excavation and Restoration Works. — For the
purpose of erecting and maintaining poles or other supports for
said wires or other conductors for the purpose of laying and
maintaining underground wires, cables or other conductors, it
shall be lawful for the grantee, its successors or assignees, with
the prior approval of the Department of Public Works and
Highways (DPWH) or the local government unit (LGU) concerned,
as may be appropriate, to make excavations or lay conduits in
any of the public places, roads, highways, streets, lanes, alleys,
avenues, sidewalks, or bridges of the provinces, cities, or
municipalities: Provided, however, That a public place, road,
highway, street, lane, alley, avenue, sidewalk, or bridge disturbed,
altered or changed by reason of erection of poles or other supports
or the underground laying of wires, other conductors or conduits
shall be repaired and replaced in workmanlike manner by said
grantee, its successors or assignees, in accordance with the
standards set by the DPWH or the LGU concerned. Should the
grantee, its successors or assignees, after the ten (10)-day notice
from the said authority, fail, refuse or neglect to repair or replace
any part of public place, road, highway, street, lane, alley, avenue,
sidewalk, or bridge altered, changed or disturbed by the said
grantee, its successors or assignees, then the DPWH or the LGU
concerned shall have the right to have the same repaired and
placed in good order and condition at double the amount spent for
such repair or replacement, to be charged against the grantee,
its successors or assignees.

SEc. 5. Responsibility to the Public. — The grantee shall
conform to the ethics of honest enterprise and not use its stations
or facilities for obscene or indecent transmission, or for
dissemination of deliberately false information, or willful
misrepresentation, or assist in subversive or treasonable acts.

The grantee shall operate and maintain all its stations,
lines, cables, systems, and equipment for the transmission and
reception of messages, signals, and pulses in a satisfactory
manner at all times and, as far as economical and practicable,
modify, improve, or change such stations, lines, cables, systems,
and equipment to keep abreast with the advances in science and
technology. ‘

The grantee shall improve and extend its services in areas
not yet served, and in hazard- and typhoon-prone areas that shall
be determined by the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council in coordination with the NTC.

The grantee shall also improve and upgrade its equipment,
facilities and services, in order to ensure effective compliance with
the objectives of Republic Act No. 10639 or “The Free Mobile
Disaster Alerts Act”.

SEC. 6. Rates for Services. — The charges and rates for
telecommunications services of the grantee, except the rates and
charges on those that may hereafter be declared or considered as
nonregulated services, whether flat rates or measured rates or
variation thereof, shall be subject to the approval of the NTC or
its legal successor.

SEc. 7. Right of the Government. — The radio spectrum
is a finite resource that is part of the national patrimony and the
use thereof is a privilege conferred upon the grantee by the
State and may be withdrawn any time after due process.

A special right is hereby reserved to the President of the
Philippines, in times of war, rebellion, public peril, calamity,
emergency, disaster or disturbance of peace and order: to
temporarily take over and operate the stations, transmitters,
facilities, or equipment of the grantee; to temporarily suspend
the operation of any station, transmitter, facility, or equipment

in the interest of public safety, security, and public welfare; or to
authorize the temporary use and operation thereof by any agency
of the government, upon due compensation to the grantee for the
use of said stations, transmitters, facilities, or equipment during
the period when these shall be so operated.

SEc. 8. Term of Franchise. — This franchise shall be
extended and in effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years
from the date of the effectivity of this Act, unless sooner
revoked or cancelled. This franchise shall be deemed ipso facto
revoked in the event the grantee fails to operate continuously
for two (2) years.

SEC. 9. Commitment to Provide and Promote ihe Creation
of Empioyment Opportunities. — The grantee shall create
employment opportunities and shall allow on-the-job trainings
in their franchise operation: Provided, That priority shall be
accorded to the residents in areas where any of its offices is
located: Provided, further, That the grantee shall follow the
applicable labor standards and allowance entitlement under
existing labor laws, rules and regulations and similar issuances:
Provided, finally, That the employment opportunities or jobs
created shall be reflected in the General Information Sheet (GIS)
to be submitted to Securities and Exchange Commission annually.

SEC. 10. Right of Interconnection. — The grantee is hereby
authorized to connect or demand connection of its
telecommunications systems to other telecommunications
systems installed, operated, and maintained by any other duly
authorized person or entity in the Philippines for the purpose of
providing extended and improved telecommunications services to
the public, under the terms and conditions mutually agreed upon
by the parties concerned, this right shall be subject to the review
and modification of the NTC.

 

SEC. 11. Mobile Number Portability. — The grantee shall
provide mobile number portability (MNP) and its implementing
mechanism, and shall interconnect, directly or indirectly, with
the infrastructure, facilities, systems, or equipment of other
telecommunications franchise grantees. It shall not install
network features, functions, or capabilities that will impede the
implementation of a nationwide MNP system. The NTC shall
issue rules and regulations for this purpose, the effectivity of which
shall commence upon applicability with other telecommunications
franchise grantees.

Sec. 12. Warranty in Favor of National and Local
Governments. — The grantee shall hold the national, provincial,
city, and municipal governments of the Philippines free from all
claims, liabilities, accounts, demands, or actions arising out of
accidents, causing injury to persons or damage to properties,
during the construction or operation of the stations, transmitters,
facilities,.or equipment of the grantee.

SEC. 13. Sale, Lease, Transfer, Grant of Usufruct, or
Assignment of Franchise. - The grantee shall not sell, lease,
transfer, grant the usufruct of, nor assign this franchise or the
rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, firm,
company, corporation or other entity, nor merge with any other
corporation or entity, nor shall transfer the controlling interest
of the grantee, simultaneously or contemporaneously, to any
person, firm, company, corporation, or entity without the prior
approval of the Congress of the Philippines and compliance with
legal requirements stipulated in other statutes. Any person or
entity to which this franchise is validly sold, transferred, or
assigned shall be subject to the same conditions, terms,
restrictions, and limitations of this Act.

Sec. 14. Dispersal of Ownership. — In accordance with
the constitutional provision to encourage public participation in
public utilities, the grantee shall continue to offer to Filipino
citizens at least thirty percent (30%) or a higher percentage that
may hereafter be provided by law of its common stocks in any
securities exchange in the Philippines within five (5) years from
the renewal ofits franchise: Provided, That in cases where public
offer of shares is not applicable, other methods of encouraging
public participation by citizens and corporations operating public
utilities must be implemented. Noncompliance therewith shall
render the franchise ipso facto revoked.

SEC. 15. Compliance with Labor Standards. — The
grantee, its successors or assignees shall comply with the
applicable labor standards under existing labor laws, rules and
regulations and such other issuances as may be promulgated by
the Department of Labor and Employment, taking into
consideration the nature and peculiarities of the
telecommunications industry.

SEC. 16. Reportorial Requirement. — The grantee shall
submit an annual report to the Congress of the Philippines,
through the Committee on Legislative Franchises of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Public Services of the
Senate, on its compliance with the terms and conditions of the
franchise and on its operations on or before April 30 of every year
during the term of its franchise. The reportorial compliance
certificate issued by Congress shall be required before an
application for any permit, CPCN, or any equivalent thereof is
accepted by the NTC.

SEC. 17. Penalty Clause. — Failure of the grantee to
submit the requisite annual report to Congress shall be penalized
with a fine in the amount of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00)
per working day of noncompliance, the effectivity of which shall
commence upon applicability with other telecommunications
franchise grantees: Provided, That in the interim, the grantee
shall be liable to pay the fine of Five hundred pesos (P500.00) per
working day of noncompliance. The fine shall be collected by the
NTC from the delinquent franchise grantee separate from the
reportorial penalties imposed by the NTC and the same shall be
remitted to the National Treasury.

Src. 18. Equality Clause. — Any advantage, favor,
privilege, exemption, or immunity granted under other existing
franchises, or which may hereafter be granted, upon prior review
and approval of Congress, shall become part of this franchise
and shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the
herein grantee: Provided, That the foregoing shall neither apply
to nor affect provisions of telecommunications franchises
concerning the territory, life span, or type of service authorized
by the franchise.

SEC. 19. Separability Clause. — If any of the sections or
provisions of this Act is held invalid, all other provisions not
affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 20. Repealability and Nonexclusivity Clause. — This
franchise shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by
the Congress of the Philippines when the public interest so
requires and shall not be interpreted as an exclusive grant of the
privilege herein provided for.

 

  

SEC. 21. Repealing Clause. — All other laws, orders,
issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent
with this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified
accordingly.

SEC. 22. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in any
newspaper of general circulation.

Appfoved,
he .

VICENTE C.S Ol GLORIA CAPAGAL-ARROYO
President of th¢ Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed. by the House of Representatives and the Senate on
December 12, 2018 and December 13, 2018, respectively,

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA DANTE A %
Secretary of the Senate Acting Fy General

   
  

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

rica a
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 ~ 009802