Republic of the Philippines .
AMetes Manila

Highteenth Congress

day of July, two thousand twenty.

—_—

[RepusuicActNo. 1152 3]

AN ACT ENSURING PHILIPPINE FINANCIAL INDUSTRY
RESILIENCY AGAINST THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Title. — This Act shall be known as
“Financial Institutions Strategic Transfer (FIST) Act”.

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. - The Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has greatly affected nations
worldwide, including the Philippines, and the measures adopted.
by the government to contain the outbreak have unavoidably
caused serious econdimic setbacks and tremendous financial
pressure on markets and industries. Because of the

‘unpredictability of the course and outcome of the health crisis,

it is necessary to lay down the appropriate policies not only
to marshal available resources towards the most affected and
vulnerable sectors but more importantly, to strengthen the

financial sector so that economic recovery can be achieved
faster, and with more lasting positive effects.

The State recognizes the role of banks and other financial
institutions as mobilizers of savings and investments and in
providing the needed financial system liquidity to keep the
economy afloat. Thus, it is essential that banks and other
financial institutions are able to maintain their financial health
in order to cushion the adverse economic impact of the: COVID-
19 pandemic. It is hereby declared the policy of the State:

(a) to develop and maintain a sound financial sector for
the country;

() to address the non-performing asset problems of the
financial sector;

© to encourage private sector investments in non-
performing assets;

@_ to eliminate existing barriers in the acquisition of
non-performing assets;

@ io help in the rehabilitation of distressed businesses
with the end in view of their becoming economic value-added
contributors; and

( to improve the liquidity of the financial system
which can be harnessed to propel economic growth and
maintain financial stability. .

SEC. 3. Definition of Terms. — As used in this Act:

(a) Approval Certificate means the Certificate of Permit
to Sell or Offer for Sale Securities issued by the Securities
and Exchange Commission (Commission) in favor of Financial
Institutions Strategic Transfer Corporation (FISTC) whose
FISTC Plan has been approved and rendered effective thereby
authorizing the sale and distribution of Investment Unit
Instruments (UIs) pursuant to the provisions of this Act;

(>) Approved Plan means a FISTC Plan for which a
Certificate of Permit to Sell or Offer for Sale Securities has
been issued by the Commission;

(©) Certificate of Eligibility (COE) refers to the certificate
issued by the appropriate regulatory authority as to the
eligibility of the Non-Performing Loans (NPL) or Real and
Other Properties Acquired (ROPAs) for purposes of availing of

the tax exemptions and privileges, pursuant to the provisions
of the Act;

@) Data Package refers to the complete set of
documents, as may be prescribed by the Commission, which
must be prepared and made available by the selling Financial
Institutions (FIs) in respect of the sale of Non-Performing
Assets (NPAs) or NPLs. The Data Package should contain,
among others, scans of all pertinent documents and particulars
of each property or loan account being sold and should be
made electronically available to potential bidders; °

© Fis means credit-granting institutions which shall be
limited to the following:

(1) The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP);

(2) A bank, as defined under Republic Act No. 8791,
also known as “The General Banking Law of 2000’;

(3) A financing company, as defined under Republic Act
No. 8556, also known as “The Financing Company Act of 1998”;

(4 An investment house, as defined in Presidential
Decree No. 129, also known as “The Investment Houses Law”;

6) A lending company, as defined under Republic Act
No. 9474, also known as “Lending Company Regulation Act
of 2007”;

(©) Accredited microfinance nongovernment organizations
(NGOs), as defined under Republic Act No. 10693, otherwise
known as “Microfinance NGOs Act”;

(7) An insurance company as defined under Presidential
Decree No. 612, also known as the “Insurance, Code”, as
amended;

(8) Government financial institutions (GFIs), which for
purposes of this Act, refer, but are not limited, to the

Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC), Land Bank
of the Philippines (LBP), and Development Bank of the
-Philippines (DBP);

@) Government-owned or -controlled corporations
(GOCCs), which for purposes of this Act, refer, but are not
limited, to the National Home Mortgage Finance Corporation
(NHMFC), Philippine Guarantee Corporation (GC), Home
Development Mutual Fund (HDMF), Social Security System
(S88), Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), Small
Business Corporation (SBC), and National Housing Authority
(NHA); and

(10) Other institutions licensed by the BSP to perform
@ quasi-banking functions and (ii) credit-granting activities,
including but not limited to, non-stock savings and loan
associations, and nonbank credit card issuers;

() FISTC Plan refers to the plan submitted to the
Commission for its approval as prerequisite to the issuance of
an IUI;

(g) IUI refers to a participation certificate, debt
instrument or similar instrument issued by the FISTC and
subscribed by Permitted Investors as provided in Section 11
hereof, pursuant to an Approved Plan: Provided, That these
shall rot include the instruments to be issued by the FISTC
to the selling FIs as full or partial settlement of the NPAs
transferred to the said FISTC: Provided, further, That such
issuances of the FISTC shall not be considered as depesit
substitutes: Provided, finally, That these shall not form part
of the capital stock of the FISTC;

th) NPAs consist of the non-performing loans and real
and other properties acquired by FIs;

@ NPLs refer te secured or unsecured loans,
receivables, and other financial assets of similar nature,
including restructured loans, whose principal and/or interest
have remained unpaid for at least ninety (90) days after they
have become past due or any of the events of default under
the loan agreement has occurred; ,

G) ROPAs refer to real and other properties, acquired
by an FI in settlement of loans and receivables, including real
properties, shares of stocks, and personal properties which have
been acquired by way of dation in payment (dacion en pago)
or judicial or extrajudicial foreclosure or execution of judgment
or enforcement of security interest;

(&) True Sale refers to a sale wherein the selling FI
transfers or sells its NPAs to a FISTC, without recourse to
cash or property in exchange for the transfer or sale, and
without prejudice to the FI and FISTC agreeing on sharing
of profits and subject to the following results:

(1) The transferor transfers full legal and beneficial title
to and relinquishes effective control over the transferred NPAs;
and

(2) The transferred NPAs are legally isolated and put
beyond the reach of the transferor and its creditors:

Provided, That the transferring FI shall not have direct
or indirect control of the transferee FISTC: Provided, further,
That the selling FI does not have legal or beneficial ownership
of more than ten percent (10%) of the transferee FISTC.

ARTICLE II
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS STRATEGIC TRANSFER
CORPORATION . :

SEC. 4. Financial Institutions Strategic Transfer
Corporation. — A FISTC is a stock corporation organized in
accordance with Republic Act No. 11232, otherwise known as
“The Revised Corporation Code of the Philippines”: Provided,
That a FISTC shall not be allowed to be incorporated as a
one person corporation: Provided, further, That if the FISTC
will acquire land, at least sixty percent (60%) of its
outstanding capital stock shall be owned. by Philippine
nationals as defined under Republic Act No. 7042, as amended,
otherwise known as the “Foreign Investments Act’.

SEC. 5. Powers of a FISTC. — A FISTC shall have the
following powers:

(a) Invest in, or acquire NPAs of FIs;

(b) Engage third parties to manage, operate, collect and
dispose of NPAs acquired from an FI;

@® Rent, lease, hire, subject to security interest,
mortgage, transfer, sell, exchange, usufruct, secure, securitize,
collect rents and profits, and other similar acts concerning its
NPAs acquired from an FI;

@ In case of NPLs, to restructure debt, condone debt
and undertake other restructuring related activities. In
restructuring debt, the FISTC may reduce the principal
amount, interest earned, interest rates, and the period for
calculating the interest, extend the time for debt repayment
or relax the conditions for debt repayment, agree to the
conversion of the borrower's debt to equity in the borrower's
business, agree to a transfer of assets or claims from the
borrower to repay the debt or dispose of some of the borrower's
property or claims to third persons;

© Buy or transfer shares issued by the borrower for
the purpose of business reorganization or rehabilitation of the
borrower, subject to the provisions of the Revised Corporation
Code of the Philippimes in respect to the rights of the
shareholders of the borrower company, and apply other
measures or restructuring techniques with the approval of the
Commission;

() Enter into dation in payment arrangements, foreclose
judicially or extrajudicially and other forms of debt settlement
involving NPLs;

(g) Spend funds to renovate, improve, complete or alter
its NPAs acquired from an FI;

th) Issue equity or participation certificates or other
forms of IUIs for the purpose of acquiring, - managing,
improving and disposing of its NPAs acquired from an FI;

@) Borrow money and issue other instruments of
indebtedness for the purpose of paying operational and
administrative costs;

@) Guarantee credit, and accept, intervene or honor the
bills of borrowers;

(k) Require from selling FIs a data package which
should contain, among others, scans of all pertinent documents
and particulars of each property or loan account being sold;

@ Advance funds to borrowers as may be required for
an acquired asset or any debt restructuring agreement
pursuant thereto, or under any court order or rehabilitation
plan; and

(m) Engage the services of a third-party asset servicing
company for the collection and receipt of the debt payments
for debts under debt restructuring or business reorganization,
management and disposition of assets of the FISTC in
accordance with the rules, procedures and conditions ptescribed
by the Commission, or by the courts. Except in the case of
ROPAs whose redemption periods have already expired, the
FISTC shall notify the borrower and all persons holding prior
encumbrances upon the properties, or a part thereof, or are
actually holding the same adversely against the borrower, of
the appointment of such third-party asset servicing company
within fifteen (15) days from the date of the appointment.

SEC. 6. Period for Filing of Applications. - Applications
for the establishment and registration of a FISTC shall be filed
with the Commission within thirty-six (36) months from the
effectivity of this Act.

‘

Entities created under Republic Act No. 9182, as
amended, otherwise known as “The Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) Act of 2002”, are qualified to avail of the privileges and
incentives under this Act.

SEC. 7. Capitalization of a FISTC. — A FISTC shall have
a minimum authorized capital stock of Five hundred million
pesos (P500,000,000.00), with a minimum subscribed capital
stock of One hundred twenty-five million pesos

(P125,000,000.00), and a minimum of paid-up capital of Thirty-

one million two hundred fifty thousand pesos (P31,250,000.00).
Where Jand and foreign equity participation are concerned, the
FISTC shall comply with the provisions of the Constitution
and the minimum capital requirements in accordance with
Republic Act No. 7042, as amended, otherwise known as “The
Foreign Investments Act”.

SEC. 8. Submission-of FISTC Plan. — Within the period
prescribed by the Commission, reckoned from the establishment
of a FISTC pursuant to Section 4 hereof, a FISTC Plan shall
be submitted to the Commission for approval and shall include
the following:

@) Investment policies of the FISTC;

) Contribution plan including the amounts and draft
of subscription documents;

© Features of the IUJs, including the specific amounts
issued and to be issued;

@ Rights of the holders of the IUIs;

© Draft agreements for the appointment of trustees and
agents with respect to the FUIs and the NPLs acquired from
an FI;

@® Name of the external auditor of the FISTC;

(@) Roles and responsibilities of the trustees, advisors,
lean servicers and property managers;

(h) Draft form of financial reports of the FISTC;
@ Details of distribution policies;

@ Methods for the increase and decrease of future fund
edntribution;

: () Methods for the alteration or modification of the
approved FISTC Plan;

@ Methods for the liquidation and distribution of assets
to the holders of (Uis;

(m) Details of credit enhancements like guarantees or
standby letters of credit or advances that may be extended to
the FISTC by an entity which shall nct be the selling FI, its
parent, subsidiaries or affiliates; and .

(a) Such other documents or information as may be
required by the Commission. :

SEC. 9. Approval, Rejection, Suspension or Revocation
of FISTC Plan. — :

(@} Approval — Upon approval of the FISTC Plan, the
Commission shall issue an Approval Certificate stating that
the FISTC Plan has been rendered effective and the sale and
distribution of UIs covered by such plan has been authorized.

() Amendments to Approved FISTC Plan - If a FISTC
Plan becomes on its face incomplete or inaccurate in any
material respect, upon the request of concerned parties or at
its own determination, the Commission shall issue an order
directing the amendment of the FISTC Plan. Upon compliance
with such order, the amended FISTC Plan shall become
effective upon approval of the Commission or appropriate
regulatory authority pursuant to Section 4 of this Act.

© Rejection, Suspension or Revocation — The
Commission may reject a submitted FISTC Plan if on its face
it was not in compliance with the requirements of this Act
or the rules and regulations issued to implement it. It is also
authorized to suspend or revoke the effectivity of an Approved
Plan after due notice and hearing by issuing an order to such
effect setting forth its findings in respect thereto, if it finds
that:

(1) The FISTC has violated any of the provisions of this
Act or any order of the Commission which the FISTC has
notice of in connection with the offering of IUIs for which a
FISTC Plan has been filed;

(2) The FISTC has been, or is engaged, or is about to
engage in fraudulent transactions;

(83) The FISTC has made any false ‘or misleading
representation of material facts in any Approved Plan
concerning the FISTC or its IUIs;

(4) The FISTC has failed to comply with any
requirement that the Commission may impose as a condition
for the issuance of IUI for which a FISTC Plan has been filed;
or

®) The FISTC Plan is, on its face, incomplete or
inaccurate in any material respect, or includes any untrue
statement of a material fact, or omits to state a material fact
required to be stated, or one which is necessary to obviate any
misappreciation of the statements therein.

SEC. 10. Isswance of IUIs. - The FISTC may be allowed
te issue [UIs subject to the rules and regulations the
Commission is herein mandated to promulgate.

SEC. 11. Permitted Investors. — Any qualified buyer, as
defined in Section 10.1() of Republic Act No. 8799, otherwise
known as “The Securities Regulation Code”, may acquire or
hold TUIs in a FISTC in the minimun¥-amount of Ten million
pesos (P10,000,000.00): Provided, That a FISTC shall not be
authorized to. acquire the IUIs of ancther FISTC: Provided,
further, That the parent, subsidiaries, affiliates or stockholders,
directors, officers or any related interest of the selling FI or
the parent’s subsidiaries, affiliates or stockholders, directors,
officers or any related interest shall not acquire or hold,
directly or indirectly, the [UIs of the FISTC that acquired the
NPAs of the FI.

ARTICLE III
TRANSFER OF ASSETS TO FISTC

SEC. 12. Notice and Manner of Transfer of Assets. —

(a) No transfer of NPLs to a FISTC shall take effect
unless the FI converned shall give prior notice to the borrowers
of the NPLs and all persons holding prior encumbrances upon
the assets mortgaged ox subject to security interest. Such notice
shall be in writing and made in accordance with the 2019
Rules of Civil Procedure, as amended, at their last known
address or their email address registered and on file with the
FI. The borrower shall be given a period of at most thirty
(36) days upon receipt of notice from the FI to restructure or
renegotiate the loan under such terms and conditions as may
be agreed upon by the borrower and the FI concerned.

(b) The transfer of NPAs from an FI to a FISTC shall
be subject to prior Certification of Eligibility as NPA by the
appropriate regulatory authority having jurisdiction over its

ll

operations which shall issue its certification within twenty (20)
working days from the date of application by the FI for
eligibility: Provided, That nothing in this Act shall be
construed to prevent the transfer of NPAs under other
applicable laws: Provided, further, That prior Certification of
Eligibility is necessary to avail of the incentives and exemption
privileges provided under Sections 15, 16, and 17 of this Act.

() After the sale or transfer of the NPLs, the
transferring FI shall inform the borrower in writing at the
last known address of the fact of the sale or transfer of the
NPLs. The reacquisition of the NPA by the borrower or owner
from the FISTC or subsequent transferee other than by the
exercise of the right of redemption as provided for in Section
20 hereof shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions
as may be agreed upon by them.

SEC. 13: Nature of Transfer. — All sales or transfers of
NPAs to a FISTC shall be in the nature of a true sale after
proper notice in accordance with the procedure as provided for
in Section 12, without need for the borrower's consent:
Provided, That in the transfer of the NPLs, the provisions
on the right of the debtor to reimburse the assignee or
trarisferee under Article 1634 of the New Civil Code shall not
apply: Provided, further, That disposition of assets of a GFI
and a GOCC shall be covered by special rules to be
incorporated in the rules and regulations of this Act: Provided,
finally, That after the sale, the FISTC shall assume all rights
and obligations of the transferring FI.

In the transfer of NPAs, the parties shall exercise the
requisite due diligence and any fraud, collusion and irregularity
shall be subject to penalties in Section 24 of this Act, as well
as other pertinent laws, rules and regulations.

SEC. 14. Issuance of Injunctive Relief Against Transfer
of Assets. — No court, other than the Court of Appeals and
the Supreme Court, shall issue any temporary restraining

‘order, preliminary injunction, preliminary mandatory

injunction, status quo order, stay order, commencement order,
or any other issuance of injunctive relief against the transfer
of NPAs from the FI to a FISTC, and from a FISTC toa
third party, or dation in payment by the borrower or by a
third party in favor of an FI or in favor of a FISTC, or judicial

or extrajudicial foreclosure sales or execution sales of the FI
cr FISTC of collateral in settlement of NPLs.

Any restraining order, injunction, status quo order, stay
order, commencement order, or any other issuance of injunctive
relief issued in violation of this section is void and of no force
and effect.

The provisions of Rules of Court on injunctions insofar

’ as these are applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions

of this Act shall govern the issuance and dissolution of

restraining orders, injunctions, status quo orders or stay orders
against said transfers.

ARTICLEIV ~
INCENTIVES AND EXEMPTION PRIVILEGES

SEC. 15. Tax Exemptions and Fee Privileges. — Any
existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the transfer of
NPAs from the FI to a FISTC, and from a FISTC to a third
party or dation in payment by the borrower or by a third party
in favor of an FI or in favor of a FISTC shall be exempt from
the following taxes:

(@) Documentary stamp tax on the abovementioned
transfer of NPAs and dation in payment as may be imposed
under Title VII of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended by Republic Act No. 10962, otherwise known as
the “Tax Reform for Acceleration and Inclusion (TRAIN)’ Act”;

(6) Capital gains tax impesed on the transfer of lands
and/or other assets treated as capital assets as defined under
Section 39(A)(1) of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997,
as amended;

©) Creditable withholding income taxes imposed on the
transfer of land and/or buildings treated as ordinary assets
pursuant to Bureau of Internal Revenve (BIR) Revenue
Regulation No. 2-98, as amended;

@) Value-added tax on the warsfer cf NPAs as may be
imposed under Title IV of the National Internal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, or gross receipts tax under Title V of:

the same Code, whichever is applicable pursuant to regulations
of the BIR.

The abovementioned transfers shall also be subject to the
following, in lieu of the applicable fees:

(@) Fifty percent (50%) of the applicable registration and
transfer fees on the transfer of real estate mortgage and
security interest to and from the FISTC, as imposed in
accordance with the existing circulars of the Land Registration
Authority (LRA);

(b) Fifty percent (50%) of the filing fees for any
foreclosure initiated by the FISTC in relation to any NPA
acquired from an FT, as prescribed by the Rules of Court; and

©) Fifty percent (50%) of the land registration fees
prescribed under the existing circulars of the LRA.

All sales or transfers of NPAs from the FIs to a FISTC
or transfers by way of dation in payment by the borrower or
by a third party to the FI shall be entitled to the privileges
enumerated herein for a period of not more than two (2) years
from the date of effectivity of this Act.

Transfers from a FISTC to a third party of NPAs
acquired by the FISTC within such two (2)-year period, or
within such extended period, or transfers.by way of dation in
payment by a borrower or by a third party to the FISTC shall
enjoy the privileges enumerated herein for a period of not more
than five (5) years from the date of acquisition by the FISTC:
Provided, That properties acquired by a FISTC from GFls or
GOCCs which are devoted to socialized or low-cost housing
shall not be converted to other uses.

The tax exemptions, incentives, and fee privileges given
to FIs and FISTC at the various stages of the transactions
under this section shall likewise be extended to any individual:
Provided, That:

(a) The transaction is limited to a ROPA that is either
a single family residential unit or an empty lot, or to NPL
secured by a real estate mortgage on a residential unit or an
emapty lot; .

(b) There shall only be one (1) transaction consisting of
one (1) residential unit or empty lot per individual;

( The two (2)-year transfer period, including its
extension, and the five (5)-year entitlement period granted to
NPA shall also apply to said single family residential unit or
empty lot.

To prevent inordinate delay in the grant of incentives and
exemption privileges, the Certificate of Eligibility duly issued
by the appropriate regulatory agency is sufficient proof of the
entity’s entitlement thereto.

SEC. 16. Additional Tax Exemptions and Fee Privileges.
— To encourage the infusion of capital“and financial assistance
by the FISTC for the purpose of rehabilitating the borrower's
business, the following additional tax exemptions and privileges
shall be enjoyed:

(a) The FISTC shall be exempt from income tax on net
interest income, documentary stamp tax and mortgage
registration fees on new loans in excess of existing loans
extended to borrowers with NPLs which have been acquired

y the FISTC;

(&) In case of capital infusion by the FISTC to the
borrower with NPLs, the FISTC shall also be exempt from
the documentary stamp tax:

Provided, That the tax exemptions and fee privileges
granted under this section shall apply for a period of not more
than five (5) years from the date of acquisition of NPLs by
the FISTC.

SEC. 17. Net Operating Loss Carry-Over (NOLCO) of
Participating FIs. —

(a) Any loss that is incurred by an FI as a result of
the transfer of an NPA within the two (2)-year period from
the effectivity of this Act, shall be treated as ordinary loss:
Provided, That the accrued interest and penalties shall not
be included as loss on said loss carry-over from operations,
subject to the provisions of the Nationa Internal Revenue Code
of 1997 on NOLCO. Such loss incurred by the FI from the

transfer of NPAs within the two (2)-year period from the
effectivity of this Act may be carried over for a period of five
(5) consecutive taxable years immediately following the year
of such loss: Provided, further, That for purposes of corporate
gain or loss, the carry-over shall be subject to pertinent laws:
Provided, finally, That the tax savings derived by FIs from
the NOLCO shall not be made available for dividend
declaration but shall be retained as a form of capital
build-up. The Department of Finance (DOF), upon the
recommendation of the BIR, shall issue the rules and
regulations to effectively implement the provisions of this
section. :

(b) The regulatory authority concerned shall promulgate
the necessary rules and regulations governing the treatment
of any loss of the Fls in the books of accounts as a result
of the transfer of the NPAs.

@ In the case of GFIs and GOCCs enumerated in

. Section 3(e) hereof, the DOF, in consultation with the

Commission on Audit (COA), shall promulgate the necessary
rules and regulations governing the treatment:of any loss in
their books of accounts as a result of the transfer of their
NPAs.

SEC. 18. Abuse of Tax Exemptions and Privileges. — Any
person, natural or juridical, who benefits from the tax
exemptions and privileges herein granted, when such person
is not entitled thereto, shall be subject to the penalties provided
in Section 24 hereof. In addition, the offender shall refund to
the government double the amount of the tax exemptions and
privileges availed of under this Act, plus interest of twelve
percent (12%) per year from the date prescribed for its
payment, until full payment thereof.

ARTICLEV
ENFORCEMENT AND PROTECTION. PROVISIONS

SEC. 19. Financial Consumer Protection Mechanism. —
The FISTC shall set up an appropriate financial consumer
protection mechanism taking into consideration the provisions
of existing laws, rules and regulations for the protection of
borrowers: Provided, however, That the rights of borrowers
under existing laws shall not be impaired nor diminished.

Financial consumer protection mechanism shall include
standards of conduct on disclosure and transparency, conflicts
of interest, protection of client information, fair treatment in
terms of affordability and suitability of product or service,
prevention of over-indebtedness, cooling-off period, and
objectivity, effective recourse and exhaustion of all remedies,
among others.

SEC. 20. Redemption Periods. — The provision on
redemption under Section 47 of “The General Banking Law
of 2000”, Act No. 3135, and the Rules of Court shall govern:
Provided, That in case of conflict between provisions of these
laws, Section 47 of “The General Banking Law of 2000” shall
prevail: Provided, further, That the provisions of Article 1634
of the New Civil Code, shall not apply.

ARTICLE VI
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING PROVISIONS

SEC. 21. Books of Accounts and Records. — The FISTC
shall set and keep accurate accounts and internal financial
controls, and shall appoint an external auditor that is
acceptable to the Commission. The Commission, the BSP, and
the BIR may lock into the books of accounts and records of
the FISTC at reasonable hours on business days after due
notice.

SEC. 22. Reports and Monitoring. — The Commission, the
regulatory authorities, and the BIR shall prescribe the
submission of reports from the FISTC and the Fis for the
proper implementation of this Act. To guide in their market
monitoring activities, a database of the sales and transfers
consummated in accordance with Section 12 shall be submitted
by FISTCs and Fis to the Commission, BIR, Philippine
Competition Commission, and other relevant agencies, on a
monthly basis: Provided, That the beneficiaries of the tax
exemptions and fee privileges under this Act shall submit the
data necessary for the DOF and the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA) to review and analyze the
impact of the incentives availment.

ARTICLE VII
FINAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 23. Primary Implementing Agency. — The
Commission shall be the primary implementing agency of this
Act. It shall have the authority to enlist the assistance of any
branch, department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality
of the government, including GOCCs and GFIs which may
include the use and transfer of its personnel, facilities and
resources.

SEC. 24. Penalties and Administrative Sanctions. — Any
person who violates any of the provisions of this Act, or any
person who, in a notice, certification or plan filed under this
Act, makes any untruthful statement of a material fact or
omits to state any material fact required to be stated therein,
shall, upon conviction, suffer a fine of not less than One
hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) nor more than Two
million pesos (P2,000,000.00) or imprisonment of not less than
six (6) years nor more than twelve (12) years, or both, at the
discretion of the court, without prejudice to the penalties
provided under Section 18 hereof. Section 37 of Republic Act
No. 7653, as amended, otherwise known as “The New Central
Bank Act”, and other applicable laws. If the offender is an
alien, he/she shall, in addition to the penalties herein
prescribed, be deported without further proceedings after
serving the penalties herein prescribed. If the offender is a
public official or employee, he/she -sHall, in addition to the
penalties prescribed herein, suffer absolute or temporary
disqualification from government or public office, as the case
may be.

If the offender is a juridical person, the Commission
may impose the administrative sanctions stated below upon
the corporation and/or its officers,

If, after due notice and hearing, the Commission finds
that: (a) there is a violation of this Act, its rules, or its orders;
or (b) any FISTC or other person has, in a FISTC Plan or
in other reports, applications, accounts, records or documents
required by law to be filed with the Commission, made any
untrue statement of a material fact, or omitted to state any
material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make
the statements therein not misleading, the Commission shall,

in its discretion, impose any or all of the following sanctions
as may be appropriate in light of the facts and circumstances:

@) Suspension, or revocation of any approved FISTC
Plan for the offering of IUIs;

@) Fine of no less than Ten thousand pesos (P10,000.00)
nor more than One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) plus not more
than Two thousand pesos (P2,000.00) for each day of continuing
violation, or in such amounts as may be prescribed by the
Commission; and

(8) Other penalties within the power of the Commission
to impose. .

With respect to Fis, the administrative sanctions in the
preceding paragraph shall be enforced, without prejudice to the
administrative sanctions that may be imposed by the BSP and
the Commission which are prescribed under the laws governing
the FIs under their respective jurisdictions, and without
further prejudice to the penalties as may be imposed by the
courts.

SEC. 25. Applicability Clause. ~ The provisions of this
Act shall be applicable to assets that have become non-
performing as of December 31, 2022.

SEC. 26. Conscience Clause. ~ Nothing in this Act shall
be construed to condone or exempt from any liability any
person responsible for acts or omissions constituting unsound
business practices or mismanagement.

SEC. 27. Oversight Committee. — There is hereby created
a Joint Congressional Oversight Committee (JCOC) to oversee,
monitor, and evaluate the implementation of this Act. The
JCOC shall be composed of five (5) members each from the
House of Representatives and from the Senate. The JCOC shall
be co-chaired by the Chairpersons of the House Committee on
Banks and Financial Intermediaries and the Senate Committee
on Banks, Financial Institutions and Currencies. The Speaker
and the Senate President shall designate the other four (4)
members of the JCOC of the House and the Senate from
among the members of the House Committee on Banks and
Financial Intermediaries and the Senate Committee on Banks,

Financial Institutions, and Currencies, at least one (1)
member of which shall be from the minority.

SEC. 28. Use of Registration Fees. — To carry
out the purposes of this Act, the Commission shall
retain and use all fees paid to it relative to the
establishment of a FISTC in addition to its annual
budget and to what is provided for under Section 75,
on partial use of income of Republic Act No. 8799 or
the “Securities Regulation Code”. -

SEC. 29. Implementing Rules and Regulations.
— Within thirty (80) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Commission, jointly with the BSP, the DOF,
BIR and the LRA, shall promulgate the necessary
rules and regulations for the effective and faithful
implementation of this Act: Provided, That within
thirty (80) days from the effectivity of this Act, the
DOF, upon recommendation of the BIR, shall
promulgate the revenue regulations implementing the
fiscal incentives under this Act. All the issuances
pursuant to this Act must strictly comply with
Republic Act No. 11032 or the “Ease of Doing Business
and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of

The non-promulgation of the implementing rules
and regulations shall not prevent the Implementation
of this Act upon its effectivity.

SEC. 30. Separability Clause. — If any provision
of this Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, all other
provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid.

SEC. 31. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No.
9182, as amended by Republic Act No. 9343, otherwise
known as “The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Act of
2002”, is hereby repealed. All laws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof, which
are inconsistent with this Act, are hereby repealed,
amended or modified accordingly.

'
{ 20 - |
| SEC. 32. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect

t
}
| immediately upon its publication in the Official Gazette and |
in a newspaper of general circulation. i

Approved,

cs

LORD ALLA Y Q. VELASCO VICENTE [C. SOTTO Il
the House Presidentlof the Senate

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1849
and House Bill No. 6816 was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on December 15,
2020 and Decemper 16, 2020. respectively.

z '

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA

|

ant

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
| President of the Philippines

of

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES