H. No, 9935
° Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manis
Righteenth Congress
Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

t

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11868]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MULTI-SPECIES MARINE
HATCHERY IN THE ISLAND GARDEN CITY OF
SAMAL, PROVINCE OF DAVAO DEL NORTE, AND
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There shall be established, under the
supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of
the Department of Agriculture (BFAR-DA), a multi-species marine
hatchery-in the Island Garden City of Samal, Province of Davao
del Norte.

SEC. 2. Prior to the establishment of the saulti-species
marine hatchery, the BFAR-DA shall conduct a full-scale
feasibility study in support of its construction to comply with the
requirements of the Department of Budget and Management.

Within two (2) years after the construction of the
multi-species marine hatchery, the BFAR-DA, through a
memorandum of agreement, shall transfer its management to
the local government of the Island Garden City of Samal. It shall
implement a training and phasing-in program for local government
personnel on the management and operation of the hatchery.

SEc. 3. The BFAR-DA shall conduct continuing research
and experimentation on the breeding and production of marine
species, especially as they apply to local conditions, to discover
new methods and technologies that will enhance the fishing
industry.

SEc. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the
Department's programs the conduct of the feasibility study and
the consequent establishment of the multi-species marine hatchery
in the Island Garden City of Samal, Province of Davao del Norte,
the funding of which shall be included in the General
Appropriations Act. The local government unit concerned shall
set aside funds from any available local revenue in an amount
deemed appropriate for the operationalization of the hatchery.

Sc. 5. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue the rules and
regulations on the supervision, operafion, monitoring, and the
eventual transfer of the multi-species marine hatchery to the
local government of the Island Garden City of Samal.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of

general circulation.

Approved,

       

YY Q. VELASCO
‘the House
sentatives

  
 

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate of the
Philippines on September 14, 2021 and January 31, 2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved:

 

dent, in aecordanae Astide Vi.
Section 27 (1) of tha Oonsitiutian
RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE

President of the Philippines

oO