nee eee re nearer nit erin tnnneainti

e- a ectsmtnateinlncn austen gaatisesneemints AAR NI RA teeta nema ALI Nate acne enn agen eine hen me eg

|

S. No. 1978
H. No. 6149

Republi of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
* Metro Manila
Righteenth Congress

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

i

[ Rerusiic Act No. 11700 ]

AN ACT DECLARING THE PROVINCE OF CATANDUANES
AS THE ABACA CAPITAL OF THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1: Declaration of Policy. — Section 1, Article XII
of the 1987 Constitution provides that the State shall promote
the industrialization and full employment based on sound
agricultural development and agrarian reform, through
industries that make full and efficient use of human and
natural resources, which are competitive in both domestic and
foreign markets.

Towards this end, the State hereby recognizes the
importance of abaca industry and its development as a driver
of rural development not only because of its singular potential


as a raw material that can increase the country’s export
earnings tremendously, and put the name of the country in
the map of the world for producing the biggest volume of abaca
fiber, but for having provided livelihood to many small farmers
in the countryside.

SEC. 2. Abaca Capital of the Philippines. — In recognition
of its status as the country’s biggest producer of abaca and
making the Philippines world-renowned as “Manila Hemp” in
the fiber industry, and in support to agricultural development
of the province, it is hereby declared that Catanduanes be the
Abaca Capital of the Philippines.

SEC. 3. Repealing Clause. — Any law, presidential decree
or issuance, executive order, letter of instruction, rule or
regulation inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Act
is hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 4. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in at
least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

   

of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 1978 on January 31, 2022 and adopted by
the House of Representatives as an amendment to
House Bill No. 6149 on February 2, 2022.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

 

Approved: wapsed into Law On APR 15 2022

-ithout the signature of the Presj
dont, in accordance with Article VI,
teeton 27 (1) of the Constitattion.

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

Office of the President
MALACARANG RECORDS OFF.CE

CERTIFIED COPY

 

he