Ee SRE Se eircom ean easel ce

H. No. 7904
S.No. 1945

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Highteenth Congress

Serant Regular Svssion
scence

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh
day of July, two thousand twenty.

[ REPUBLIC ACT No. 11527]

AN ACT FURTHER STRENGTHENING THE ANTI-MONEY
LAUNDERING LAW, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9160, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS
THE “ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING ACT OF 2001”, AS
AMENDED

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 2 of Republic Act No. 9160, as
amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. — It is
hereby declared the policy of the State to protect
and preserve the integrity and confidentiality of
bank accounts and to ensure that the Philippines
shall not be used as a money laundering site for
the proceeds of any unlawful activity. Consistent .

SEC. 2. Section 3 of the same Act is hereby amended as

follows:

with its foreign policy, the State shall extend
cooperation in transnational investigations and
prosecutions of persons involved in money
laundering activities wherever committed, as well
as in the implementation of targeted financial
sanctions related to the financing of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
terrorism, and financing of terrorism, pursuant
to the resolutions of the United Nations Security
Council.”

“SEC. 3. Definitions. = For purposes of
this Act, the following terms are hereby defined
as follows:

“(a) ‘Covered persons’, natural or juridical
refer to:

“(1) xxx;

“(9) Real estate developers and brokers;

“(10) Offshore gaming operators, as well as
their service providers, supervised, accredited or
regulated by the Philippine Amusement and
Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR) or any
government agency;

“(b) ‘Covered transaction’ is a transaction
in cash or other equivalent monetary instrument
involving a total amount in excess of Five
hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00) within one
(1) banking day; for covered persons under Section
3(a)(8), a single casino cash transaction involving
an amount in excess of Five million pesos
(P5,000,000.00) or its equivalent in any other
currency.

“For covered persons under Section 3(a)(9)
herein, a single cash transaction involving an
amount in excess of Seven million five hundred

thousand pesos (P7,500,000.00) or its equivalent
in any other currency.

“(b-1) ‘Suspicious transactions’ are
transactions with covered persons, regardless of
the amounts involved, where any of the following
circumstances exist:

“1. There is no underlying legal or trade
obligation, purpose or economic justification;

“2. The client is not properly identified:

“3.The amount involved is not
commensurate with the business or financial
capacity of the client;

“4. Taking into account all known
circumstances, it may be perceived that the
client’s transaction is structured in order to avoid
being the subject of reporting requirements under
the Act;

“5. Any circumstance relating to the
transaction which is observed to deviate from the
profile of the client and/or the client's past
transactions with the covered person;

“6. The transaction is in any way related
to an unlawful activity or offense under this Act
that is about to be, is being or has been committed:
or

“7, Any transaction that is similar or
analogous to any of the foregoing.

SSK Rs

“@ Unlawful activity’ refers to any act or
omission or series or combination thereof
involving or having relation to the following:

“Q) xxx;

“(33) Fraudulent practices and other
violations under Republic Act No. 8799, otherwise
known as ‘The Securities Regulation Code of 2000’;

“(84) Violation of Section 19 (a)(8) of
Republic Act No. 10697, otherwise known as the
‘Strategic Trade Management Act’, in relation to
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and its financing pursuant to United Nations
Security Council Resolution Numbers 1718 of
2006 and 2231 of 2015”;

“(35) Violations of Section 254 of Chapter
II, Title X of the National Internal Revenue Code
of 1997, as amended, where the deficiency basic
tax due in the final assessment is in excess of
Twenty-five million pesos (P25,000,000.00) per
taxable year, for each tax type covered and there
has been a finding of probable cause by the
competent authority: Provided, further, That
there must be a finding of fraud, willful
misrepresentation or malicious intent on the part
of the taxpayer: Provided, finally, That in no
case shall the AMLC institute forfeiture
proceedings to recover monetary instruments,
property or proceeds representing, involving, or
relating to a tax crime, if the same has already
been recovered or collected by the Bureau of
Internal Revenue (BIR) ina separate proceeding;
and

“(86) Felonies and offenses of a similar
nature that are punishable under the penal laws
of other countries. ~~

*z Oe

“@) For purposes of covered persons under
Section 3(a)(8), the following terms are hereby
defined as follows:

* x

“(4) ‘Offshore gaming operator’ refers to an
entity engaged in offering online games of chance
or sporting events via the internet using a
network and software program, by themselves
or through local service providers.

“(5) ‘Service providers’ refer to duly
constituted business corporations who provide
components of offshore gaming operations to
offshore gaming operators.

«.
XXX

“(m) ‘Real estate developer’ refers to any
natural or juridical person engaged in the
business of developing real estate development
project for the account of the developer and offering
them for sale or lease.

“(a) ‘Real estate broker’ refers to a duly
registered and licensed natural person who, fora
professional fee, commission or other valuable
consideration, acts as an agent of a party ina
real estate transaction to offer, advertise, solicit,
list, promote, mediate, negotiate or effect the
meeting of the minds on the sale, purchase,
exchange, mortgage, lease or joint venture, or
other similar transactions on real estate or any
interest therein.

“(o) ‘Targeted financial sanctions’ refer to
both asset freezing and prohibition to prevent
funds or other assets from being made available,
directly or indirectly, for the benefit of any
individual, natural or legal persons or entity
designated pursuant to relevant United Nations
Security Council resolutions and its designation
processes.

“(p) ‘Proliferation financing’ refers when a
person:

“(1) Makes available an asset; or
“(2) Provides a financial service; or

“(8) Conducts a financial transaction; and
the person knows that, or is reckless as to
whether, the asset, financial service or financial
transaction is intended to, in whole or in part,
facilitate proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction in relation to UN Security Council

Resolution Numbers 1718 of 2006 and 2231 of

SEC. 3. Section 7 of the same Act is hereby amended to
read as follows:

“SEC. 7. Creation of Anti-Money
Laundering Council (AMLC). — The Anti-Money
Laundering Council is hereby created and shall
be composed of the Governor of the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas as Chairman, the
Commissioner of the Insurance Commission and
the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange
Commission, as members. The AMLC shall act
unanimously in the discharge of its functions as
defined hereunder:

directly or indirectly, including funds and assets
derived or generated therefrom, by individuals
or entities designated and listed under United
Nations Security Council Resolution Numbers
1718 of 2006 and 2231 of 2015 and their successor
resolutions as well as any binding resolution of
the Security Council; and

“(16) to preserve, manage or dispose assets
pursuant to a freeze order, asset preservation
order, or judgment of forfeiture: Provided,
however, That pending their turnover to the
national government, all expenses incurred in
relation to the duties herein mentioned shall be
deducted from the amount to be turned over to
the national government.”

“() torequire, receive and analyze covered
or suspicious transactions reports from covered
persons;

Sc. 4. A new Section 8-A is hereby inserted after
Section 8 (Creation of a Secretariat) of Republic Act No. 9160, as
amended to read as follows:

"SK x

“(6) to investigate suspicious transactions
and covered transactions deemed suspicious after
determination by AMLC, money laundering
activities, and other violations of this Act.

"2x x

“(18) in the conduct of its investigation,
the AMLC shall apply for the issuance of a search
and seizure order with any competent court;

“(14) in the conduct of its investigation,
the AMLC shall apply for the issuance of subpoena
ad testificandum and/or subpoena duces tecum
with any competent court;

“(15) to implement targeted financial
sanctions in relation to proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and its financing, including
ex parte freeze, without delay, against all funds
and other assets that are owned and controlled,

“SEC. 8-A. Information Security and
Confidentiality. - The AMLC and its Secretariat
shall securely protect information received or
processed and shall not reveal, in any manner,
any information known to them by reason of their
office. This prohibition shall apply even after their
separation from the AMLC.

“The AMLC shall formulate rules
governing information exchange and
dissemination, the security and confidentiality
of such information, including procedures for
handling, storage, and protection of, as well as
access to such information.”

SEC. 5. Section 10 of the same Act is hereby further
amended by inserting a new paragraph to read as follows:

“SEC. 10. Freezing Monetary Instrument
or Property. —

“(a) Upon a verified ex parte petition by the
AMLC and after determination that probable

cause exists that any monetary instrument or
property is in any way related to an unlawful
activity as defined in Section 3() hereof, the Court
of Appeals may issue a freeze order which shall
be effective immediately, for a period of twenty
(20) days. Within the twenty (20)-day period, the
Court of Appeals shall conduct a summary
hearing, with notice to the parties, to determine
whether or not to modify or lift the freeze order,
or extend its effectivity. The total period of the
freeze order issued by the Court of Appeals under
this provision shall not exceed six (6) months.
This is without prejudice to an asset preservation
order that the Regional Trial Court having
jurisdiction over the appropriate anti-money
laundering case or civil forfeiture case may issue
on the same account depending on the
circumstances of the case, where the Cowrt of
Appeals will remand the case and its records:
Provided, That if there is no case filed against a
person whose account has been frozen within the
period determined by the Court of Appeals, not
exceeding six (6) months, the freeze order shall
be deemed ipso facto lifted: Provided, further,
That this new rule shall not apply to pending
cases in the courts. In any case, the court should
act on the petition to freeze within twenty-four
(24) hours from filing of the petition. If the
application is filed a day before a nonworking day,
the computation ofthe twenty-four (24)-hour
period shall exclude the nonworking days.

“The freeze order or asset preservation
order issued under this Act shall be limited only
to the amount of cash or monetary instrument
or value of property that court finds there is
probable cause to be considered as proceeds of a
predicate offense, and the freeze order or asset
preservation order shall not apply to amounts in
the same account in excess of the amount or value
of the proceeds of the predicate offense.

 

 

 

 

“A person whose account has been frozen
may file a motion to lift the freeze order and the

 

court must resolve this motion before the
expiration of the freeze order.

“No court shall issue a temporary
restraining order or a writ of injunction against
any freeze order, except the Supreme Court.

“(b) For purposes of implementing targeted
financial sanctions in relation to proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and its financing,
as provided under Section 3(15), the AMLC shall
have the power to issue, ex parte, an order to
freeze without delay.

“The freeze order shall be effective until the
basis for its issuance shall have been lifted.
During the effectivity of the freeze order, the
aggrieved party may, within twenty (20) days
from issuance, file with the Court of Appeals a
petition to determine the basis of the freeze order
according to the principle of effective judicial
protection: Provided, That the person whose
property or funds have been frozen may withdraw
such sums as the AMLC determines to be
reasonably needed for monthly family needs and
sustenance including the services of counsel and
the family medical needs of such person.

“The AMLC, if circumstances warrant,
may initiate civil forfeiture proceedings to preserve
the assets and to protect it from dissipation. No
court shall issue a temporary restraining order
or a writ of injunction against the freeze order,
except the Court of Appeals or the Supreme
Court.”

SEC. 6. Section 12 of the same Act is hereby amended by
inserting a new paragraph to read as follows:

“SEC. 12. (a) Civil Forfeiture. — x x x.

“(d) No court shall issue a temporary
restraining order (TRO) or a writ of injunction
against any provisional asset preservation order


or asset preservation order, except the Court of
Appeals or the Supreme Court.”

SEC. 7. Section 14, paragraph (d) of Republic Act No. 9160,
as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 14. Penal Provisions. —
“Sk x

“(d) Breach of Information Security and
Confidentiality. The punishment of imprisonment
ranging from three (3) to eight (8) years and a
fine of not less than Five hundred thousand
Philippine pesos (Php500,000.00) but not
more than One million Philippine pesos
(Php1,000,000.00), shall be imposed on a person
convicted fora violation under Section 9(c)-or
Section 8-A on information security and
confidentiality of this Act. If the offender is a
public official or employee, he shall, in addition
to the penalties prescribed herein, suffer the
penalty of perpetual or temporary absolute
disqualification from public office, as the case may
be. In the case of a breach of confidentiality that
is published or reported by media, the responsible
reporter, writer, president, publisher, manager
and editor-in-chief shall be liable under this Act.”

SEC. 8. Section 20 of the same Act is hereby amended to
read as follows:

“SEC. 20. Non-intervention in the Bureau
of Internal Revenue (BLE) Operations. — Nothing
contained in this Act nor in related antecedent
laws or existing agreements shall be construed
to allow the AMLC to participate in any manner
in the operations of the BIR. The AMLC
may, however, coordinate with the BIR on
investigations in relation to violations of Section
254 of the NIRC, as amended, as a predicate offense
to money laundering.”

SEC. 9. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
AMLC shall, within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this
Act, issue the necessary rules and regulations.

 

SEC. 10. Separability Clause. — If any provision or section
of this Act is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the other
provisions or sections hereof, which are not affected thereby shall
continue to be in full force and effect.

SEC. 11. Repealing Clause. ~ All provisions of existing
laws, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby
repealed, amended, or modified accordingly: Provided, That all
provisions of Republic Act No. 9160, as amended, which are not
inconsistent with this Act are hereby adopted.

SEC. 12. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect
immediately after the completion of its publication in the
Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

Approved,

 
  
  

   
 
  

VICENTE C. SOTTO HT LORD ALL
President kf the Senate Spea
of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 7904
and Senate Bill No. 1945 was passed by the House of
Representatives and the Senate of the Philippines on
January 20, 2021.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

   

ILIPPINES
-PRRD- 2016 _~ 016483