i

H. No. 8908
S. No. 1819

\ Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Shetra Manila

Seventeenth Cougress
Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11299]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE OFFICE FOR SOCIAL
WELFARE ATTACHE, AMENDING FOR THE
PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8042, OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS THE “MIGRANT WORKERS AND
OVERSEAS FILIPINOS ACT OF 1995”, AS AMENDED,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
| Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 2, paragraph (b) of Republic Act
No. 8042, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“(b) The State shall afford full protection to
labor, local and overseas, organized and unorganized,
and promote full employment and equality of
employment opportunities for all. Towards this end,
the State shall provide adequate and timely social,

economic and legal services to Filipino migrant
workers, especially for workers who are vulnerable
to physical, emotional, and psychological stress or
abuse.”

Src. 2. Anew paragraph (e) is hereby inserted in Section
23 of Republic Act No. 8042, as amended, to read as follows:

“@) Department of Social Welfare and
Development. — The Department of Social Welfare
and Development (DSWD) shall deploy Social
Welfare Attachés in countries with large
concentration of overseas Filipino workers (OFWs),
as determined in coordination with the Department
of Foreign Affairs (DFA) and the Department of
Labor and Employment (DOLE). The Social
Welfare Attaché shall possess the minimum
qualifications set by the Civil Service Commission
and the preferred qualifications prescribed by the
DSWD. .

“The Social Welfare Attaché shall perform the
following functions and duties at the overseas post:

“(e.1) Manage cases of OFWs and other
overseas Filipinos in distress needing psychosocia
services, such as victims of trafficking or illega
recruitment, rape or sexual abuse, maltreatmen
and other forms of physical or mental abuse, an
cases of abandoned or neglected children:

“(e.2) Undertake surveys and prepare officia
social welfare situationers on the OFWs in the area
of assignment; .

“(e.8) Establish a network with overseas-base
social welfare agencies and/or individuals and groups
which may be mobilized to assist in the provision o
appropriate social services;

“(e.4) Respond to and monitor the resolution
of problems and complaints or queries of OF Ws an
their families;

 

“e.5) Establish and maintain a data bank and
documentation of OFWs and their families so that
appropriate social welfare services can be more
effectively provided;

“(e.6) Submit regular reports to the DSWD and
DFA home office on plans and activities undertaken,
recommendations, and updates on the situation of
OF Ws, particularly those encountering difficulties
in the host country. Said report shall form part of
the semi-annual report to Congress as provided under
Section 33 of Republic Act No. 8042, as amended;

“(e.7) Provide information about the DSWD
and its attached agencies and services; and

“(e.8) Perform other related functions in the
delivery of social services, as may be directed by the
head of the Diplomatic Post in the area of
assignment.”

Sec. 38. Appropriations. — The Secretary of Social Welfare
and Development shall include in the DSWD’s programs the
implementation of this Act, the funding of which shall be included
in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEc. 4. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
DSWD, in consultation with the DFA, DOLE, Department of
Health, Philippine Overseas Employment Administration,
Overseas Workers Welfare Administration and other relevant
stakeholders, shall, within sixty (60) days after the effectivity of
this Act, formulate the necessary rules and regulations for its
effective implementation.

The DSWD shall also provide the criteria for determining
the selection of Diplomatic Posts to which Social Welfare Attachés
will be deployed and the minimum qualifications and attributes
of the Social Welfare Attachés.

Sec. 5. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
section or provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional or
invalid, other sections or provisions hereof shall remain in force.

oy oe tecrnac omens RANA TR AL ERI DARED

SEc. 6. Repealing Clause. — Alllaws, decrees, executive
orders, rules, regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Src. 7. Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

       

Approved, YD
a
N Da
VI .5O i GLO ACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President pf the Senate Speaker of the House

of Representatives

This Act was passed by the House of Representatives as
House Bill No. 8908 on February 4, 2019 and adopted by the Senate
of the Philippines as an amendment to Senate Bill No. 1819 on
February 6, 2019.

. co
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA = DANTE
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: APR 17 2018

 

  

RODRI OA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines }

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 011189

 

 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIFIED COPY
FRET

betta RECT