S. No. 2407
H. No. 9913

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Righteenth Congress

w.

Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

——_ i

[ Repusuic ActNo. 14§3§]1

AN ACT AMENDING SECTION 27(B) OF THE
NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF
1997, AS AMENDED, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Section 27(B) of the National Internal
Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended
to read as follows:

“(B) Hospitals which are nonprofit and proprietary
educational institutions shall pay a tax of ten percent
(10%) on their taxable income except those covered by
Subsection (D) hereof: Provided, That beginning July 1,
2020 until June 30, 2023, the. tax rate herein imposed

a
is

shall be one percent (1%): Provided, further, That if
the gross income from unrelated trade, business or
other activity exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the total
gross income derived by such educational institutions or
hospitals from all sources, the tax prescribed in
Subsection (A) hereof shall be imposed on the entire
taxable income. For purposes of this Subsection, the
term ‘unrelated trade, business or other activity’ means
any trade, business or other activity, the conduct of
which is not substantially related to the exercise or
performance by such educational institution or hospital
of its primary purpose or function. ‘Proprietary
educational institution’ means any private school
maintained and administered by private individuals or
groups with an issued permit to operate from the
Department of Education (DepEd), or the Commission on
Higher Education (CHED), or the Technical Education
and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), as the case
may be, in accordance with existing laws and
regulations.”

SEC. 2. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — The
Department of Finance shall promulgate the necessary rules
and regulations for the effective implementation of the
provisions of this Act.

SEC. 3. Separability Clause. ~ If any portion or provision
of this Act is subsequently declared invalid or unconstitutional,
other provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall
remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 4. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, executive
orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are
inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, amended or
modified accordingly.

a
\

SEC. 5. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a
newspaper of general circulation.

Approved, $

 

of Representatives

This Act was passed by the Senate of the Philippines as
Senate Bill No. 2407 on September 27, 2021 and adopted by
the House of Representatives as an amendment to House
Bill No. 9913 on September 29, 2021.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

  
     

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
esident of the Philippines

Office cf the President

MALAOMANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTERZED COPY

 

PRRD 2016 - 0719400