S. No. 643
H. No, 9458

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
wr Ut * Eighteenth Congress

Ghird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[ RerusiicActNo. 11701]

AN ACT GRANTING NIGHT SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL PAY
TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES INCLUDING THOSE
IN GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR -CONTROLLED
CORPORATIONS AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS
THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Government employees occupying position
items from Division Chief and below, or their equivalent,
including those in government-owned or -controlled corporations,
whether the nature of their employment is permanent,
contractual, temporary, or casual, shall be paid night shift
differential at a rate not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of
the hourly basic rate of the employee, as determined by the
head of the agency, for each hour of work performed between
the hours of 6:00 in the evening and 6:00 in the morning of

2 C

the following day: Provided, That the night shift differential
pay provided under this Act shall be in addition to and shall
not in any way diminish whatever benefits and allowances are
presently enjoyed by government employees.

Hourly basic rate refers to basic salary rate per hour
derived by dividing the basic monthly rate by twenty-two (22)
working days, and dividing the quotient derived by eight (8)
hours.

SEC. 2. The following government employees are not
covered by this Act:

(a) Government employees whose schedule of office hours
fall between 6:00 in the morning to 6:00 in the evening.
Services rendered beyond the regular eight (8)-hour work
schedules are paid overtime pay in accordance with existing
laws, rules and regulations; and

(b) Government employees whose services are required,
or are on call, twenty-four (24) hours a day such as uniformed
personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), the
Philippine National Police (PNP), the Bureau of Jail
Management and Penology (BJMP), the Bureau of Fire
Protection (BFP), and others similarly situated, as may’ be
determined by the Civil Service Commission (CSC) and the
Department of Budget and Management (DBM).

SEc. 3. The CSC, in coordination with the DBM, shall
promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the effective
implementation of this Act.

SEC. 4. The amount necessary for the initial
implementation of this Act shall be funded as follows:

(a) For the national government entities, the amount
shall be charged against existing appropriations for the purpose
of the departments, bureaus, offices, and agencies concerned.
Thereafter, such sums as may be necessary for the continuous
implementation of this Act shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act;

>

(b) For local government units, the amount shall be
charged against their respective funds, subject to the
provisions of Sections 325 and 331 of Republic Act No. 7160
or the “Local Government Code of 1991”; and

(©) For government-owned or -controlled corporations and
their subsidiaries, the amount shall be charged against their
respective corporate funds. :

SEC. 5. Separability Clause. - If any provision or part
hereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the
law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid
and subsisting.

SEC. 6. Repealing Clause. — Section 18 of Republic Act
No. 7305 is hereby amended or modified accordingly. Any law,
presidential decree or issuance, executive order, letter of
instruction, administrative order, rule or regulation contrary
to, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby
repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. - This Act shall take effect fifteen
(15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers
of general circulation.

Approved,

    

   

Y Q. VELASCO CENTE C. SOTTO Ill
Speaker the House ‘President of the Senate
of Representatives

This Act, which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 643
and House Bill No. 9458, was passed by the Senate of the
Philippines and the House of Representatives on
February 2, 2022.

  

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

President of the Philippines
oO

 

~