S. No. 1662
H. No. 6573

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila

Souenteenth Congress

Sorond Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth
day of July, two thousand seventeen.

{ Repusiic Act No. 11053 ]

AN ACT PROHIBITING HAZING AND REGULATING
OTHER FORMS OF INITIATION RITES OF
FRATERNITIES, SORORITIES, AND OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES
FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF, AMENDING FOR
THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT NO. 8049, ENTITLED
“AN ACT REGULATING HAZING AND OTHER FORMS
OF INITIATION RITES IN FRATERNITIES,
SORORITIES, AND ORGANIZATIONS AND PROVIDING
PENALTIES THEREFOR”

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. A new section to be denominated as Section
1 is hereby inserted in Republic Act No. 8049, to read as
follows:

“SECTION 1. Short Title. — This Act shall be
known as the “Anti-Hazing Act of 2018”.

SEC. 2. Section 1 of the same Act is hereby amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. Definition of Terms. —- As used in this
Act:

“(a) Hazing refers to any act that results in
physical or psychological suffering, harm, or injury
inflicted on a recruit, neophyte, applicant, or member
as part of an initiation rite or practice made as a
prerequisite for admission or a requirement for
continuing membership in a fraternity, sorority, or
organization including, but not limited to, paddling,
whipping, beating, branding, forced calisthenics,
exposure to the weather, forced consumption of any
food, liquor, beverage, drug or other substance, or
any other brutal treatment or forced physical activity
which is likely to adversely affect the physical and
psychological health of such recruit, neophyte,
applicant, or member. This shall also include any
activity, intentionally made or otherwise, by one
person alone or acting with others, that tends to
humiliate or embarrass, degrade, abuse, or endanger,
by requiring a recruit, neophyte, applicant, or
member to do menial, silly, or foolish tasks.

“(b) Initiation or Initiation Rites refer to
ceremonies, practices, rituals, or other acts, whether
formal or informal, that a person must perform or
take part in order to be accepted into a fraternity,
sorority, or organization as a full-fledged member. It
includes ceremonies, practices, rituals, and other acts
in all stages of membership in a fraternity, sorority,
or organization.

“(c) Organization refers to an organized body of
people which includes, but is not limited to, any
club, association, group, fraternity, and sorority. This
term shall include the Armed Forces of the
Philippines (AFP), the Philippine National Police
(PNP), the Philippine Military Academy (PMA), the

Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA), and
other similar uniformed service learning institutions.

“(d) Schools refer to colleges, universities, and
all other educational institutions.”

SEC. 3. A new section to be denominated as Section 3
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 3. Prohibition on Hazing. — All forms of
hazing shall be prohibited in fraternities, sororities,
and organizations in schools, including citizens’
military training and citizens’ army training. This
prohibition shall likewise apply to all other
fraternities, sororities, and organizations that are not
school-based, such as community-based and other
similar fraternities, sororities, and organizations:
Provided, That the physical, mental, and
psychological testing and training procedures and
practices to determine and enhance the physical,
mental, and psychological fitness of prospective
regular members of the AFP and the PNP as
approved by the Secretary of National Defense and
the National Police Commission, duly recommended
by the Chief of Staff of the AFP and the Director
General of the PNP, shall not be considered as
hazing for purposes of this Act: Provided, further,
That the exception provided herein shall likewise
apply to similar procedures and practices approved
by the respective heads of other uniformed learning
institutions as to their prospective members, nor
shall this provision apply to any customary athletic
events or other similar contests or competitions or
any activity or conduct that furthers a legal and
legitimate objective, subject to prior submission of a
medical clearance or certificate.

“In no case shall hazing be made a requirement
for employment in any business or corporation.”

SEC. 4. Section 2 of the same Act is hereby amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. Regulation of School-Based Initiation
Rites. — Only initiation rites or practices that do not
constitute hazing shall be allowed: Provided, That:

“(a) A written application to conduct initiation
rites shall be made to the proper authorities of the
school not later than seven (7) days prior to the
scheduled initiation date;

“(b) The written application shall indicate the
place and date of the initiation rites and the names
of the recruits, neophytes, or applicants to be
initiated and the manner by which they will conduct
the initiation rites;

“(c) Such written application shall further
contain an undertaking that no harm of any kind
shall be committed by anybody during the initiation
rites;

“(d) The initiation rites shall not last more than
three (3) days;

“(e) The application shall contain the names of
the incumbent officers of the fraternity, sorority, or
organization and any person or persons who will
take charge in the conduct of the initiation rites;

“() The application shall be under oath with a
declaration that it has been posted in the official
school bulletin board, the bulletin board of the office
of the fraternity, sorority, or organization, and two
(2) other conspicuous places in the school or in the
premises of the organization; and

“(g) The application shall be posted from the
time of submission of the written notice to the school
authorities or head of organization and shall only be
removed from its posting three (3) days after the
conduct of the initiation rites.

“The school, fraternity, sorority, or organization
shall provide for their respective bulletin boards for
purposes of this section.

“Guidelines for the approval or denial of the
application to conduct initiation rites by a registered
fraternity, sorority, or organization shall be
promulgated by the appropriate school officials not
later than sixty (60) days after the approval of this
Act. The appropriate school authorities shall have the
obligation to disapprove the application to conduct
initiation rites that do not conform with any of the
requirements of this section, and the reasons thereof
shall be stated clearly and in unequivocal terms in
a formal advice to the fraternity, sorority, or
organization concerned, taking into consideration the
safety and security of participants in the activity.

“School officials shall have the authority to
impose, after due notice and summary hearing,
disciplinary sanctions, in accordance with the
school’s guidelines and regulations on the matter,
which shall include, but shall not be limited to,
reprimand, suspension, exclusion, or expulsion, to the
head and all other officers of the fraternity, sorority,
or organization which conducts an initiation without
first securing the necessary approval of the school
as required under this section. All members of the
fraternity, sorority, or organization, who participated
in the unauthorized initiation rites, even if no hazing
was conducted, shall also be punished accordingly.

“In case the written application for the conduct
of initiation rites contains false or inaccurate
information, appropriate disciplinary sanctions in
accordance with the school’s guidelines and
regulations on the matter ranging from reprimand
to expulsion shall be imposed, after due notice and
summary hearing, against the person who prepared
the application or supplied the false and inaccurate

WH

information and to the head and other officers of the
fraternity, sorority, or organization concerned.”

SEC. 5. Section 3 of the same Act is hereby amended
to read as follows:

“SEC. 5. Monitoring of Initiation Rites. — The
head of the school or an authorized representative
must assign at least two (2) representatives of the
school to be present during the initiation. It is the
duty of the school representatives to see to it that
no hazing is conducted during the initiation rites,
and to document the entire proceedings. Thereafter,
said representatives who were present during the
initiation shall make a report of the initiation rites
to the appropriate officials of the school regarding the
conduct of the said initiation: Provided, That if
hazing is still committed despite their presence, no
liability shall attach to them unless it is proven that
they failed to perform an overt act to prevent or stop
the commission thereof.”

SEC. 6. A new section to be denominated as Section 6
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 6. Registration of Fraternities, Sororities,
and Other Organizations. — All existing fraternities,
sororities, and other organizations otherwise not
created or organized by the school but has existing
members who are students or plans to recruit
students to be its members shall be required to
register with the proper school authorities before it
conducts activities whether on or off-campus,
including recruitment of members.

“A newly established fraternity, sorority, or
organization in a school shall immediately register
with the proper school authorities during the
semester or trimester in which it was established or
organized: Provided, That the new fraternity,

sorority, or organization has complied with the
requirements prescribed by the school in establishing
a fraternity, sorority, or organization: Provided,
further, That schools shall promulgate their
guidelines in the registration of fraternities,
sororities, and organizations within their jurisdiction
not later than sixty (60) days from the approval of
this Act.

“Upon registration, all fraternities, sororities,
and organizations shall submit a comprehensive list
of members, which shall be updated not later than
thirty (30) days from the start of every semester or
trimester, depending on the academic calendar of
the school.

“School officials shall have the authority to
impose, after due notice and summary hearings,
disciplinary penalties in accordance with the school’s
guidelines and regulations on the matter including
suspension to the head and other officers of the
fraternity, sorority, or organization who fail to
register or update their roster of members as
required under this section.

“Failure to comply with any of the
requirements in this section shall result in the
cancellation of the registration of the fraternity,
sorority, or organization.”

SEC. 7. A new section to be denominated as Section 7
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 7. Faculty Adviser. — Schools shall
require all fraternities, sororities, and organizations,
as a condition to the grant of accreditation or
registration, to submit the name or names of their
respective faculty adviser or advisers who must not
be members of the respective fraternity, sorority, or
organization. The submission shall also include a

written acceptance or consent on the part of the
selected faculty adviser or advisers.

“The faculty adviser or advisers shall be
responsible for monitoring the activities of the
fraternity, sorority, or organization. Each faculty
adviser must be a duly recognized active member,
in good standing, of the faculty at the school in
which the fraternity, sorority, or organization is
established or registered.

“In case of violation of any of the provisions of
this Act, it is presumed that the faculty adviser has
knowledge and consented to the commission of any
of the unlawful acts stated therein.”

SEC. 8. A new section to be denominated as Section 8
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 8. Role of Educational Institutions. —
The responsibility of schools to exercise reasonable
supervision in loco parentis over the conduct of its
students requires the diligence that prudent parents
would employ in the same circumstance when
disciplining and protecting their children. To this
end, it shall be the duty of schools to take more
proactive steps to protect its students from the
dangers of participating in activities that involve
hazing.

“Schools shall implement an information
dissemination campaign at the start of every
semester or trimester to provide adequate information
to students and parents or guardians regarding the
consequences of conducting and participating in
hazing.

“An orientation program relating to
membership in a fraternity, sorority, or organization
shall also be conducted by schools at the start of
every semester or trimester.

“Schools shall encourage fraternities, sororities,
and organizations to engage in undertakings that
foster holistic personal growth and development and
activities that contribute to solving relevant and
pressing issues of society.”

SEC. 9. A new section to be denominated as Section 9
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 9. Registration of Community-Based and
Other Similar Fraternities, Sororities, or
Organizations. — All new and existing community-
based fraternities, sororities, or organizations,
including their respective local chapters, shall
register with the barangay, municipality, or city
wherein they are primarily based.

“Upon registration, all community-based
fraternities, sororities, or organizations, including
their respective local chapters, shall submit a
comprehensive list of members and officers which
shall be updated yearly from the date of registration.”

SEC. 10. A new section to be denominated as Section 10
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 10. Regulation of Initiation Rites for
Community-Based Fraternities, Sororities, or
Organizations. — Only initiation rites or practices
that do not constitute hazing shall be allowed:
Provided, That:

“(a) A written application to conduct the same
shall be made to the punong barangay in the
barangay or the municipal or city mayor in the
municipality or city where the community-based
fraternity, sorority, or organization is based, not
later than seven (7) days prior to the scheduled
initiation date;

“(b) The written application shall indicate the
place and date of the initiation rites and the names


of the recruits, neophytes, or applicants to be
initiated;

“(c) Such written application shall further
contain an undertaking that no harm of any kind
shall be committed by anybody during the initiation
rites;

“(d) A medical certificate of the recruit,
neophyte, or applicant must be attached to the
application to ensure fitness to undergo initiation
when it involves physical activity not falling under
the definition of hazing as used in this Act;

“(e) The initiation rites shall not last more than
three (3) days;

“(f) The application shall contain the names of
the incumbent officers of the community-based
fraternity, sorority, or organization and any person
or persons who will take charge in the conduct of
the initiation rites;

“(g) The application shall be under oath with
a declaration that it has been posted on the official
bulletin board of the barangay hall or the municipal
or city hall where the community-based fraternity,
sorority, or organization is based, and on the bulletin
board of the office of the community-based fraternity,
sorority, or organization; and

“(h) The application shall be posted from the
time of submission of the written notice to the
punong barangay or municipal or city mayor and
shall only be removed from its posting three (3) days
after the conduct of the initiation rites.”

SEC. 11. A new section to be denominated as Section 11
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 11. Monitoring of Initiation Rites of
Community-Based and All Similar Fraternities,

Sororities, or Organizations. — The punong barangay
of the barangay or the municipal or city mayor of
the municipality or city where the community-based
fraternity, sorority, or organization is based must
assign at least two (2) barangay or municipal or city
officials to be present during the initiation and to
document the entire proceedings. Thereafter, said
representatives who were present during the
initiation shall make a report of the initiation rites
to the punong barangay, or the municipal or city
mayor regarding the conduct of the initiation:
Provided, That if hazing is still committed despite
their presence, no liability shall attach to them
unless it is proven that they failed to perform an
overt act to prevent or stop the commission thereof.”

SEC. 12. A new section to be denominated as Section 12

is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 12. Nullity of Waiver and Consent. — Any
form of approval, consent, or agreement, whether
written or otherwise, or of an express waiver of the
right to object to the initiation rite or proceeding
which consists of hazing, as defined in this Act,
made by a recruit, neophyte, or applicant prior to
an initiation rite that involves inflicting physical or
psychological suffering, harm, or injury, shall be void
and without any binding effect on the parties.

“The defense that the recruit, neophyte, or
applicant consented to being subjected to hazing shall

not be available to persons prosecuted under this
Act.”

SEC. 13. A new section to be denominated as Section 13

is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

“SEC. 13. Administrative Sanctions. — The
responsible officials of the school, the uniformed
learning institutions, the AFP or the PNP may
impose the appropriate administrative sanctions, after


due notice and summary hearing, on the person or
the persons charged under this Act even before their
conviction.”

SEC. 14. Section 4 of the same Act is hereby amended

to read as follows:

“SEC. 14. Penalties. - The following penalties
shall be imposed:

“(a) The penalty of reclusion perpetua and a fine
of Three million pesos (P3,000,000.00) shall be
imposed upon those who actually planned or
participated in the hazing if, as a consequence of the
hazing, death, rape, sodomy, or mutilation results
therefrom;

“(b) The penalty of reclusion perpetwa and a fine
of Two million pesos (P2,000,000.00) shall be imposed
upon:

“(1) All persons who actually planned or
participated in the conduct of the hazing;

“(2) All officers of the fraternity, sorority, or
organization who are actually present during the
hazing;

“(3) The adviser of a fraternity, sorority, or
organization who is present when the acts
constituting the hazing were committed and failed
to take action to prevent the same from occurring
or failed to promptly report the same to the law
enforcement authorities if such adviser or advisers
can do so without peril to their person or their
family;

“(4) All former officers, nonresident members,
or alumni of the fraternity, sorority, or organization
who are also present during the hazing: Provided,

That should the former officer, nonresident member,
or alumnus be a member of the Philippine Bar, such
member shall immediately be subjected to
disciplinary proceedings by the Supreme Court
pursuant to its power to discipline members of the
Philippine Bar: Provided, further, That should the
former officer, nonresident member, or alumnus
belong to any other profession subject to regulation
by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC),
such professional shall immediately be subjected to
disciplinary proceedings by the concerned Professional
Regulatory Board, the imposable penalty for which
shall include, but is not limited to, suspension for
a period of not less than three (3) years or revocation
of the professional license. A suspended or revoked
professional license pursuant to this section may be
reinstated upon submission of affidavits from at least
three (3) disinterested persons, good moral
certifications from different unaffiliated and credible
government, religious, and socio-civic organizations,
and such other relevant evidence to show that the
concerned professional has become morally fit for
readmission into the profession: Provided, That said
readmission into the profession shall be subject to
the approval of the respective Professional Regulatory
Board;

“(5) Officers or members of a fraternity,
sorority, or organization who knowingly cooperated
in carrying out the hazing by inducing the victim
to be present thereat; and

“(6) Members of the fraternity, sorority, or
organization who are present during the hazing when
they are intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol
or illegal drugs;

“(c) The penalty of reclusion temporal in its
maximum period and a fine of One million pesos
(P1,000,000.00) shall be imposed upon all persons
who are present in the conduct of the hazing;



“(d) The penalty of reclusion temporal and a
fine of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00) shall be
imposed upon former officers, nonresident members,
or alumni of the fraternity, sorority, or organization
who, after the commission of any of the prohibited
acts proscribed herein, will perform any act to hide,
conceal, or otherwise hamper or obstruct any
investigation that will be conducted thereafter:
Provided, That should the former officer,
nonresident member, or alumnus be a member of
the Philippine Bar, such member shall immediately
be subjected to disciplinary proceedings by the
Supreme Court pursuant to its power to discipline
members of the Philippine Bar: Provided, further,
That should the former officer, nonresident member,
or alumnus belong to any other profession subject
to regulation by the PRC, such professional shall
immediately be subjected to disciplinary proceedings
by the concerned Professional Regulatory Board, the
imposable penalty for which shall include, but is not
limited to, suspension for a period of not less than
three (3) years or revocation of the professional
license. A suspended or revoked professional license
pursuant to this section may be reinstated upon
submission of affidavits from at least three (3)
disinterested persons, good moral certifications from
different unaffiliated and credible government,
religious, and socio-civic organizations, and such
other relevant evidence to show that the concerned
professional has become morally fit for readmission
into the profession: Provided, That said readmission
into the profession shall be subject to the approval
of the respective Professional Regulatory Board.”

“(e) The penalty of prision correccional in its
minimum period shall be imposed upon any person
who shall intimidate, threaten, force, or employ, or
administer any form of vexation against another
person for the purpose of recruitment in joining or
promoting a particular fraternity, sorority, or
organization. The persistent and repeated proposal or

invitation made to a person who had twice refused
to participate or join the proposed fraternity,
sorority, or organization, shall be prima facie
evidence of vexation for purposes of this section; and

“(f) A fine of One million pesos (P1,000,000.00)
shall be imposed on the school if the fraternity,
sorority, or organization filed a written application
to conduct an initiation which was subsequently
approved by the school and hazing occurred during
the initiation rites or when no representatives from
the school were present during the initiation as
provided under Section 5 of this Act: Provided, That
if hazing has been committed in circumvention of the
provisions of this Act, it is incumbent upon school
officials to investigate motu proprio and take an
active role to ascertain factual events and identify
witnesses in order to determine the disciplinary
sanctions it may impose, as well as provide
assistance to police authorities.”

“The owner or lessee of the place where hazing
is conducted shall be liable as principal and penalized
under paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section, when
such owner or lessee has actual knowledge of the
hazing conducted therein but failed to take any action
to prevent the same from occurring or failed to
promptly report the same to the law enforcement
authorities if they can do so without peril to their
person or their family. If the hazing is held in the
home of one of the officers or members of the
fraternity, sorority, or organization, the parents shall
be held liable as principals and penalized under
paragraphs (a) or (b) hereof when they have actual
knowledge of the hazing conducted therein but failed
to take any action to prevent the same from
occurring or failed to promptly report the same to
the law enforcement authorities if such parents can
do so without peril to their person or their family.


“The school authorities including faculty
members as well as barangay, municipal, or city
officials shall be liable as an accomplice and likewise
be held administratively accountable for hazing
conducted by fraternities, sororities, and other
organizations, if it can be shown that the school or
barangay, municipal, or city officials allowed or
consented to the conduct of hazing or where there
is actual knowledge of hazing, but such officials
failed to take any action to prevent the same from
occurring or failed to promptly report to the law
enforcement authorities if the same can be done
without peril to their person or their family.

“The presence of any person, even if such
person is not a member of the fraternity, sorority,
or organization, during the hazing is prima facie
evidence of participation therein as a principal unless
such person or persons prevented the commission of
the acts punishable herein or promptly reported the
same to the law enforcement authorities if they can
do so without peril,to their person or their family.

“The incumbent officers of the fraternity,
sorority, or organization concerned shall be jointly
liable with those members who actually participated
in the hazing.

“Any person charged under this Act shall not
be entitled to the mitigating circumstance that there
was no intention to commit so grave a wrong.

“This section shall apply to the president,
manager, director, or other responsible officer of
businesses or corporations engaged in hazing as a
requirement for employment in the manner provided
herein.

“Any conviction by final judgment shall be
reflected in the scholastic record, personal, or
employment record of the person convicted,

:
PAN LON D.

regardless of when the judgment of conviction has
become final.”

SEC. 15. A new section to be denominated as Section 15
is hereby inserted in the same Act to read as follows:

. _ “SEC. 15. Implementing Rules and Regulations
(IRR). = The Commission on Higher Education
(CHED), together with the Department of Education
(DepED), Department of Justice (DOJ), Department
of the Interior and Local Government (DILG),
Department of Social Welfare and Development
(DSWD), AFP, PNP, and National Youth
Commission (NYC), shall promulgate the IRR within
ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act.”

SEC. 16. Separability Clause. — If any provision or part
of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other
parts or provisions hereof shall remain valid and effective.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No. 8049 and
all other laws, decrees, executive orders, proclamations, rules
or regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with
or contrary to the provisions of this Act are hereby amended
or modified accordingly.

SEC. 18. Effectivity Clause. — This Act shall take effect
fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette
or in at least two (2) national newspapers of general
circulation.

Approved,

   
  
  

hy : woe aH
KREZ AQUILIN® “KOKO” PIMENTEL nt

Speaker of the Hofise President of the Senate

of Representa


This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1662
and House Bill No. 6573 was passed by the Senate and the

House of Representatives on March 12, 2018 and
March 13, 2018, respectively.

CESAR STRAIT PAREJA 7 tamcarDo B. BARBO

Secretary General Secretary of the Senate
House of Representatives

 

Approved: YUN 25 2078

 

RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE
President of the Philippines

oO

 

REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
PRRD 2016 - 006890

   
 

Office of the President
MALACANANG RECORDS OFFICE

CERTIRIED COPY

  
 
  

ATTY. CGRCEP
I nR-We