H. No. 8006

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Abletra Manila

Seventeentl Congress
Chirk Regular Sessian

—_i——_

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third
day of July, two thousand eighteen.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11282]

AN ACT CONVERTING THE OROQUIETA AGRO-
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL (OAIS) IN THE CITY OF
OROQUIETA, PROVINCE OF MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL,
INTO A STATE COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE
MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL STATE COLLEGE (MOSC),
REPEALING FOR THE PURPOSE REPUBLIC ACT
NO. 4941, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Conversion. —The Oroquieta Agro-Industrial
School (OAIS) in Barangay Villaflor, Oroquieta City, Province
of Misamis Occidental, is hereby converted into a state college
to be known as the Misamis Occidental State College (MOSC),
hereinafter referred to as the College. Its main campus shall
be in Oroquieta City.

 

SEC. 2. General Mandate. — The College shall primarily
provide advance studies and research, higher professional and
technical instructions for special purposes, short-term
technical-vocational, and other continuing courses as may be
relevant. It shall also undertake extension and development
programs, and provide the necessary instructional and research
leadership in education, agriculture, fishery, engineering, arts
and sciences in the Province of Misamis Occidental and in
Region X.

Sec. 3. Curricular Offerings. — The College shall offer
undergraduate, graduate and short-term technical-vocational
courses, and other degree and nondegree courses within its areas
of specialization, according to its capacity, and as the Board
of Trustees may deem necessary to carry out its objectives and
to meet the needs of the Province of Misamis Occidental and
Region X.

The existing and any other future technical-vocational
courses or programs under the supervision of the Technical
Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) shall
continue to be offered at the College’s campus.

The existing high school shall be transferred to the
jurisdiction and supervision of the Department of Education:
Provided, That the College may operate a reasonably-sized
laboratory high school ifit has a College of Education.

Suc. 4. Administration. ~ The College shall have the
general powers of a corporation set forth in the corporation law.
The administration of the College and the exercise of its corporate
powers shall be vested exclusively in the Board of Trustees, and
in the President of the College, insofar as authorized by the Board.

Sec. 5. The Governing Board. — The governing body of
the College shall be the Board of Trustees, hereinafter referred to
as the Board, which shall be composed of the following:

(a) The Chairperson of the Commission on Higher
Education (CHED), Chairperson;

(b) The President of the College, Vice-Chairperson;

(©) The Chairperson of the Committee on Education, Arts
and Culture of the Senate, member;

(@) The Chairperson of the Committee on Basic Education
and Culture of the House of Representatives, member;

() The Regional Director of the National Economic and
Development Authority (NEDA), Region X, member;

() The Regional Director of the TESDA, member;

(g) The Regional Director of the Department of Science and
Technology (DOST), member;

(kh) The Regional Director of the Department of Agriculture
(DA), member;

@) The president of the faculty association of the College,
member;

G) The president of the student council of the College,
member;

(k) The president of the alumni association of the College,
member; and

@ Two (2) prominent citizens who have distinguished
themselves in their profession or fields of specialization of the
College, members.

The two (2) prominent citizens shall be chosen from among
the list of at least five (5) qualified persons in the Province of
Misamis Occidental, as recommended by the search committee
constituted by the College President in consultation with the
Chairperson of the CHED and the other members of the Board,
based on the normal standards and qualifications for the position.

The term of office of the president of the faculty association,
the president of the student council and the president of the alumni
association shall be coterminous with their respective terms of
office as set forth in their respective constitution and bylaws.

The two (2) prominent citizens shall serve a term of two (2)
years from the date of appointment.

SEC. 6. Promulgation and Implementation of Policies. —
The Board shall promulgate and implement policies in accordance
with the declared State policies on education and other pertinent
provisions of the Philippine Constitution on education, agriculture,
science and technology, as well as the policies, standards and

thrusts of the CHED under Republic Act No. 7722, otherwise
known as the “Higher Education Act of 1994” and the TESDA
under Republic Act No. 7796, otherwise known as the “TESDA
Act of 1994”.

SEc. 7. Powers and Duties of the Board of Trustees. — In
addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise
of all powers granted to the board of directors of a corporation
under existing laws, the Board shall have the following specific
powers and duties:

(a) To promulgate rules and regulations not contrary to
laws as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and functions
of the College;

(b) Toreceive and appropriate all sums as may be provided,
for the support of the College in the manner it may determine in
its discretion to carry out the purposes and functions of the College;

(©) To import duty-free economic, technical and cultural
books and/or publications upon verifications by the CHED that
such imported books and/or publications are for economic,
technical, vocational, scientific, philosophical, historical or
cultural purposes in accordance with the provisions of the Tariff
and Customs Code, as amended;

(@) To receive, in trust, all kinds of legacies, gifts and
donations of real and personal properties and to administer and
dispose the same when necessary for the benefit of the College
and subject to the limitations, directions and instructions of the
donor, if any;

Such donations shall be exempt from the donor’s tax and
the same shall be considered as allowable deductions from the
gross income in the computation of the income tax of the donor,
in accordance with the provisions of the National Internal Revenue
Code (NIRC), as amended: Provided, That such donation shall
not be disposed of, transferred or sold;

(e) To fix the tuition fees and other necessary school charges
such as matriculation fees, graduation fees and laboratory fees,
as the Board may deem proper to impose, after due consultation
with the involved sectors. Such fees and charges, including
government subsidies and other income generated by the College,
shall constitute the special trust funds and shall be deposited in

any authorized government depository bank, and all interests
that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same funds for
the use of the College. Any provision of existing laws, rules and
regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, any income generated
by the College from tuition fees and other charges as well as from
the operation of auxiliary services and land grants, shall be
retained by the College, and may be disbursed by the Board for
instruction, research, extension or other programs/projects of the
College: Provided, That all fiduciary fees shall be disbursed for
the specific purposes for which these were collected: Provided,
however, That if, for reasons beyond its control, the College shall
not be able to pursue any project for which the funds have been
appropriated and allocated under its approved program of
expenditures, the Board may authorize the use of the said funds
for any reasonable purpose which, in its discretion, may be
necessary and urgent for the attainment of the objectives and
goals of the College;

@) Toadopt and implement a socialized scheme of tuition
and school fees for greater access to education of poor but deserving
students in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act
No. 10981, otherwise known as the “Universal Access to Quality
Tertiary Education Act”;

(g) To authorize the construction or repair of its buildings,
machinery, equipment and other facilities, and the purchase and
acquisition of real and personal properties including the necessary
supplies, materials and equipment;

th) To appoint, upon the recommendation of the President
of the College, the vice presidents, deans, directors and heads of
departments, faculty members, and other officials and employees
of the College;

@ To fix and adjust the salaries of faculty members and
administrative officials and employees, subject to the provisions
of the Revised Compensation and Position Classification System
and other pertinent budget and compensation laws governing
hours of service, and such other duties and conditions as it may
deem proper; to grant them, at its discretion, leaves of absence
under such regulations as it may promulgate, any provision of
existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, and to remove them
for cause in accordance with the requirements of due process of
law;

G) Toapprove the curricula, instructional programs, and
rules of discipline drawn by the administrative and academic
councils herein provided;

(k) To set the policies on admission and graduation of
students;

@ Toaward honorary degrees upon persons in recognition
of their outstanding contribution in the fields of education, public
service, arts, science and technology, agriculture or in any field
of specialization within the academic competence of the College;
and to authorize the awarding of certificates of completion of
nondegree and nontraditional courses;

(m) To establish and absorb nonchartered tertiary
institutions within the Province of Misamis Occidental as
branches and centers, in coordination with the CHED and in
consultation with the Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), and to offer therein programs or courses to promote and
carry out equal access to educational opportunities, as mandated
by the Constitution;

(n) To establish research and extension centers of the
College where such will promote the development of the latter;

(0) To establish professorial chairs in the College and to
provide fellowships for qualified faculty members and scholarships
to deserving students;

(p) To delegate any ofits powers and duties provided herein
to the President or other officials of the College as it may deem
appropriate, so as to expedite the administration of the affairs of
the College;

(q) To authorize an external management audit of the
College, to be financed by the CHED, subject to the rules and
regulations of the Commission on Audit (COA); and to institute
reforms, including academic and structural changes on the basis
of the audit results and recommendations;

(xr) To collaborate with other governing boards of other state
universities and colleges (SUCs) within the Province of Misamis
Occidental and Region X, under the supervision of the CHED and
in consultation with the DBM, and work for the restructuring of
the College to become more efficient, relevant, productive and
competitive; 7

(s) To enter into joint ventures with business and industry
for the profitable development and management of the economic
assets of the College, the proceeds of which shall be used for the
development and strengthening of the College;

(t) To develop consortia and other linkages with local
government units (LGUs), institutions and agencies, both public
and private, local and foreign, in the furtherance of the purposes
and objectives of the College;

(a) To develop academic arrangements for institutional
capability building with appropriate institutions and agencies,
public or private, local or foreign, and to appoint experts/specialists
as consultants, part-time or visiting or exchange professors,
scholars or researchers, as the case may be;

(v) Toset up the adoption of modern and innovative modes
of transmitting knowledge such as the use of information
technology, dual training system, open distance learning, and
community laboratory, for the promotion of greater access to
education;

(w) To establish policy guidelines and procedures to promote
participative decision-making and transparency within the College;

(x) To privatize, where most advantageous to the College,
the management of nonacademic services such as health services,
food services, building or grounds or property maintenance, and
such other similar activities; and

(y) Toextend the term of the President of the College beyond
the age of retirement, whose performance has been unanimously
rated by the governing board as outstanding, after unanimous
recommendation by the search committee, but not beyond the
age of seventy (70).

SEC. 8. Meetings of the Board. — The Board shall convene
regularly at least once every quarter. However, the Chairperson
of the Board may, upon three (3) days prior written notice, calla
special meeting whenever necessary.

A quorum of the Board shall consist of a majority of allits
members holding office at the time of the meeting: Provided,
That the Chairperson of the Board or the President of the College
is among those present in the meeting.

In the absence of the Chairperson of the CHED, a
Commissioner of the CHED, duly designated by the CHED
Chairperson as representative in the meeting, shall have all the
rights and responsibilities of a regular member: Provided,
however, That during this meeting, the President of the College,
as Vice-Chairperson, shall be the presiding officer: Provided,
further, That this proviso notwithstanding, the Chairperson of
the CHED is hereby authorized to designate a CHED
Commissioner as the regular Chairperson of the Board, in which
case said CHED Commissioner shall act as the Presiding Officer.

In case the Chairpersons of the Congressional Committees
on Education shall not be able to attend the Board meeting, they
may designate their respective representatives who shall have
the same rights and responsibilities as the regular member of
the Board.

The members of the Board shall not receive any salary but
shall be entitled to reimbursements for actual and necessary
expenses incurred, either in their attendance to meetings of the
Board or in connection with other official business authorized by
resolution of the Board, subject to existing laws and regulations.

SEC. 9. The College President. ~ The College shall be
headed by a President who shall render full-time service. The
President shall be appointed by the Board, subject to the guidelines,
qualifications and/or standards set by the Board, upon
recommendation of a duly constituted search committee.

The College President shall have a term of four (4) years
and shall be eligible for reappointment to another term: Provided,
That this proviso notwithstanding, and in order to effect a smooth
transition to a state college, the incumbent administrator of the
OAIS, if qualified, shall serve as the first president of the College.
The remaining term of the incumbent administrator of the OAIS
shall be considered as the first term College President.

Within six (6) months before the expiration of the term of
office of the incumbent President of the College, the Board shall
constitute the Search Committee for the Presidency (SCP).

In case of vacancy in the office of the President by reason of
death, compulsory retirement, resignation, removal for cause or
incapacity of the President to perform the functions of the office,

the Board shall have the authority to designate an Officer-in-
Charge (OIC) of the College pending the appointment of a new
President. Within six (6) months from the date of vacancy, the
Board shall constitute the SCP.

The powers and duties of the President of the College, in
addition to those specifically provided in this Act, shall be those
usually pertaining to the Office of the President of similar colleges,
and those delegated by the Board.

The salary of the President of the College shall be in
accordance with the Revised Compensation and Position
Classification System and shall be comparable to that being
received by the presidents of similar educational institutions.

The President of the College shall be assisted by a Vice
President for Academic Affairs and a Vice President for
Administration, who shall be appointed by the Board upon the
recommendation of the President.

SEC. 10. Administrative Council. — There shall be an
Administrative Council consisting of the President of the College,
as Chairperson, and the vice presidents, deans, directors, and
other officials of equal rank as members, whose duty is to
implement the policies governing the administration,
management and development of the College, as approved by the
Board.

SEC. 11. Academic Council. — There shall be an Academic
Council composed of the President of the College, who shall act as
Chairperson, and all members of the academic staff with the rank
of not lower than assistant professor, as members.

The Academic Council shall have the power to review and
recommend the curricular offerings and rules of discipline of the
College, subject to the appropriate action by the Board. It shall
fix the requirements for the admission of students, as well as for
their graduation and conferment of degrees, subject to review
and approval by the Board through the President of the College.
It shall also have disciplinary powers over students of the College
and shall formulate academic policies and rules and regulations
on discipline, subject to the approval of the Board.

SEc. 12. The Secretary of the College. — The Board shall
appoint a Secretary who shall serve as such for both the Board


and the College, and who shall keep all records and proceedings
of the Board in addition to other duties and responsibilities. The
Secretary shall serve upon each member of the Board the
appropriate notice of Board meetings.

Suc. 18. The Treasurer of the College. - The Treasurer
of the Philippines shall be the ex officio treasurer of the College.

SEC. 14. Faculty. — No political belief, gender preference,
cultural or community affiliation or ethnic origin, and religious
opinion or affiliation shall be a matter of inquiry in the appointment
of faculty members of the College: Provided, That said
appointment shall be subject to the qualifications and standards
set by the Board: Provided, further, That no member of the
faculty shall teach for or against any particular church or religious
sect.

 

SEC. 15. Scholarships Program/Admission. ~— The
College shall provide a scholarship program and other affirmative
action programs to assist poor but deserving students who qualify
for admission to the College.

No student shall be denied admission to the College by
reason of sex, nationality, religion, cultural or community
affiliation or ethnic origin.

SEC. 16. Academic Freedom and Institutional Autonomy.
— The College shall enjoy academic freedom and institutional
autonomy pursuant to Section 5, paragraph 2 of Article XTV of
the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines.

SEC. 17. Filing of Annual Report. — On or before the
fifteenth (15") day of the second month after the opening of the
regular classes each year, the Board shall file with the Office of
the President of the Philippines, through the Chairperson of the
CHED, and with both Houses of Congress, a detailed report on
the progress, conditions and needs of the College.

SEC. 18. Authority to Lend or Transfer Apparatus/
Equipment/Supplies and Detail of Personnel. — The heads of
the bureaus and offices of the national government are hereby
authorized to lend, transfer, upon the request of the President of
the College, such apparatus, equipment or supplies as may be
needed by the College, and to detail employees for duty therein

when, in the judgment of the head of bureau or office, such
apparatus, equipment, supplies or services of such employees can
be spared without serious detriment to public service. The
employees so detailed shall perform such duties as required of
them by the President of the College, and the time so employed
shall be counted as part of their regular services.

SEC. 19. Assets, Liabilities and Personnel. ~ All assets,
real and personal, personnel and records of the OAIS in Barangay
Villaflor, Oroquieta City, Province of Misamis Occidental, as well
as its liabilities or obligations, are hereby transferred to the
College: Provided, That the positions, rights and security of tenure
of the academic staff and personnel therein employed under
existing laws prior to the conversion of the OAIS into a College
shall be respected: Provided, finally, That the College shall also
include an upgrade or increase in its human resource component.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the OAIS are hereby declared the property of the College and
shall be titled under that name: Provided, That should the College
cease to exist, or be abolished, or such aforementioned parcels of
land be no longer needed by the College, the title to said parcels of
land shall be transferred to the LGU of Oroquieta City, Province
of Misamis Occidental.

SEC. 20. Development Plan, Management Audit,
Organizational / Administrative / Academic Structure. — Within
the period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the approval of
this Act, the College shall accomplish the following:

(a) Submit a five (5)-year development plan, including its
corresponding program budget to the CHED, for corresponding
recommendation to the DBM;

(b) Undergo a management audit in cooperation with the
CHED;

(©) Accordingly set up its organizational, administrative
as well as academic structure, including the appointment of the
College key officials; and

(d) Set in motion the establishment of at least four (4)
separate degree-granting units, one of which is in the arts and
sciences, and another unit for nondegree technical-vocational
education and training.


SEC. 21. Compliance with CHED Requirements. — The
provisions of this Act notwithstanding, the establishment or
conversion of the institution into a state college shall become
effective only upon the determination and declaration by the
CHED, based on the recommendation of a panel of experts it shall
constitute for the purpose, that the institution has complied
with the requirements for a college status based on CHED
Memorandum Order No. 46, series of 2012 (Policy Standard to
Enhance Quality Assurance (QA) in Philippine Higher Education
Through an Outcomes-Based and Typology-Based QA): Provided,
That the panel may issue such a recommendation when the
institution has substantially complied with the requirements for
the grant of status as state college.

The institution shall retain its status prior to the effectivity
of this Act until such time that it is able to comply with the
requirements provided herein.

SEC. 22. Suppletory Application. — The provisions of
Republic Act No. 8292, otherwise known as the “Higher Education
Modernization Act of 1997”, shall be an integral part of this Act
and shall serve as part of the governing charter of the College.

SEc. 23. Parity Clause. — All other powers, functions and
privileges, responsibilities and limitations to state colleges and
their officials under existing laws shall be deemed granted to or
imposed upon the College and its officials whenever appropriate.

Suc, 24. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to carry
out the provisions of this Act shall be charged against the current
year’s appropriations for the OAIS. Thereafter, such sums as
may be necessary for the operation and maintenance of the College
shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Suc. 25. Implementing Rules and Regulations. — Within
sixty (60) days upon the effectivity of this Act, the Board, in
consultation with the CHED, shall formulate the guidelines to
fully implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 26. Separability Clause. — If, for any reason, any
part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional,
the remaining parts or provisions not affected shall remain in
full force and effect.

 

SEC. 27. Repealing Clause. — Republic Act No. 4941 and
all laws, presidential decrees, executive orders, rules and
regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 28. Effectivity.~ This Act shall take effect fifteen (15)
days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper
of general circulation.

C4

 

VICENTE|C. SOTTO HI =GLORIA/MACAPAGAL-ARROYO
President lof the Senate Speaker of the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on August 29, 2018 and February 6, 2019,

respectively. Y.
MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA DANTE ROBERTOP. MALING

Secretary of the Senate Acting Secretary General
House of Representatives

 

Approved: APR 1 2 2019

 

Kylie
RODRIGO

President

    
  

the President
the Philipplegsinnc RECORDS OFFICE

oCERTIFIED COPY

fe oomcercigf ey Meso .sno-exAD
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES ee 4P-225 TRECTOR No

PRRD 2016 ~ 010235 Bessa car alone nai snesasncinscscmamicemanc uae

   

|
|
|