H. No. 8040
¢

Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Meteo Manila
Righteenth Congress
Chird Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth
day of July, two thousand twenty-one.

[REPUBLIC AcT No. 11800}

AN ACT INTEGRATING THE CONSOLACION
COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN THE MUNICIPALITY
OF CONSOLACION, PROVINCE OF CEBU, INTO
THE CEBU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY (CTU),
TO BE KNOWN AS THE CTU-CONSOLACION
CAMPUS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. This Act shall be known as the “Cebu
Technological University-Consolacion Campus Act”.

SEc. 2. The Consolacion Community College in the
Municipality of Consolacion, Province of Cebu, is hereby integrated
into the Cebu Technological University (CTU) as a regular
campus, to be known as the CTU-Consolacion Campus. It shall
be under the direct supervision of the CTU.

Src. 3. The Board of Regents of the CTU, hereinafter

referred to as the Board, shall be authorized to determine the ©

structure, composition, and size of the faculty and staff of the
CTU-Consolacion Campus.

Sec. 4. The CTU President shall have overall supervision
and management over the CTU-Consolacion Campus, which shall
be headed by a Campus Administrator who shall render full-time
service and be appointed or designated by the Board upon the
recommendation of the search committee and the President,
subject to the guidelines, qualifications, and standards set by the
Board.

Sec. 5. Allassets, real and personal, personnel, and records
of the Consolacion Community College located in the Municipality
of Consolacion, Province of Cebu, as well as liabilities or
obligations, shall be transferred to the CTU: Provided, That the
positions, rights, and security of tenure of faculty members and
personnel therein employed under existing laws prior to their
integration into the CTU shall be respected.

All parcels of land belonging to the government occupied
by the Consolacion Community College shall be transferred to
the CTU, and shall be titled under its name:,Provided, That
should the CTU-Ce msolacion Campus or the CTU cease to exist
or be abolished or should such aforementioned parcels of land be
no longer needed by the CTU, the same shall revert to the
concerned local government unit or to the Republic of the
Philippines, as the case may be.

SEC. 6. The amount necessary to carry out the provisions
of this Act shall be included in the annual General Appropriations
Act (GAA).

The Municipality of Consolacion shall provide the same
assistance until such time that the amount necessary for the
continued operation and mairffenance of the Campus shall be
included in the annual GAA. \ .

SEC. 7. Within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this
Act, the Board shall issue the implementing rules and regulations
to carry out the provisions of this Act.

i

Sec. 8. If, for any reason, any part or provision of this Act
is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining parts or
provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect.

Skc. 9. All laws, presidential decrees, executive orders,
rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act are repealed or modified accordingly.

Sec. 10. This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after
its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of
general circulation. Ty

Approved,

    

Speaker gf the House
of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives
was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate
of the Philippines on December 16, 2020 and January 31,.2022,
respectively.

MYRA MARIE D. VILLARICA
Secretary of the Senate

Approved: