MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 489

DECLARING THE FOURTH (4 th ) WEEK OF OCTOBER AS THE JUVENILE JUSTICE AND WELFARE CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK

WHEREAS, Section 13, Article II of the 1987 Constitution provides that, “the State recognizes the vital role of the youth in nation building and shall promote and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, and social well-being. It shall inculcate in the; youth patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and civic affairs;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is the 31 st party to sign and ratify the United Nations Convention on; the Rights of the Child (UN-CRC), a legally binding international instrument which establishes the minimum entitlements and freedoms of children – ranging from civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights – that should be respected by governments;

WHEREAS, the enactment of Republic Act (RA) No. 9344, otherwise known as the “Juvenile justice and Welfare Act of 2006,” is an affirmation of the Philippine commitment to the obligations enshrined in the UN-CRC;

WHEREAS, the Filipino people should celebrate and recognize the Filipino children and youth as the most valuable asset of the nation;

WHEREAS, there is a need to mainstream awareness and consciousness of the Filipino people on the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act in order to emphasize the rights of every Filipino youth and child, including children-at-risk and in conflict with the law, their role in nation-building, and the responsibilities of all duty bearers and stakeholders in ensuring the protection and promoting the welfare of the Filipino youth and children; and,

WHEREAS, Presidential Proclamation No. 267 (s. 1993) designates the month of October as the National Children’s Month, thereby emphasizing the importance of the role of the child within the Filipino family and in the context of the greater Philippine society.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the Fourth (4 th ) Week of October of each year as the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Consciousness Week, in conjunction with the annual celebration of October as the National Children’s Month by virtue of Presidential Proclamation No. 267 (s. 1993).

All Departments, Agencies, and Instrumentalities of the National Government, State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), Government-Owned and -Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) and Local Government Units (LGUs), with the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Council (JJWC) as lead implementing agency, are hereby enjoined to support and extend the necessary assistance in the observance of the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Consciousness Week.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 11 th day of October, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary