MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 178

DECLARING THE YEARS 2011 TO 2020 AS THE NATIONAL DECADE ON BIODIVERSITY IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, biological diversity, also referred to as biodiversity, provides a variety of goods and ecosystem services essential to sustain all life on earth and is the foundation of a healthy environment that is necessary for human well-being and sustainable development;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as one of the world’s seventeen (17). mega-diverse countries with immensely rich biodiversities, is also one of the biodiversity hotspots that continue to face constant threats of degradation;

WHEREAS, the General Assembly of the United Nations (UN), concerned with the continuous loss of biodiversity throughout the world, and the social, economic, environmental and cultural implications of such loss, acknowledges the need for concerted efforts by the international community in reducing the rate of damage in biodiversity and the need for effective public education to raise awareness on biodiversity;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a founding Member State of the UN and a Party to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), recognizes the UN Decade on Biodiversity as an excellent opportunity to increase awareness of the importance of biodiversity and promote actions at the national, provincial, and local levels to conserve and sustainably manage the nation’s rich natural heritage; and

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as a Party to the CBD, is committed to the attainment of the new global biodiversity goals set out during the 10 th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties held in Nagoya, Japan in 2010

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the years 2011 to 2020 as the National Decade on Biodiversity in the Philippines (Biodiversity Decade).

All branches and agencies of the Government, including, but not limited to, commissions, national government agencies, local government units, state universities and colleges, government-owned and-controlled corporations, in cooperation with the private sectors of society, community organizations, and non-government organizations, are hereby enjoined to initiate activities to promote the Biodiversity Decade.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 25 th day of May in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary