MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 682

DECLARING A STATE OF NATIONAL CALAMITY

WHEREAS, Typhoon Yolanda (international codename: Haiyan) caused widespread death, destruction and incalculable damage in several areas, including the Samar provinces, Leyte, Cebu, Iloilo, Capiz, Aklan and Palawan;

WHEREAS, in accordance with Republic Act No. 10121 , or the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) has recommended the declaration of a State of National Calamity;

WHEREAS, the declaration of a State of National Calamity will hasten the rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation efforts of the government and the private sector, including any international humanitarian assistance; and

WHEREAS, this declaration will, among others, effectively control the prices of basic goods and commodities for the affected areas and afford government ample latitude to utilize appropriate funds for rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation efforts of, and to continue to provide basic services to, affected populations, in accordance with law.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, do hereby declare a State of National Calamity.

All departments and other concerned government agencies are hereby directed to implement and execute rescue, recovery, relief, and rehabilitation work in accordance with pertinent operational plans and directives.

All departments and other concerned government agencies are also hereby directed to coordinate with, and provide or augment the basic services and facilities of, affected local government units.

Law enforcement agencies, with support from the Armed Forces of the Philippines, are directed to undertake all necessary measures to ensure peace and order in affected areas, as may be necessary.

The State of National Calamity shall remain in force and effect until lifted by the President.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Thirteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary