MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 522

DECLARING A STATE OF NATIONAL CALAMITY

WHEREAS, the devastating rains, floods, landslides and flashfloods caused by Typhoon “Pablo” (international name: Bopha) have brought death, destruction, and incalculable damage to the lives and properties of Filipinos;

WHEREAS, due to the severe gravity of the damage, particularly in Provinces of Compostela Valley, Davao Oriental and Davao del Norte in Region XI; Surigao del Sur in CARAGA Region; Lanao del Norte, Misamis Oriental and Cagayan de Oro City in Region X; Siquijor in Region VII; and, Palawan in Region IV-B, the government is spearheading the entire nation’s efforts to undertake immediate rescue, recovery, relief and rehabilitation;

WHEREAS, the declaration of a State of National Calamity will hasten the rescue, relief and rehabilitation efforts of the government and the private sector, including any international humanitarian assistance, and will effectively control the prices of basic goods and commodities for the affected areas;

WHEREAS, this declaration also necessitates that the mechanisms for international humanitarian assistance are implemented pursuant to Republic Act No. 10121, otherwise known as the “Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010;” and

WHEREAS, such declaration will further afford the local government units ample latitude to utilize their respective calamity funds for the rescue, relief and rehabilitation of their constituents.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby declare a State of National Calamity .

All departments and other concerned government agencies are hereby directed to implement and execute medical assistance, relief and rehabilitation work in accordance with existing operational plans and directives and orders issued in connection with the occurrence of calamities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 7th day of December in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President: (Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary