PROCLAMATION NO. 313

DECLARING THE MONTH OF JANUARY OF EVERY YEAR AS “THE PHILIPPINE TROPICAL FABRICS MONTH”

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to promote products which are indigenous to the Philippines, such as the use of locally-developed technologies and local resources, as a tool in the generation of livelihood for Filipinos and to make headway in the promotion of Filipino products in the global market;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 9242 or the “Philippine Tropical Fabrics Law of 2004” defines tropical fabrics as those containing natural fibers produced, spun, woven or knitted and finished in the Philippines, for use in office uniforms of government officials and employees and for other purposes;

WHEREAS, the implementation of RA No. 9242 shall raise awareness on the utilization of natural fibers like pineapple, banana, abaca and Philippine silk for textile and allied products and bring about the revival and upgrading of the local textile and garments industries, thus redounding to the creation of livelihood in the agricultural and industrial sectors;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 86 (s. 2010) declared 24 January 2011 as “Philippine Tropical Fabrics Day” under the auspices of the Philippine Textile Research institute (PTRI) of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) which increased interest on tropical fabrics from among the local industries; and,

WHEREAS, there is a need to sustain the gains from the celebration of the first Philippine Tropical Fabrics Day and to engage a more active participation of government institutions and local industries on the use of Philippine Tropical Fabrics, as well as local natural fibers.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO, III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of January of every year as the “Philippine Tropical Fabrics Month.” The PTRI-DOST is hereby directed to source funds to defray the cost of the celebration.

The PTRI-DOST shall also ensure that extensive research on the judicious utilization of local natural fibers shall be continued and that meaningful activities to properly celebrate the “Philippine Tropical Fabrics Month” shall be undertaken toward a sustained development of the local textile industry.

All fabric producers, textile manufacturers, garments and geotextile industries, including the private sector, associations, institutions and the academe, are hereby enjoined to actively participate in the proper observance of the “Philippine Tropical Fabrics Month” and to partner with the government in bringing about an evolution of the Philippine textile industry as an emerging leader in the global textile market.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 12th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary