PROCLAMATION NO. 1172

DECLARING A STATE OF CALAMITY IN BARANGAYS IPIL, KAMANDUGAN AND BOTILAO IN STA. CRUZ, MARINDUQUE

WHEREAS , health studies conducted by the Department of Health (DOH) strongly indicate an elevated blood mercury level among school children in barangays Ipil, Kamandugan and Botilao in Sta. Cruz, Marinduque;

WHEREAS , soil samples collected within 7 kilometers in the causeway as well as air monitoring results indicate lead values higher than allowable limits/standards;

WHEREAS , there is need to undertake further health and environmental monitoring of the Calancan Bay area to determine the extent and magnitude of exposure to lead, cadmium and other chemicals; and,

WHEREAS , there is an urgent need for the declaration of a state of calamity in said barangays to enable the concerned Local Government Units (LGUs) to utilize its Calamity Fund for the conduct of more extensive health assessment, environmental monitoring and detoxification activities in the affected areas.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare that a state of calamity for health reasons exists in barangays Ipil, Kamandugan and Botilao in Sta. Cruz, Marinduque.

All departments and other agencies concerned are hereby directed to extend assistance to the local government units affected in accordance with existing operational plans, directives and orders issued in connection with calamities. Specifically, the Interagency Committee on Environmental Health (E.O. 489 dated 22 November 1991) is hereby directed to expedite environmental and health monitoring activities and facilitate formulation and dissemination of regular health advisories and preventive interventions in the affected areas.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

Source: www.cdasia.com