MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 183

DECLARING JUNE 25 OF EVERY YEAR AS THE DAY OF THE FILIPINO SEAFARER

WHEREAS, the Conference of Parties, under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), that adopted major revisions otherwise known as the “Manila Amendments” to the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping (STCW) for seafarers and its associated Code that was held in Manila from 21-25 June 2010 approved a resolution declaring every 25 th Day of June each year as the “Day of the Seafarer”;

WHEREAS, the IMO has encouraged governments, shipping organizations, companies, shipowners and all other parties concerned to duly and appropriately promote the Day of the Seafarer and take action to celebrate it meaningfully;

WHEREAS, the United Nations Organization (UNO) has recognized the important role that seafarers play in the continued growth of the global economy and in the promotion of safety of life at sea and the protection of the marine environment and has included this day in its list of observance;

WHEREAS, Filipino seafarers deserve respect, recognition and gratitude for their invaluable contribution to the national development efforts of the country; and,

WHEREAS, Filipino seafarers have become “sailing ambassadors” of the country for having demonstrated before the global maritime community the best traits of the Filipino.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare June 25 of every year as the Day of the Filipino Seafarer, and in support hereof, hereby order:

Section 1. All relevant maritime agencies or instrumentalities of the government including government-owned and controlled corporations as well as private individuals or organizations are enjoined to support the commemoration of this important event.

The Secretary of Transportation and Communications through the Administrator of the Maritime Industry Authority (MARINA) shall lead the observance of the Day of the Filipino Seafarer;

Section 2. The MARINA, consistent with its mandate as the Flag State Administration of the country, is hereby authorized to create a Steering Committee, a Working Group and a Secretariat composed of representatives from various agencies and organizations to lead efforts in the commemoration of this important event.

It shall also submit to the Office of the President, through the Secretary of Department of Transportation and Communications, a written report one (1) month after the culmination of the celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3 rd day of June, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary