PROCLAMATION NO. 326

DECLARING THE FOURTH MONDAY OF SEPTEMBER OF EVERY YEAR AS “KAINANG PAMILYA MAHALAGA” DAY AND AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 1895 (S. 2009)

WHEREAS, Section 12, Article 2 of the 1987 Constitution declares that the State shall recognize the sanctity of family life and shall protect and strengthen the family as the basic social unit;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 60 (s. 1992) declared the fourth (4 th ) week of September as “Family Week” to focus on the importance of strengthening and promoting unity, solidarity and stability of the Filipino Family as the basic unit of Filipino society and for whose well-being all national development efforts are directed;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 847 (s. 1996) declared the 4 th Sunday of September as Family Thanksgiving Day;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1895 (s. 2009) declared the 4 th Monday of September of 2009 as the “Salu-Salo ng Pamilya Mahalaga” day;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 238 (s. 2003), amending EO No. 241 (s. 1995), expanded the powers, functions and membership of the National Steering Committee of the Family Week, and further renamed it as the National Committee on the Filipino Family (NCFF), mandated to promote the family as the foundation of the nation and to provide opportunities for partnership with the private sector, particularly civic, religious, educational institutions and media groups;

WHEREAS, one of the meaningful traditions of Filipinos is the common family meal where all members of the family are present to signify their unity and thanksgiving for God’s abundant blessings;

WHEREAS, having a common family meal encourages parents to stay connected with their children and understand the challenges they face;

WHEREAS, there is a need to highlight and celebrate the value of families sharing meals together as a national tradition that should be observed annually and sustained by all Filipino families; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to amend Proclamation No. 1895 and rename “Salu-Salo ng Pamilya Mahalaga” day as “Kainang Pamilya Mahalaga” day to distinguish the latter as a regular annual event.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare:

SECTION 1. “Kainang Pamilya Mahalaga” day. The “Salu-Salo ng Pamilya Mahalaga” day is now renamed as “Kainang Pamilya Mahalaga” day. It will be held every 4 th Monday of September of every year, in conjunction with the annual celebration of the Family Week.

SECTION 2. Role of the NCFF and concerned agencies. The NCFF shall lead the national observance of “Kainang Pamilya Mahalaga” day. The heads of all Departments, agencies, Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), Local Government Units (LGUs), and other government instrumentalities shall support NCFF in its activities related to the event.

All national and local publications, television and radio stations are encouraged to help generate awareness and public support for activities in promoting the observance of “Kainang Pamilya Mahalaga” day.

SECTION 3. Repealing Clause. Proclamation No 1895 (s. 2009), all other orders, rules, regulations, and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Proclamation are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 26 th day of January, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary