MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1135

DECLARING OCTOBER 20, 2015 AS “WORLD STATISTICS DAY”

WHEREAS, the United Nations (UN) General Assembly issued Resolution 64/267 designating 20 October 2010 as the date of the first (1st) “World Statistics Day” in recognition of the fundamental importance of: (a) sustainable national statistical capacity to produce reliable and timely statistics and indicators; and (b) solid data for informed policy formulation and monitoring of the Millennium Development Goals at the national, regional and international levels;

WHEREAS, on 03 June 2015, the UN General Assembly adopted the resolution endorsed by the UN Statistical Commission (UNSC) along with some member states and the Philippines, designating 20 October 2015 as second (2nd) World Statistics Day, under the general theme, “Better data. Better lives.” and that the WSD be celebrated every five (5) years every 20 of October;

WHEREAS, Presidential Proclamation No. 647 (s. 1990) declared the Month of October of every year as the National Statistics Month, to promote, enhance and instill nationwide awareness and appreciation of the importance and value of statistics, and ensure public support in improving and enhancing the quality and standard of statistics in the country;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 43 (s. 2010), declared 20 October 2010 as World Statistics Day, to recognize the role of statistics in evidence-based decision making across all cultural and historical background of countries, despite diversity and variation in levels of development;

WHEREAS, the PSA Board approved Resolution No. 09 (s. 2015), entitled “Enjoining Support to and Participation in the Nationwide Observance of World Statistics Day,” to enjoin the support and participation of the members of the Philippine Statistical System to the nationwide observance of the “World Statistics Day” in the Philippines; and

WHEREAS, both the National Statistics Month and the “World Statistics Day” will be celebrated in October 2015 through various activities that will highlight the important role of statistics in achieving sustainable and inclusive growth and improving access to health facilities and social protection programs critical in nation-building.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 20 October 2015 as “World Statistics Day.”

All agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations, are hereby directed and all local government units, as well as the private sector, are hereby encouraged to collaborate and cooperate with the PSA in advocating and implementing activities pursuant to this Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Fifteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary