MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 433

DECLARING JULY 13, 2012 AS A NATIONAL DAY OF REMEMBRANCE TO HONOR THE MEMORY OF THE LATE RODOLFO “DOLPHY” QUIZON SR.

WHEREAS , the nation deeply feels the passing of Rodolfo Quizon Sr., the man who will live on in Philippine cultural history—and in the hearts of many of his countrymen—as “Dolphy;”

WHEREAS , with every milestone that he marked in a career that had spanned decades, the standards of the entertainment industry were raised, our cultural identity was strengthened, and innumerable aspirants had an example to look up to;

WHEREAS , he, too, was a philanthropist, and his encouragement of charitable causes was driven by a deep-rooted recognition of the promise within his fellowmen and a genuinely generous heart;

WHEREAS , it is appropriate to mark the memory of Mr. Quizon’s contributions to Philippine culture, arts, and entertainment;

WHEREAS , even as we grieve the loss of a cultural icon and a master of his field, we should never forget that Dolphy made generations of Filipinos laugh; he was unparalleled in tapping into our inherently jovial spirit—that both challenges and triumphs could be met with optimism and cheer; and that therefore, this was the greatest gift he gave the Filipino people, and this is the kindness that he will always be remembered for: Dolphy was relentless in reminding us all to always open ourselves to joy; and

WHEREAS , his contribution to Philippine culture and arts influenced and will continue to influence the Philippine Entertainment Industry for generations to come;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim July 13, 2012 as a day of National Remembrance, to honor the memory of the late Rodolfo “Dolphy” Quizon Sr. I ask all our countrymen to reflect on the art and artistry, the personal kindness and generosity, and deep patriotism, of Dolphy, and the manner in which he exemplified in his works and life, the positive values of the Filipino people. I ask all our countrymen to make this Day of Remembrance a celebration of the full life that Dolphy, with utmost generosity, shared with the country.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12 th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Twelve.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA Executive Secretary