MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 933

DECLARING THE LAST WEEK OF JULY OF EVERY YEAR AS “LINGGO NG MUSIKANG PILIPINO”

WHEREAS, the Constitution mandates that arts and culture shall enjoy the patronage of the State and to this end, the State shall conserve, promote and popularize the nation’s historical and cultural heritage and resources, as well as artistic creations;

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 255 (s. 1987) required all radio stations with musical format programs to broadcast a minimum of four original Pilipino musical compositions in every clock hour and defined original Pilipino music as any musical composition created by a Filipino, whether the lyrics be in Pilipino, English or in any other language or dialect;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1173 (s. 1973) declared the last week of November of each year as the National Music Week for Young Artists;

WHEREAS, it is critical in the achievement of the long-term goal of reviving original Pilipino music that the Filipino audience has awareness and appreciation of homegrown music;

WHEREAS, the promotion and development of the local music industry not only advances Filipino art and culture, but also contributes to the development of the economy, providing employment and revenue stream, and supporting other local industries; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to revitalize government efforts to promote Philippine music.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the last week of July of every year as “Linggo ng Musikang Pilipino.”

The National Commission for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) is hereby designated as the lead agency to ensure the successful annual celebration of said week throughout the Philippines.

All departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of the national government, including government-owned and -controlled corporations, local government units, and the private sector, including radio stations with musical format programs, are encouraged to extend their full support and active participation in the programs and activities to be spearheaded by the NCCA for this purpose.

In consonance with EO 255, all radio stations are hereby encouraged to broadcast a minimum of four (4) original Pilipino music in every clockhour of a program with a musical format during the celebration. All other institutions, public and private, are likewise invited to play original Pilipino music in their respective establishments, where appropriate, during the celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 19th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Fourteen.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR. Executive Secretary