MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 181

DECLARING THE YEARS 2011 TO 2016 AS THE PINOY HOMECOMING YEARS

WHEREAS, the global economic recession calls for accelerated economic development through a more vigorous and focused effort to improve the tourism industry by maximizing the benefits derived from tourism-related activities;

WHEREAS, apart from the traditional tourism source markets overseas, alternative market sources or segments with huge potentials to supply a greater volume of visitors to the Philippines should be targeted and built as additional sources for tourist arrivals;

WHEREAS, Overseas Filipinos, or the Balikbayan market, have historically contributed to Philippine visitor arrivals and to the Philippine economy in terms of foreign exchange inflow and the revenues that they generate;

WHEREAS, focusing on the huge Balikbayan segment, which is rapidly growing due to the continued migration of Filipinos abroad and the significant expansion of the second and third generation Filipinos abroad, is crucial in maximizing revenues that can be generated from this particular visitor group;

WHEREAS, a special campaign should be developed and implemented to address the specific travel needs and interests of this particular market segment, especially overseas Filipino organizations and business groups, that will be the main driving force that will encourage or influence them to travel to the Philippines for reunions, conferences, missions or vacations; and

WHEREAS, the said campaign will serve to reinforce Republic Act No. 6768, as amended, entitled “An Act Instituting a Balikbayan Program,” by providing benefits and privileges to Balikbayans and for other purposes.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the years 2011 to 2016 as the Pinoy Homecoming Years. The Secretary of Tourism is hereby authorized to call upon any department, agency, office or corporation of the government to assist in the pursuit of the objectives of this Proclamation.

The private sector stakeholders in the tourism industry are enjoined to come up with appropriate activities that would help the government in achieving and sustaining the objectives of the Pinoy Homecoming Years.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 3 rd day of June, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Eleven.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary