MALACAÑAN PALACE Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 43

DECLARING OCTOBER 20, 2010 AS “WORLD STATISTICS DAY”

WHEREAS, the Philippines has been observing the National Statistics Month (NSM) since 1990, pursuant to Presidential Proclamation No. 647, s. 1990, to promote, enhance and instill nationwide awareness and appreciation of the importance and value of statistics, and ensure the support of the public in improving and enhancing the quality and standard of statistics in the country;

WHEREAS, the United Nations (UN) Statistics Division reports that, along with the Philippines, 101 countries and areas have been celebrating the statistics day, week or month to raise the profile of official statistics;

WHEREAS , the UN recognizes that statistics are critical in evidence-based decision-making across all cultural and historical backgrounds of countries, irrespective of level of development;

WHEREAS, the UN General Assembly issued Resolution 64/267 designating October 20, 2010 as “World Statistics Day” in recognition of the fundamental importance of: (a) sustainable national statistical capacity to produce reliable and timely statistics and indicators; and (b) solid data for informed policy formulation and monitoring the Millennium Development Goals at the national, regional and international levels;

WHEREAS, the UN General Assembly invites Member States, UN organizations, and other international and regional organizations, as well as civil society, to observe the first “World Statistics Day”, with the overarching theme “Celebrating the Many Achievements of Officials Statistics”, with emphasis on the core values of service, integrity and professionalism;

WHEREAS, both the NSM and the “World Statistics Day” will be celebrated in October 2010 in recognition of the crucial role of statistics in nation building and in regional/international planning, respectively;

WHEREAS, during the “World Statistics Day” celebration, activities at the national level will highlight the role of official statistics and the many achievements of the national statistical system, and the international, regional and subregional organizations will complement national activities with additional events;

WHEREAS, by virtue of the powers and functions under Executive Order No. 121, s. 1987, the National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB) approved NSCB Resolution No. 6, s. 2010, “Enjoining Support to and Participation in the Nationwide Observance of World Statistics Day”, and to ensure the success of the first “World Statistics Day” in the Philippines, the support and cooperation of all concerned is necessary.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare October 20, 2010 as “World Statistics Day”.

All departments and government agencies, including government-owned and controlled corporations, as well as local government units, are hereby directed to collaborate and cooperate with the NSCB in advocating and implementing activities pursuant to this Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1 st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) BENIGNO S. AQUINO III

By the President:

(Sgd.) PAQUITO N. OCHOA, JR . Executive Secretary