IMPOSING THE PENALTY OF ONE (1) YEAR SUSPENSION WITHOUT PAY ON ASSISTANT PROVINCIAL PROSECUTOR ABRAHAM F. DATLAG OF THE PROVINCIAL PROSECUTION OFFICE OF LA UNION FOR CONDUCT PREJUDICIAL TO THE BEST INTEREST OF THE SERVICE

This refers to the administrative complaint filed against Assistant Provincial Prosecutor Abraham F. Datlag of the Office of the Provincial Prosecutor of La Union by Ricardo Aveno and Beatriz Ladia.

The complaint arose from the alleged bias of respondent prosecutor against the complainants’ daughter, Perla Ladia, the private complainant in Criminal Cases Nos. 3573–3577 for rape (four [4] counts) and violation of Republic Act No. 7610 (one [1] count), which she earlier filed against a certain David Garcia with the Provincial Prosecutor of La Union. In their joint Sworn Statement dated April 13, 1998, complainants Aveno and Ladia alleged, among other things, that during the investigation of Criminal Cases No. 3573–3577, respondent prosecutor uttered the words “The case filed is too heavy but the child’s statement is weak. You are poor, the case needs a large payment for a lawyer.” They further alleged that respondent prosecutor had prejudged the cases in favor of Garcia by advising their daughter as follows: “No rape happened. If you are offered P30,000.00 to P50,000.00, you should accept it. That will help you and you are in a difficult situation.”

Respondent prosecutor denied the accusation, alleging that the complaint is a plain harassment suit that was prompted by his dismissal of Perla Ladia’s rape charges.

On January 7, 1999, the Department of Justice instituted a formal charge for conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the service against respondent prosecutor. Shortly thereafter, hearings were conducted during which time Perla Ladia testified that respondent prosecutor indeed showed bias against her by uttering during the investigation of Criminal Cases No. 3573–3577 the words mentioned earlier. The complainants, for their part, affirmed their Sworn Statement and corroborated their daughter’s testimony.

After the requisite formal administrative investigation, the Secretary of Justice found respondent prosecutor guilty of conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the service for having uttered the words complained of and for having showed bias against Perla Ladia during the investigation of Criminal Cases No. 3573–3577.

We concur in the findings of the Secretary of Justice.

Perla Ladia positively testified that respondent prosecutor indeed showed bias against her and virtually prejudged Criminal Cases No. 3573–3577 by uttering the words — “The case filed is too heavy but the child’s statement is weak. You are poor, the case needs a large payment for a lawyer,” as well as the words “No rape happened. If you are offered P30,000.00 to P50,000.00, you should accept it. That will help you and you are in a difficult situation.” Her declarations, which the Secretary of Justice found to be firm and categorical, find sufficient corroboration from the equally firm and categorical testimony of the complainants. Such declarations prevail over the testimony of respondent prosecutor, who, incidentally, adduced no evidence to corroborate his bare denial of the charges.

WHEREFORE, and as recommended by the Secretary of Justice, Assistant Provincial Prosecutor Abraham F. Datlag of the Office of the Provincial Prosecutor of La Union is hereby SUSPENDED FOR ONE (1) YEAR WITHOUT PAY, effective upon his receipt of this Order, with a warning that a repetition of the same or similar acts in the future shall be dealt with more severely.