MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 8

CONSTITUTING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE TO MITIGATE THE EFFECTS OF THE LA NIÑA PHENOMENON

WHEREAS , there is a high probability that a La Niña phenomenon or “cold front” will occur in the Philippines, which will bring prolonged and excessive rainfall in the country and inundate our major river basins and lowland plains;

WHEREAS , the La Niña phenomenon is expected to cause damage to infrastructure and agricultural crops, particularly rice and corn, and affect the availability and distribution of food supply in the country;

WHEREAS , a coordinated effort must be undertaken to prepare for the La Niña to minimize its adverse effect on our people;

WHEREAS , there is a need to constitute a Task Force to enhance inter-agency coordination in the formulation and implementation of measures to mitigate the effects of the La Niña, particularly in agriculture;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. Constitution of a Presidential Task Force to Mitigate the Effects of the La Niña Phenomenon . There is hereby constituted a Presidential Task Force to Mitigate the Effects of the La Niña Phenomenon (hereinafter referred to as the “Task Force”). The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

Section 2. Functions of the Task Force . The Task Force shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate a comprehensive disaster preparedness and rehabilitation plan for the La Niña phenomenon, which includes, among others, measures to control flood and reduce damage to agricultural crops and support facilities (e.g. irrigation and farm-to-market-roads), as well as interventions to ensure adequate and affordable food supply in hard-hit areas, particularly lahar-stricken areas in Central Luzon;

b. Ensure the timely and effective implementation of the plan;

c. Regularly monitor the implementation of the plan;

d. Conduct a massive information campaign to educate the public on the La Niña phenomenon and the needed interventions to reduce its expected adverse impact in the country;

e. In coordination with the Department of Budget and Management, identify possible funding sources to implement the activities of the Task Force; and

f. Undertake such other functions as may be necessary.

Section 3. Provincial and Municipal Task Forces . The Department of Interior and Local Government is hereby directed to oversee the constitution of parallel task forces at the provincial, city and municipal levels for the effective implementation and monitoring of the plan, including the information dissemination program.

Section 4. Funding . An initial amount of P10 million is hereby allocated from the Calamity Fund to finance the operations of the Task Force.

Section 5. Administrative Support . The Department of Agriculture shall provide secretariat support to the Task Force, with the assistance of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources.

Section 6. Abolition of the Presidential Task Force on the El Niño Phenomenon . The Presidential Task Force on the El Niño Phenomenon (constituted pursuant to Presidential Directive dated 23 September 1997) is hereby abolished. For this purpose, the Presidential Task Force on the El Niño Phenomenon shall submit a terminal report to the President, through the Executive Secretary, copy furnished the Presidential Management Staff. The personnel and funds of the Secretariat of the Presidential Task Force on the El Niño Phenomenon are hereby transferred to the Presidential Task Force on the La Niña Phenomenon.

Section 7. Assistance from Other Government Entities . All government agencies and local government units are directed to extend full support to the Presidential Task Force on the La Niña Phenomenon.

Section 8. Reporting Requirements . The Task Force shall submit fortnightly reports to the President, through the Executive Secretary, copy furnished the Presidential Management Staff, on the status of its activities.

Section 9. Repealing Clause . All issuances, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 10. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, on this 19 Th day of August, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia