MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 47

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE THIRTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FEBRUARY 22-25, 1986, EDSA REVOLUTION

WHEREAS, the February 22-25 EDSA Revolution restored democratic institutions and ushered meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country;

WHEREAS, the triumph of this revolution was anchored upon people power, the ultimate demonstration of the citizens’ solidarity in seeking to transform Philippine society and chart a new course for the country’s history by linking arms and courageously asserting their democratic rights;

WHEREAS, the EDSA Revolution serves as our inspiration as we continue charting our collective course as a nation and a people.

NOW THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Constitution of a National Committee. There is hereby constituted a National Committee for the commemoration of the 13th Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution which shall be chaired by Mr. Antonio Lopa with Trade and Industry Secretary Jose T. Pardo as Co-Chairman. The Undersecretary of the Department of Interior and Local Government is hereby designated as Vice-Chairperson and the following as members:

Representatives from the NGO’s/Private and Business Sector:

Representatives from the Government Sector:

SECTION 2. Functions. The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Formulate a comprehensive plan for the nationwide commemoration of the 13th Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution and coordinate with all sectors concerned in the implementation of the same, taking into consideration austerity measures and the spirit of volunteerism;

2. Create such working committees and designate the respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors, as may be necessary, to ensure the success of the celebration; and

3. Invite or enjoin and mobilize all sectors who would like to participate in the celebration and call upon any government instrumentality to render the necessary assistance therefor.

SECTION 3. Staff Support. The Department of Trade and Industry shall provide the technical and secretariat support of the Committee. The heads of departments, agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are directed to give full support to the National Committee and its various working committees and to actively participate in the celebrations.

SECTION 4. Funding. The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of THREE MILLION PESOS (P3,000,000.00) to support this activity and release said amount to the Department of Trade and Industry immediately. Concerned agencies may allocate such amount as may be necessary to defray the expenditures that may be incurred from participation in the EDSA Anniversary.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 7th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.

Administrative Order No. 47, January 7, 1999