MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 25

DIRECTING THE BASES CONVERSION DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (BCDA) TO REVIEW AND UPDATE AND, WHERE NECESSARY, MODIFY OR REVISE THE MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLANS FOR THE PROPERTIES IN THE METRO MANILA CAMPS TRANSFERRED TO IT PURSUANT TO REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7227, AS AMENDED, AND FOR OTHER RELATED PURPOSES

WHEREAS, under Republic Act No. 7227, Section 4, BCDA is empowered to own, hold and/or administer those portions of Metro Manila camps which may be transferred to it by the President;

WHEREAS, under Republic Act No. 7227, Section 8, the Metro Manila camps transferred to BCDA may be sold, in whole or in part, provided that the President has approved a development plan embodying projects for conversion;

WHEREAS, Master Development Plans (MDPs) for various former military camps, such as the Fort Bonifacio military reservation, Camp John Hay in Baguio City, and Wallace Poro Point in La Union, have been approved by the President;

WHEREAS, a portion of the former Fort Bonifacio military reservation has been sold within the general framework of the approved MDP;

WHEREAS, as found necessary, the original MDPs have been updated so as to make the planned land uses of the Metro Manila camps more responsive to the declared policy of Republic Act No. 7227 to enhance the benefits to be derived from said properties in order to promote national development;

WHEREAS, the Administration has declared its strong commitment to pursue a policy of socio-economic development, focus on the upliftment of the condition of the poor;

WHEREAS, in the light of the major programs of the new administration, the recent developments in, and the present state of the Philippine economy, it is imperative for BCDA to review the current MDPs to ensure that they are supportive of the economic and social reform policies of the Administration;

WHEREAS, considering that portions of the Metro Manila camps have been sold under the general framework of the MDPs, BCDA shall undertake the review of the MDPs with the participation of its current joint venture partners, property developers and investors.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Review of the Master Development Plans . – BCDA is hereby directed to review and update and, where necessary, revise or modify the existing Master Development Plans of the Metro Manila camps transferred to it pursuant to Republic Act No. 7227. If any such camp, in whole or in part, has been sold, BCDA shall undertake such review with the participation of its joint venture partners, property developers and investors.

SEC. 2. Authority to Negotiate . – For the purpose of facilitating and expediting the review and revision of the MDPs, the BCDA is hereby authorized to negotiate immediately with an urban planner or an urban planning firm to undertake the review and revision.

SEC. 3. Submission of Updated MDPs . – Within two (2) months from effectivity of this Administrative Order, BCDA shall submit to the President for his approval the updated and revised MDPs covering major properties within former Metro Manila camps transferred to BCDA pursuant to RA 7227, particularly Fort Bonifacio and Villamor Air Base. The updated MDPs shall help promote the Administration’s policies and programs, particularly the development of socialized and affordable dwelling units for the police and military personnel.

SEC. 4. Assistance from Other Agencies . – The following government offices, agencies or instrumentalities shall, upon request of BCDA, provide support assistance to BCDA in the review, modification, and implementation of the Master Development Plans:

a. The concerned local government of the areas where BCDA properties are located, e.g. Municipalities of Taguig and Pateros, Pasay City, and Makati City – In incorporating or synchronizing the Master Development Plans for BCDA properties with their respective local development plans and zoning ordinances.

b. The Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board – In the determination of appropriate land uses and development standards as well as approval of zoning ordinances.

c. The Department of National Defense and the Armed Forces of the Philippines – In the speedy relocation of military facilities affected by the bases conversion program.

d. The Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council and the National Housing Authority – In the development of relocation programs for the informal occupants of BCDA properties.

e. The Department of Interior and Local Government/Philippine National Police – In facilitating and ensuring peace and order in the relocation of informal occupants within BCDA properties.

f. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources – In facilitating the issuance of Special Patents or Titles and Environmental Clearance Certificates for BCDA properties.

g. The Department of Finance – In the allocation and utilization of funds needed for the various relocation and development activities of the bases conversion program.

All other government offices, including the Department of Transportation and Communication, and the Department of Public Works and Highways, shall likewise extend the necessary assistance and support to BCDA in the review and modification of the MDPs.

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause . – All administrative or executive orders, department and other agency issuances inconsistent herewith are hereby deemed repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

SEC. 6. Effectivity . – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-144] . Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.