MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 94

CREATING THE SPECIAL OPERATIONS GROUP IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT ON LOCAL PRESIDENTIAL VISITS

To ensure a smooth planning and execution of all plans and arrangements, including Presidential instructions, relating to Presidential local travels, there is hereby created a Special Operations Group in the Office of the President for Local Presidential Visits (OP-SOG) composed of the following:

1. The Chairman of the Presidential Commission on Urban Poor and Vice-Chairman of the National Anti-Poverty Commission (lead);

2. The Presidential Security Group;

3. The Radio-TV Malacañang (RTVM) or Philippine Broadcast Staff of the Office of the Press Secretary;

4. The Media Accreditation and Relations Office (MARO) of the Office of the Press Secretary;

5. The Malacañang Appointments Office;

6. The Malacañang Protocol Office; and

7. The Presidential Assistants for Regional Concerns (PARECOs) through the Office of the Executive Secretary.

The Group shall take charge of implementing the following:

(a) objectives of the Presidential local trips;

(b) policy guidance on the various preparatory work; and

(c) required arrangements relating to such visit.

The OP-SOG shall conduct ocular inspection and assessment of the proposed trips to validate and finalize the President’s program of activities and whenever necessary, a post-visit assessment of the trip.

The OP-SOG shall be responsible for coordinating the planning and implementation of all strategies, preparations and arrangements for the local Presidential visits.

The lead agency of the OP-SOG shall be responsible for preparing the detailed program of the President’s activities and the corresponding flight manifest (if any). As such, at the national level, it shall coordinate with national line agencies and the members of the Special Operations Group on all the administrative and other arrangements and preparations required in the areas to be visited by the President. The lead agency of the OP-SOG shall also be the lead agency in coordinating the participation of all government agencies and instrumentalities, including Congress and the Judiciary as well as concerned Private Sector representatives in such visits.

The lead agency of the OP-SOG shall likewise be responsible for gathering the required data and other inputs needed for the President’s speeches and statements for the different activities during the visits.

At the local level, the lead agency of the OP-SOG shall coordinate through the Office of the PAs for Regional Concerns (PARECOs) with the regional offices of national line agencies and the local officials concerned on all the administrative requirements for the conduct of the various activities of the President in the areas to be visited as well as the participation of said local officials to the said activities.

The Presidential Security Group (PSG) shall be the lead agency in providing the security requirements of the President and the members of the First Family. It shall also lead in coordinating the (a) security and other related preparations and arrangements for the local Presidential visits and (b) participation of the officials and elements of the Philippine National Police and the Armed Forces of the Philippines in the area of the President’s activities.

The Philippine Broadcast Staff of the Office of the Press Secretary (PBS-OPS) shall be the lead agency in coordinating the physical and substantive requirements for the provision of radio and television coverage for the Presidential activities.

The Media Accreditation and Relations Office of the Office of the Press Secretary (MARO-OPS) shall be the lead agency in coordinating all media-related activities; including the preparation of press kits, and the decision for the conduct of press briefings, press conference and interviews on site, in coordination with the other members of the OP-SOG.

The Malacañang Protocol Office shall primarily be responsible for attending to all the protocular requirements and arrangements for the different activities of the President during the visit.

The Malacañang Appointments Office shall primarily be responsible for providing the lead of the OP-SOG with inputs regarding possible activities of the President during the local visit as well as ensuring that the approved program of activities for the local visit are incorporated in the integrated schedule of the President.

The Presidential Management Staff shall primarily be responsible for preparing the President’s speeches and statements needed for the different activities during the visit based on inputs and other data provided by the lead agency of the OP-SOG.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5 th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.