MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 131

DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE AS THE INITIATOR AND IMPLEMENTATOR OF THE VARIOUS CENTENNIAL CELEBRATIONS RELATING TO THE PHILIPPINE-AMERICAN WAR

WHEREAS, on February 4, 1999, the nation commemorated the centennial of the Outbreak of the Philippine-American War which signaled the start of other major battles between the Filipino revolutionists and the American forces;

WHEREAS, on their great resolve to defend the Republic from the American forces, the Filipino patriots offered their lives in defense of the Motherland through the many battles fought throughout the Philippine archipelago;

WHEREAS, some of these major battles fought by the Filipino freedom fighters under the leadership of General Emilio Aguinaldo during the Philippine-American War include the “Battle of Cagayan de Misamis” (April 7, 1900) and “Battle of Makahambus Hills” on June 4, 1900, both in Cagayan de Oro City; the “Battle of Paye” (July 31, 1900) in Boac, Marinduque; the “Battle of Mabitac” (September 17, 1900), and many others of local and national historical significance;

WHEREAS, it is important that the heroic deeds and patriotism of our heroes and heroines during the Philippine-American War which contributed immensely to the freedom and political emancipation of our people and the final march towards national progress must be inculcated in the minds of our citizenry, particularly the youth of the land;

WHEREAS, by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 1, dated September 24, 1972 which created the National Historical Institute and Executive Order No. 80, dated March 5, 1999 which provides for the National Center for Culture and the Arts (NCCA) to have administrative supervision over the Cultural Center of the Philippines, Commission on Filipino Language, National Museum, National Historical Institute, National Library and the Archives Office.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby constituted a National Executive Committee to commemorate the various centennial celebrations relating to the Philippine-American War which shall be composed of the Chairman and Executive Director of the National Historical Institute, as Chairman, with the following members:

Undersecretary of Tourism

Undersecretary of Education, Culture and Sports

Undersecretary of Public Works and Highways

Undersecretary of Interior and Local Government

Undersecretary of Budget and Management

Undersecretary of National Defense

Undersecretary of Transportation and Communication

Head, Philippine Information Society

Director General, Philippine National Police

Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines

Governors of Marinduque, Laguna and Misamis Oriental

Mayors of Torrijos and Boac, Marinduque, Mabitac, Laguna and Cagayan de Oro City, Misamis Oriental

National President, Boy Scouts of the Philippines

National President, Girl Scouts of the Philippines

Other members from government and private sectors, as may be designated by the National Historical Institute.

Section 2. The Committee shall take charge of the nationwide preparations for the centennial celebrations of the various events relating to the Philippine American War. For this purpose, it shall have the following responsibilities:

(a) To undertake the overall study, conceptualization, formulation and implementation of the necessary programs/activities of the centenary celebrations;

(b) To act as overall coordinator for the nationwide promotion and dissemination of all centennial related programs/activities;

(c) To organize sub-committees and sub-working groups which shall undertake the implementation of the Committee’s programs and other related undertakings;

(d) To call upon any government agency or instrumentality and corporation, and to invite private individuals and organizations to assist the Committee in the performance of its tasks and for such financial assistance as it may deem necessary in the discharge of its functions but only for the duration of the celebrations; and

(e) To submit regular reports to the President on the plans, programs, projects, activities as well as the status of the preparations for the celebrations.

Section 3. The release of an initial amount of THREE MILLION PESOS (P3,000,000) chargeable against FY 2000 President’s Contingent Fund is hereby authorized to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order. Any deficiency shall be charged against the regular budget of the participating agencies.

Section 4. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.