MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 129

CREATING THE DEFENSE EXHIBITION COORDINATING COMMITTEE TO SUPPORT DEFENSE ASIA 2000

WHEREAS, the President has approved on 27 April 1999 the holding of the 9 th International Defense Equipment Exhibition and Conference (Defense Asia 2000) in the country;

WHEREAS, the holding of the above Conference in the country will provide significant impetus in the implementation of the AFP Modernization Program as well as opportunities to enhance cooperation for regional stability;

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide mechanism to efficiently coordinate the preparations for the holding of the Conference in Manila and thus, ensure the success of the exhibition and conference.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Committee. There is hereby created a Defense Exhibition Coordinating Committee hereinafter referred as the Committee to coordinate the preparations for the holding of the 9 th International Defense Equipment Exhibition and Conference in Manila in September 2000.

SECTION 2. Composition. The Committee shall be chaired by the Secretary of National Defense with the Secretaries of Foreign Affairs and of Science and Technology as Vice-Chairmen; and the Departments of Trade and Industry, and of Tourism, the representatives from which shall be designated by their respective Department Heads from among their Senior Officials with the rank of at least Undersecretary; the Chief of Staff of the AFP, the Press Secretary, and Heads of the Bureau of Customs, Bureau of Immigration, Philippine National Police, Bureau of Fire Protection, Manila International Airport Authority, and Philippine Ports Authority, as members.

SECTION 3. Duties and Functions. The Committee shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Serve as a focal point of coordination on the preparations for the holding of the above Conference in Manila;

b. Ensure the unhampered conduct of the Conference as well as the safety of its participants;

c. Provide linkage for the local private sector’s meaningful participation in the Conference;

d. Submit to the President, through the DND Secretary, progress report on the preparations, conduct and results of the Conference; and

e. Perform other functions which may be deemed necessary by the President.

SECTION 4. Administrative Support. The DND shall provide technical and administrative support to the Committee in the effective discharge of its functions. It may also enlist the support of the concerned agencies, local government units and/or government-owned and controlled corporations, to ensure the success of the Conference in Manila.

SECTION 6. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 24 th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.