MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 120

DIRECTING THE ORGANIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS TO CELEBRATE THE PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY ON JUNE 12, 2000 AND CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, there is a need for the Filipino people to commemorate the heroism and self-sacrifice of our forefathers in the struggle for independence;

WHEREAS, the 102 nd anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence is the ideal occasion for all Filipinos to unite and rally behind the government and the country’s institutions;

WHEREAS, there is a need to properly plan, implement and coordinate all programs and activities leading to the said celebration.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The government shall take the lead in the celebration of Philippine Independence Day with an appropriate, relevant theme to be determined by the National Committee or its Executive Committee which shall be created purposely for the event.

Sec. 2. All departments, bureaus, offices, national government agencies and government-owned-and controlled corporations are hereby enjoined to participate in the celebration of Philippine Independence Day in a fitting manner consistent with their respective public service functions and in coordination with the plans of the National Committee or its Executive Committee.

Activities that promote a strong national identity and deepen the spirit of patriotism among Filipinos should be undertaken. There will be cultural festivals, theatrical presentations, symposia, historical tours and/or similar other activities in all regions.

All branches of government are enjoined to participate in the Independence Day celebration as well as to enlist the participation of private sector groups and non-government organizations so that the 102 nd Philippine Independence Day celebration will be a true show of unity and strength during these challenging times.

Towards this end, local government units together with the private sector groups and NGOs are enjoined to celebrate Independence Day in their respective localities.

Sec. 3. A National Committee is hereby created to undertake and/or conduct, in coordination with the local government units and/or agencies involved, the programs and events for the Independence Day celebration which shall include, to the extent appropriate as determined by the National Committee, the following:

a. Pambansang Araw ng Watawat (Philippine National Flag Day) on May 28 as the kick-off ceremony for the two-weekend Pagdiriwang ng Malayang Filipino (Philippine Independence Day Festival) on June 2-4 and June 9-12, instant. A special Program on “Pag-galang sa Watawat” and “Pagpapahalaga sa Pambansang Awit” will be held on June 11.

b. Raising of the national flag and wreath-laying at the Rizal monument in the Rizal Park on June 12, 2000 at about 7:00 in the morning including a special historical tableaux in order to dramatize the importance of this event to the life of the nation.

These activities will be replicated in historically significant places such as the Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan, Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, Cavite, the Bonifacio Monument in Kalookan City and the Pinaglabanan Shrine in San Juan, Metro Manila.

All other cities and municipalities around the country are enjoined to simultaneously hold similar activities on the same day and time.

c. The Independence Day “Parada ng Pagkakaisa” (Parade of Unity) at the Quirino Grandstand in the afternoon/evening of June 12 which shall be meaningful and relevant to the theme of the celebration. It will be capped by a special cultural program at the same venue.

Sec. 4. The National Committee shall be composed of the following:

Sec. 5. To assist the National Committee, an Executive Committee is hereby created consisting of the Chairperson, the Co-Chairperson and the Vice-Chairpersons of the National Committee, the Secretaries of Finance, Budget and Management, and Public Works and Highways, the Chairman of the National Historical Institute, the Chief of Staff of the AFP, the President of CCP, the Executive Director of the NPDC, the Chairman of MMDA, and such other members as the Chairperson may designate, or the duly authorized representatives of such Executive Committee members.

Sec. 6. The National Committee Chairperson is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office or any instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or -controlled corporations and local government units, to extend all necessary assistance to the National Committee or the Executive Committee.

Sec. 7. In support of the 102 nd Philippine Independence Day celebration, all concerned government agencies and local government units are, subject to budgetary laws and issuances, authorized to allocate such amounts as may be necessary to defray expenses for the said event.

Sec. 8. The funds necessary to implement the programs/activities for the Independence Day celebration, including those identified in Section 3 hereof, amounting to P20M (Twenty Million Pesos), shall come from the funds of the Office of the President allocated for the purpose in the FY 2000 General Appropriations Act (GAA) and from the unobligated funds for cultural and historical activities released to the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (Office of the Secretary), National Commission for Culture and the Arts, National Historical Institute and the Department of Tourism from their respective 1999 GAA.

Fund augmentation thereon, as may be necessary, shall be sourced from any of the regular items in the 1999 GAA, or from such other sources as may be determined by DBM and the Executive Committee for the 102 nd Philippine Independence Day Celebration.

Sec. 9. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of May in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.