MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 36

AMENDING AND REVOKING SPECIFIC PROVISIONS OF THE IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF R A. 8425 GOVERNING THE NATIONAL ANTI-POVERTY COMMISSION

WHEREAS, pursuant to Administrative Order No. 11 dated 27 July 1998, the NAPC Lead Convenor was tasked to submit recommendations to the Office of the President within sixty (60) days upon effectivity of the said administrative order regarding the implementation mechanism for the establishment of the NAPC, particularly the nomination of the sectoral representatives;

WHEREAS, further delay in the submission of recommendations, particularly the nominations for sectoral representatives, to the Office of the President will jeopardize the Civil Society participation in the implementation of the Poverty Alleviation program of the government.

WHEREAS, the Implementing Rules and Regulations of R.A. 8425 should be concise, clear and in full compliance with the law;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. Section 2, Rule III – Appointment of Other Members to the NAPC, is revoked;

2. Section 3, Rule III – Executive Committee, is revoked;

3. Rules IV and V are revoked;

4. Sectoral Councils shall be formed as follows:

“The Sectoral Councils shall consist of fifteen members coming from the respective sectors listed in R.A. 8425 with the following geographic representations: 4 members from Luzon, 4 members from Visayas, 4 members from Mindanao and 3 members from the National Capital Region, Metro Cebu or Metro Davao.

The Preparatory Committees formed by the Lead Convenor shall submit their recommended criteria and mechanism for the Sectoral Assemblies, Sectoral Councils and nominations for Sectoral Representatives to the Office of the President not later than 15 December 1998. The Heads of Government Offices concerned may choose to support mechanisms and/or actions proposed by the Preparatory Committees in addition to the procedures outlined herein, provided that the deadline set is met.

The criteria for selecting the members of the Sectoral Councils, as well as the nominations for Sectoral Representatives shall be published in three newspapers of general circulation once a week for a period of two weeks and broadcast daily on television and radio for a period of two weeks. Nominations for the Sectoral Council members and Sectoral Representatives shall be submitted to the Office of the President and the Head of the Government Office concerned. A short list from the Office of the President of twenty-five (25) candidates for each Sectoral Council and three (3) candidates for each Sectoral Representative shall subsequently be posted in the central, regional and provincial offices of the government offices forming part of the NAPC and the Office of the President for a period of five business days.

The President shall appoint the fifteen (15) members of the Sectoral Councils and the Sectoral Representatives within fifteen (15) days from the period of posting the short lists.”

5. All provisions of the Implementing Rules and Regulations referred to in Administrative Order No. 11 dated 27 July 1998 contrary herewith are deemed revoked, revised and amended accordingly.

6. This Order takes effect immediately.

Done in Manila, this 12 th day of November, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-144] . Manila : Presidential Management Staff.