MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 39

RECONSTITUTING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENT AND MANAGEMENT AND REDEFINING ITS FUNCTIONS

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 351 dated August 31, 1997 as amended by Administrative Order No. 375 dated January 19, 1998 created the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Improvement and Management;

WHEREAS, the traffic situation in the country, particularly in Metro Manila gravely and adversely affects the over-all mobility of people and goods, thereby resulting in decreased productivity, disruptions in the supply of goods and services and other traffic-related costs;

WHEREAS, the plans and programs on traffic management and improvement of various instrumentalities and agencies need to be harmonized;

WHEREAS, such harmonization requires a single traffic authority that will cut across various departments and traffic-related bodies and instrumentalities to integrate and coordinate traffic implementation and mobilization of resources to address the traffic situation;

WHEREAS, under Republic Act 7924, the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA) is mandated to perform planning, monitoring and coordinative functions, and in the process exercise regulatory and supervisory authority over the delivery of metro-wide services within Metro Manila to include, transportation and traffic management, without diminution of the autonomy of the Local Government Units (LGUs) concerning purely local matters; and,

WHEREAS, there is a need for concerned government agencies to support the MMDA in the exercise of its functions relative to traffic management.

NOW, THEREFOR, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Reconstitution of the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Improvement and Management . The Presidential Task Force on Traffic Improvement and Management, hereinafter referred to as TRAFIMM, is hereby reconstituted and strengthened and shall continue to serve as the integrating, coordinating and directing authority on traffic management in Metro Manila and its environs, subject to appropriate laws and national policies.

Section 2. Composition. The TRAFIMM shall be composed of the following:

The TRAFIMM Chairman is hereby vested with full executive authority within the law to rationalize and facilitate the effective and efficient movement and management of people and goods in Metro Manila and its environs, in coordination with concerned LGUs.

Section 3. Functions . The TRAFIMM shall perform the following functions:

a. In consultation with Metro Manila LGUs and concerned sectors, formulate and implement guidelines on roadworks traffic management which shall be strictly observed for all roadwork activities in Metro Manila;

b. Coordinate with the concerned LGUs relative to the issuance of clearances for all roadwork activities, diggings and excavations within the thoroughfares of Metropolitan Manila including the construction of shopping malls and similar traffic generating establishments;

c. Organize a Central Database System for Monitoring and Information of roadwork activities in Metropolitan Manila; and,

d. Perform other functions as may be required by the President.

Section 4. Technical and Secretariat Support . The TRAFIMM shall create the following Committees to provide the technical and operational support thereof:

a. The Committee on Education, Communications and Information shall be composed of the private sector representatives as Chairman with members from the DOTC, MMDA, DECS, CHED, TESDA, National Telecommunications Commission, UP-National Center for Transport Studies, Philippine Information Agency and representatives from the private sector;

b. The Committee on Engineering shall be composed of the Undersecretary of the DPWH as Chairman with members from the MMDA, DPWH-NCR, DPWH-URPO, DPWH-TEC, DOTC, LRTA, PEA, PNCC, representatives from the concerned utilities companies and the private sector;

c. The Committee on Urban Transport Services shall be composed of the Undersecretary of the DOTC as Chairman with members from the Office of the MMDA Assistant General Manager for Planning, LTFRB, LRTA, UP-NCTS and the representatives from the private sector; and

d. The Committee on Enforcement shall be composed of the PNP Director-General as Chairman with members from the Office of the MMDA Traffic Executive Director, the PNP, DOTC Action Center, PNCC, REACT, METROWATCH, MAPA, DPOS-QC, PEATC and the representatives from the private sector.

The TRAFIMM Chairman may give direct operational instructions to any of the member-agencies of the Committees in the pursuit of the functions of the TRAFIMM. The TRAFIMM Chairman shall designate the representatives from the private sector to these Committees.

The Metropolitan Manila Development Authority shall provide secretariat support to the TRAFIMM.

Section 5. National Government Support. The TRAFIMM is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

Section 6. Funding. Funds necessary to immediately carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order shall be sourced by the Department of Budget and Management from available sources, upon submission by the TRAFIMM of its work and financial plan to the former.

Section 7. Repealing Clause. All orders, issuances or parts thereof inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 8. Separability Clause . If any provisions of this Administrative Order is held invalid, the other provisions not affected thereby shall continue in operation.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7 th day of DECEMBER, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.