MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 127

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE WITH PLENARY POWERS TO INVESTIGATE LAND ANOMALIES AND TO COORDINATE AND MONITOR TITLING OF PUBLIC LANDS IN GENERAL SANTOS CITY

WHEREAS, there are persistent reports of cases of landgrabbing and illegal titling of public lands in General Santos City allegedly involving large syndicates and influential private persons in connivance with government officials;

WHEREAS, these nefarious activities seriously affect the implementation of important government projects in General Santos City, particularly those intended for the less fortunate and landless constituents of the city;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to resolve conflicting claims of ownership between the City Government of General Santos City and alleged landgrabbers or illegal occupants of government lands in the city;

WHEREAS, it is likewise imperative to institute measures to ensure that valuable government lands are preserved and/or disposed of only to qualified persons as provided by law;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of Committee . There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee on land titling anomalies in General Santos City to be composed of the following:

SEC. 2. Tasks of the Committee . The Committee is hereby tasked to:

1. Investigate anomalous acquisitions and/or titling of public lands and other government lands in General Santos City;

2. Cause the filing of appropriate cases in court to recover illegally-disposed government lands;

3. Cause the filing of appropriate criminal and/or administrative charges against those who may be found responsible therefor;

4. Coordinate and monitor the progress of cases filed in court and/or administrative bodies; and

5. Coordinate and monitor land acquisitions and land titling of government lands in General Santos City.

SEC. 3. Powers and functions . For the effective discharge of its tasks, the Committee is hereby empowered;

1. To exercise the powers of an investigating body under Section 37, Chapter 9, Book I of the 1987 Administrative Code including the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony or evidence and to issue compulsory processes to produce documents, books, records and such other matters relevant to the investigation;

2. To call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions;

3. To create sub-committees or technical working committees to assist the Committee in the discharge of its tasks;

4. To monitor, evaluate and ensure the proper implementation of established procedures relative to the titling of alienable and disposable lands of the public domain. For this purpose, the Committee may ask for technical support from any of its members as often as necessary;

5. To conduct an inventory of all pending cases, whether in court or before administrative agencies, involving illegal acquisition and titling of government lands in General Santos City;

6. To perform such powers and functions as may be directed by the President.

SEC. 4. Staff Supports . The Department of Justice shall provide staff support to the Committee.

SEC. 5. Reporting . The Committee shall submit to the President a quarterly report of its activities, assessments and accomplishments.

SEC. 6. Funding . Funding for the operation of the Committee shall be sourced from the budgets of members agencies, as may be needed.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 144]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.