Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines At the Convention of the Liberal Party

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

Probably I have not felt so happy in my life as I feel today as I gaze upon this convention and realize the merits of the men and women who have come to attend this very important gathering of the backbone of our party. And we could not have met under more favorable circumstances. A year ago—a little over a year ago—when the Liberal Party was organized and we agreed to join hands with the minority party who believed in the same principles and policies which we upheld, it was a different atmosphere that I sensed, that I felt. It was a convention composed of men and women who gathered together with grievances in their hearts, men and women who believed injustice had been committed upon them, men and women who were deeply concerned over the future of their country, who were desirous of change in Government, who believed that our Republic must be established upon the soundest foundations and that the welfare and happiness, particularly the freedom of our people, must be assured.

Today we meet, as I said before, under different circumstances. No longer are our hearts imbued with a spirit of rebellion against conditions as they exist. We have met, bringing with us the deepest concern over the welfare of our country, feeling the sense of responsibility that devolves upon our party, for the Government that is now in operation in this beloved land of ours.

A national convention of the party in power is a national event, because if we believe in party responsibility in government, national conventions discharge a very important role in the fulfillment of that responsibility, because these national conventions are composed of men and women who represent the active and live members of our organization. If our Government fails, if we cannot satisfy the longings and the needs and the anxieties of our people, in the last analysis it is the party, our party, that will have to assume the responsibility. It is for that reason that in other democratic countries national conventions acquire great significance and great importance.

There are men in the United States, for example, who consider it a great honor just to be a member of the national convention. They know the significance of a national convention of a great political party: they realize their responsibility to the nation and to posterity. They feel that as instruments of the political organization it is their duty and responsibility to formulate the program of government not only on matters of principle but also on matters of government as well, that the government will have to adhere to those if that government will retain the confidence of the people.

You, ladies and gentlemen, who are delegates to this convention, I am sure, feel the weight of that responsibility. You have read in the party platform certain definite and specific principles, and a program of action which, if we are to remain in power and if the people are to give us their confidence, would be a directive not only to the Chief Executive but also the members of the party to fulfill every commitment and to effect the program of action outlined in that platform. The members of this convention and the Chief Executive of this nation would be recreant to their trust if they should fail to put into effect the decisions that you have approved here. And I hope and I trust that not only this convention but future conventions of our party will meet with that grave responsibility in mind.

And I said that I was happy to witness this convention not only because of the members; not only because I see in this convention the most valuable elements of our population, both in the political and social life of our country, but because for the first time our convention has been graced by such a large number of very charming ladies who have come here not as guests but as important members of our party for the purpose of showing their interest in the work and the decisions of this convention. They have come to pledge support to this party of ours. I believe that the women of this nation have reached the conviction that the welfare of this country will depend in a very large measure on the decisions that this convention will arrive at. These decisions pertain not only to matters affecting our platform but also to matters concerning the candidates that are nominated by this convention.

I am very happy to read in the platform of the party a very important plank which I should like many members of this convention to read carefully. They have given to this their approval and they must make up their minds to carry out this commitment not only in the best of spirit, but also to the letter.

The Liberal Party for the first time—and I mean this is the first time that any political party in the Philippines, this is the first time that any political party in the world— has subscribed to this definite and positive commitment which reads: “We recognize that men and women have equal opportunities in the public service and shall not permit sex to be a bar to the holding of any public office.” From now on in the Liberal Party women will be accepted by us not as our inferior or merely as leaders of the party but as our equal. They will be accepted by us and will sit with us in the councils of the party as real partners just as in the home, men and women cooperating together.

On occasions like this, it is customary for leaders of this party to speak about the opposition party. I am not going to do it today. It is not necessary. Let us base our claim to the renewal of confidence by the people in us, on our record of what we have done and what we have promised to do. I do not want to give to the leaders of the opposition any opportunity for saying that Mr. Roxas is a bad man because he tries to weaken the opposition, that Mr. Roxas is trying to destroy the opposition. They have accused me of that grave crime. I have not tried to weaken the opposition. I am interested in the maintenance of a two-party system in the Philippines, with a majority party and a minority party.

To the recognition or admission made by the minority party that their party has become weakened, I wish to tell them that they should attribute that weakness not to things that we have done, but that they probably recognize that we have done a great deal of good to the nation and therefore the nation has become more strongly convinced that we deserve this confidence. They should attribute the weakness of their party to the fact that the opposition party is dispersing its energy, that the opposition party is incapable of making heroic and courageous action on public questions that the opposition party is pursuing a course of systematic opposition to anything and everything that the majority has tried.

This country needs a loyal opposition, just as it needs a strong majority party, but the opposition must be loyal not to the party but to the country. No man who is not willing to understand—to hear and to understand the views of other men so that there may be harmony, so that they may reach a common objective—can be successful in politics.

I am sure that in this convention there is not a single name that will be mentioned that will receive the unanimous approval of each and every one of you, because in every instance you have a personal close friend whom you will prefer to the others named. But a successful political convention is one where members are willing to submit their views and their opinions and their preferences to the decisions of the majority, and are willing and determined to accept the decisions of the majority. I am not completely satisfied with the ticket, if I must tell you frankly; but I am satisfied with one thing, in other words, under the present circumstances, taking into consideration the strong views expressed by the different delegations here and the interest of the different sections of our nation, I am satisfied and I am convinced that the senatorial candidates are the best senatorial candidates that we can present to our people. And I am going to work as hard as I can for the election of each and every member of that ticket.

I am not only going to promise that, but I am going to tell you one thing more. I am generally not very much in favor of making promises, but I will tell you one thing— that if, as I expect, that ticket receives the unanimous support of the members of the Liberal Party, and of all the leaders of the Liberal Party, particularly you men and women who are here today, the governors and the mayors who are here, and the important leaders of the different communities—I have no fear, in fact I am sure, that each and every one of those candidates will win by a big majority in the coming elections.

And I want to assure the provincial leaders and our candidates for provincial governors and the candidates for mayors that the national Liberal Party is going to do all it can to help them in their fight in the local elections. The national Liberal Party is going to do all it can to insure the election of each and every one of our candidates for provincial governors and municipal mayors throughout the Philippines. Before this convention adjourns, I should like to submit to you for consideration—I am not giving you orders or instructions, but I wish to submit for your consideration—the advisability of creating two campaign committees of the party: one, a campaign committee for the senatorial ticket, and the other, a campaign committee for the provincial and local candidates, these two committees to work under the general supervision, for purposes of coordination, of the Executive Committee of the party presided over by the President of the Senate.

My friends, we have no reason to be ashamed of our record during the past 14 months since we assumed power. In my public addresses and messages to Congress, I have informed the people of the Philippines of what we have done, of what we are trying to do, and what we cannot do at this time, but which we should like to accomplish. I trust that you are well informed of these things. It is not necessary to recount the accomplishments of our party, except to say that if we compare what we have done in 14 months in the Philippines with what other countries of the world have done in the same period under probably better conditions, I can assure you that we have been more successful in dealing with our problems and in solving them than any other nations of the world.

So I wish each and every one of you Godspeed. You will assume responsibility as leaders of our party. You can rely upon us for support. We can rely upon you for constructive work and for efforts to win and to maintain and increase, if possible, the confidence of the people in our party. I am merely a servant of the people, merely an instrument of our party.

NOTE.—This national convention was to mobilize the machinery of the Liberal Party to take part in the general elections held on November 11, 1947. On that day aside from a new batch of local officials (provincial governors, provincial board members, municipal mayors, vice-mayors, and councilors) throughout the country, eight new senators were to be chosen to replace those whose terms were expiring.

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.