Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines At the Inaugural Meeting of the USAFFE Veterans Association

[Delivered on April 20, 1947]

COLONEL TUASON, GENERAL MOORE, FELLOW VETERANS:

I am very happy to have been asked to attend this inaugural meeting of the USAFFE Veterans Association. I see here this morning many of the men with whom I had been associated during the war. Probably the most important of those who are here is a man whom the veterans of the Philippines have learned to love and to admire not only because of his admirable record during the war but because of his abiding interest in the welfare of the Filipino veterans and of the Philippine Republic. I refer, my friends, to that great American, that great hero of Corregidor, one of the greatest friends of the Filipino people, our comrade, General Moore. ( Long applause .)

I also see here this morning men who recall to my mind soul-stirring incidents during the dark days of the war, men who, during the most trying difficulties, had shown a devotion and a loyalty to their country and the principles for which our country and the United States fought, that can hardly be equalled. I see all of you, men who composed the backbone of the USAFFE in the Philippines, insofar as the Philippine Army was concerned, men who in that war rendered a priceless service to our nation and to the cause of liberty, and, because of their heroic sacrifices, have covered the Philippines and the Filipino race with glory for all time to come. ( Long applause .)

I am sure that our great commander-in-chief during those days, the peerless soldier whose name is a by-word of patriotism and loyalty in the Philippines today, the man who, I am sure, will continue showing his interest in the welfare of this country and of the Filipino veterans, would have wished to be present at this reunion. I refer to General Douglas MacArthur, whom we all love—the man whose heroism brought honor to his country and ours and made possible the participation of the Filipinos in the epic Battle of the Philippines. ( Long applause .)

Every member of this association has every reason to be proud that he is such a member. It was your privilege to fight for your country during that critical period of our history. That privilege was vouchsafed to you not only by the course of events but by Almighty God, and you should be grateful as I am grateful for that opportunity. But that privilege imposes upon you and upon me solemn obligations—the obligation to continue fighting for the principles for which we fought, the obligation to continue devoting our utmost to the service of our country, the obligation to labor now in this time of peace for the same things and for the priceless opportunities for which you risked your lives in that bitter war.

And I trust that this association that you have organized is motivated and inspired by no selfish aims. Whatever may be some of your goals, your principal aim should be service to your people and to your country.

The Filipinos fought in the last war without any mercenary motive. We do not commercialize patriotism in the Philippines. We do not put a dollar mark upon it. There are things that are more priceless and closer to our hearts than dollars and cents.

I trust that the organization of this association is not for the purpose of dividing the war veterans into USAFFE Veterans and Guerrilla Veterans. I trust that the only reason why the USAFFE Veterans have organized separately from the Guerrilla Veterans and vice versa is for the purpose of maintaining fraternal associations which are valuable to the morale of the men that compose each of those organizations.

But on fundamental matters, matters affecting our country, in matters affecting the interests of all the veterans— all the members of the USAFFE and of the Guerrillas can all be united, and you must be united if you want to succeed in your present and future undertakings. ( Long applause .)

One of the important questions, which probably is in the mind of this convention and it is in my mind too, is the question of the proper recognition of the USAFFE veterans by the Government of the United States. That is a question which involves not merely dollars and cents. It is a question which involves the historical integration of the Philippine-American forces in the Philippines, the American Army and the members of the Philippine Army that were inducted into the service of the United States.

I remember distinctly that day in July, 1941, when the President of the United States, in accordance with the powers granted to him by our Constitution, called the Philippine Army into the service of the forces of the United States. You, who were members of the Philippine Army at that time, and the reserve personnel who were later on called to the colors, were so inducted. The question now arises whether that action taken by the President of the United States and given effect by the President of the Commonwealth in a proclamation, made the Philippine Army part and parcel of the Army of the United States.

For practical purposes, it was so considered. It was so considered by General MacArthur not only at the time when that order was promulgated but even as late as 1943. We fought together. We fought for the same principles. We fought under the same flags. We were nationals of the same country and it was our understanding at that time that we owed a double loyalty not only to our people and to our Government but also to the Government and the people of the United States of America. And the sacrifices and the heroism exhibited by Filipino soldiers during that war were unsurpassed, and their loyalty unquestioning. There was in the heart and in the soul of every Filipino soldier in the front lines, a full devotion to the cause of liberty, a devotion to the flag of our country, to the glorious flag of the United States of America. I am certain that no Filipino at that time ever made a distinction as to his loyalty to the United States or to the Philippines. His loyalty to the Philippines was identical with his loyalty to the United States and his loyalty to the United States was identical with his loyalty to the Philippines; and, I am sure the Filipinos would have fought with the same valor and with the same loyalty if they had fought only for the American flag instead of fighting under the blended shadow of the American and the Filipino flags. ( Applause .)

Peoples in other parts of the world would have difficulty in understanding this loyalty; but not we in the Philippines.

We have lived under the American flag for over 40 years. Practically all of us who formed the Philippine Army were the product of the great experiment in democracy and altruism inaugurated by the United States in the Philippines. We were all educated in the public schools opened by American soldiers who first came here in 1898. We were imbued with the principles and traditions of America. We were taught and we learned to love liberty and democracy. We were conscious of the noble things that America had done for our country, not only in the field of idealism but likewise in material progress. We felt a deep gratitude and affection for the United States, and had a great confidence in her aims in the world. We knew that America was not a predatory power; that America had no ambitions for territorial expansion; that America did not seek to dominate either the actions or the consciences of the peoples of the world; that America did not seek to implant her sovereignty over the lands of others. We knew, because we had drunk deep from the great fountain-source of American liberty and traditions, that America was fighting for the same things which the Filipinos had learned it was their duty to die for—liberty, justice, and democracy. That is why we gave our devotion without stint to the great people of the United States. And we fought.

Many of our comrades fell on the wayside. Many of them died in the fields of battle and others in concentration camps.

I believe I can state without fear of contradiction that there is not a single army of any nation of the world, without any exception, which has shown greater patriotism and devotion and eagerness to fight, and has suffered more casualties, than the USAFFE in the Philippines. ( Long applause .)

Human action is susceptible of practical demonstration when it relates to things of the spirit and of the heart; human devotion and loyalty can be measured by the sacrifices made to prove that loyalty. Because the USAFFE in the Philippines has lost approximately 50 per cent of all its contingents, I repeat, there is no army in the world that had shown greater devotion and greater loyalty than the USAFFE. ( Long applause .)

Now, the war is over. It is the duty of governments to recognize the services of their fighting men, not only because it is just and fair that they be given material compensation for their sacrifices, but also because it is proper that governments do everything within their power to prove that they value these services, so that when a new emergency should occur men would come and join the colors with enthusiasm and with confidence that their Government will take care of them after the war and will take care of their widows and orphans.

The United States Government, conscious of this obligation, inasmuch as you were a part of the United States forces, at first considered Filipino war veterans, members of the USAFFE and recognized guerrillas, entitled to the same privileges, compensations and gratuities as other veterans of the United States Army. Such was the interpretation of the Missing Persons Act when it was enacted, I believe in 1942. And that was not only the belief of the veterans and the guerrillas fighting in the Philippines, but also the understanding and interpretation of many officers who were in command of the American Army at that time.

During the campaign for liberation that understanding continued. Nothing was said in the Philippines during those hectic days concerning conditions and restrictions, or doubts that have later been expressed as to the rights of members of the USAFFE and other veterans to receive compensation, gratuities, allowances or arrears in pay, granted to all veterans of that war under the Missing Persons Act.

The first intimation received by the Filipinos that this question would be raised was when the Rescission Act of 1946 was approved in February of that year. I am not informed what understanding the Government of the Commonwealth at that time or its representatives had, if they had any with the Government of the United States, concerning the effect of the provisions of this Rescission Act. I believe, however, that our Government should have opposed the passage of that Rescission Act with all the energy and firmness at its command.

That Rescission Act provides in substance, as interpreted by the Judge Advocate General of the United States Army, that all the gratuities and privileges and compensations authorized by the Missing Persons Act for members of the United States forces are not applicable—are not applicable, I repeat—to veterans of the Philippines, except in two particulars: first, with regard to insurance, and the other exception, with regard to disability and death benefits.

The question of arrears in pay was not expressly touched upon in that act. No provision was made for hospitalization for disabled and sick veterans. No provision was made for educational benefits and for economic aid as are provided in the American GI Bill of Rights.

The first thing that I did soon after my inauguration, conscious as I was of the importance of this matter and determined as I was and as I still am to see that justice be done to Filipino veterans, was to send General Duque with a small staff to the United States for the purpose of presenting this matter before the Secretary of War and other officials of the United States. The position of the Filipino veterans and of the Philippine Government on this matter was ably presented by General Duque.

After that, I wrote a personal letter to President Truman referring to this problem and pleading especially for proper provisions for hospitalization service for disabled veterans, for the care of widows and orphans and for educational benefits. As a result of my letter, President Truman appointed an Inter-Departmental committee to study all these questions. That Inter-Departmental committee submitted a progress report which was included in a bill submitted to the Congress in its last session but which failed of approval because it did not come for consideration until the last day of the session and unanimous consent was necessary in order to obtain its consideration by the House.

The bill provides for hospitalization and for funeral expenses. I have been promised that the Inter-Departmental committee is going to continue considering the question of educational benefits and economic aid. But the question of arrears in pay has developed in such a way that I understand it has greatly disturbed the minds of the USAFFE veterans and, I believe, justly so.

It is not true, as many believe, that the War Department cannot pay arrears in pay to USAFFE veterans. The ruling of the Attorney General and of the Judge Advocate General of the United States Army is that the American Army can continue to pay subject to the rules and regulations established by the War Department.

The great question before us is first, one of principle. The other, is a question of fairness of the so-called regulation under which arrears in pay may be authorized. The question of principle involved is this: “Is it right, is it just that Filipinos who have served and have fought under the American flag with the same motives and the same loyalty as other members of the United States forces, should be subjected to a double standard of compensation or gratuities, or proof of appreciation by the American Government for those services, by treating them differently from their American comrades?”

I believe it is our right not only to ourselves but also for the honor of the organization to which you belong to respectfully submit to the Government and the Congress of the United States that the USAFFE of the Philippines, Americans as well as Filipinos, be accorded the same treatment because they were a part of the same force, because they fought for the same things, because when Japanese bullets were hurled against them, these bullets did not inquire whether the person who was to be shot down was an American or a Filipino, and because we were loyal to the same institutions and the same flag. It is our right to expect that we be given the same evidences of the recognition of appreciation by the people and the Government of America. ( Long applause .)

That, my friends, is probably a matter of sentiment. It may not have practical effects; nevertheless sentiment in this world is of great importance. Sentiment comes from the souls of men, from the hearts of men, the same source from which patriotism and devotion to principles and to country emanate. And I believe that this association can very properly submit to the Government and the Congress of the United States and the people of America our desire, our great ambition that there be no distinction between Americans and Filipinos as far as the USAFFE is concerned.

The other question concerns a more practical subject—the back-pay. A better understanding of conditions obtaining in the Philippines during the occupation by the officials whose duty it is to decide what particular men in the USAFFE are entitled to arrears in pay and other privileges is absolutely necessary. I have read the regulations of the War Department. They provide that anybody who has been released from a prison camp and returned to his home and lived (the regulation says) “a practically normal life”, will not be entitled to arrears in pay from the date of his release from the prison camp.

Anyone who had been in the Philippines at that time knows and, if he doesn’t, he should know, that 90 per cent if not more of the men who were imprisoned in Capas and other prison camps were sick, that they could not lead a normal life. They had to go home for several reasons: first, because that was the order of the Japanese military authorities; second, because they needed the care of their families in order to nurse them back to health; and third, they could not themselves make a living. ( Long applause .)

It is unfair by general rule to provide that just because a man went back home immediately after his release, he is not entitled to arrears in pay. These men were subjected to impositions and constant vigilance by the Japanese who did not permit their leading a normal life.

Two or three months ago, I came across the order of the Japanese military command to the people who were paroled from prison camps: they were ordered on pain of very severe penalties that they go home; that they were to report periodically to the military police as to their whereabouts and activities; that they were to report if they obtained employment; that they were to report if they changed their domicile; that they were to report if they were to leave the province or municipality; and that they were to report if they died. ( Long applause .) That is no joke. It is so stated in that Order.

I object and object strenuously to the other regulation which says that a man who accepted employment under the Japanese government or the puppet government is ipso facto barred from receiving arrears in pay, and I say that I am very strongly opposed to that because I know that some of you who are here today, obtained employment in order to spy upon or to watch other people who were employed in the Japanese government. If that rule were to be imposed, one of the greatest heroes of this war among the Filipinos, a man who was made a colonel in our forces and was commissioned directly by General Douglas MacArthur, because he was employed in the Amusement Service of the Government, could not receive arrears in pay. And he was shot by the Japanese because of his work for our forces. I refer to Colonel Jose Ozamis.

Colonel Castaneda, who is here today ( Long applause ), would not be entitled to arrears in pay because under my instructions he accepted the position of Governor of Cavite because I ordered him to consolidate the guerrillas of Cavite and to prepare for the landing of the Americans. ( Long applause .)

Manuel del Villar, a gallant officer of the guerrillas, could not now receive arrears in pay because he was working in the Customs House.

And the brave pilots whom we employed, whom we asked to obtain employment in the Port of Manila, in order to watch the movement of Japanese ships and to report them to the coast watchers in Mindoro and other places so that American submarines might waylay the ships, such as Mañosa and others, could not now receive arrears in pay. There are thousands of others.

The people whom we enlisted in the Constabulary for the purpose of maintaining the loyalty of that organization on the condition that upon our indication they would desert and join the guerrilla forces, which they did—they, too, would not be able to receive arrears in pay. ( Long applause .)

My friends, I am sure that there is no desire on the part of the United States Government to do any injustice to any man or to place the least blot on the great name of the USAFFE. I am not going to discuss with more detail the other items of those regulations. I will only say this: That I agree fully and completely with one of its provisions—that any member of the USAFFE or any other veteran of the Philippines who is proven to have been disloyal to his country or to the United States should not only be denied arrears in pay but also every other compensation, gratuity or benefit provided for veterans. ( Long applause .)

But unless that proof is established, unless a man who seeks compensation or gratuities accorded to him by law can be disqualified on that ground, and I believe on that ground alone, he should be entitled to receive the compensation and gratuities fixed in the law.

I assure you, my friends, that your Government is doing everything within its power to advocate action in settlement of these problems with speed and fairness both to you and to the Government of the United States, and with proper regard of the great fundamental principle of justice which, I am sure, will always inspire the policies of the American Government. It is necessary, however, that all these questions and facts be laid squarely and clearly before the people of America and before the officials of America whose duty it is to pass upon them.

The American Ambassador in Washington is also doing everything within his power with the assistance of a prominent veteran, Colonel Velasquez, to obtain favorable consideration of our petitions. Brigadier General Romulo is actively cooperating to enlist the help of the veterans associations of the United States.

Nevertheless, if this association believes that the questions are not being presented completely, that there are other facts that should be considered, I would welcome the organization by you of a small committee composed of not more than three men who could go to the United States upon your responsibility, to cooperate with our representatives there for the proper presentation of this question to the American Government. I believe this mission could be very helpful. ( Long applause .)

I advise and I counsel that there should be no impatience shown in the advocacy of your petition, that there should be no bitterness expressed. It would be unnecessary. It would be unfair. It would react unfavorably to your cause. Have confidence, as I have always had and I still have confidence, that America will always do right by us, by our country, and by our people. Prove to the Government and Congress of the United States that by justice and by right we are entitled to certain things, and you can be sure that justice will not be denied to you. Action may be delayed, it may take a few months and probably a year or two but I am confident, judging from our past experience with America, that in the end, justice will be done to us if we know how to present our case with dignity and perseverance. ( Long applause .)

And so, my friends, I wish to thank you again for inviting me to this inaugural convention. Let me reiterate my profound interest in the great name of the USAFFE and in the individual welfare of all veterans. But, as we think of the interests of those who are living, let us not forget the widows and orphans of our dead comrades. Our first obligation is to them, and I assure you that I will never let them down. ( Long applause . . . Cries of “MABUHAY”. )

NOTE.—On July 27, 1941, President F. D. Roosevelt ordered the Philippine Army and Constabulary including 150,000 reservists to be available for duty with the armed forces of the U. S. At the same time he called back to duty General Douglas MacArthur, with the rank of Lieutenant General, and placed him in command of the United States Armed Forces in the Far East (USAFFE).

This presidential address enumerates the reasons why the USAFFE veterans organized themselves.

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.