Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines At the 40th Convention of the Philippine Medical Association

[Delivered on May 7, 1947]

Mr. CHAIRMAN, YOUR GRACE, MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, MY FRIENDS:

I believe that I would have been able to obtain more benefits and the country would have been able to obtain better advantages after this session if I had been invited only to listen to the remarks made by your Chairman and Dr. Del Mundo of certain things which the government might do to help the health program of the Philippines and to assist in some way in improving the present situation of the members of the medical profession. To the views expressed here, I am in deep assent and I wish right now to state that I am recommending to the Secretary of Health the careful consideration of the suggestions and views expressed here.

As I gazed upon this gathering this morning upon my arrival, my heart was filled with a certain amount of pardonable envy. Right after finishing my high school, I tried to study law but I could find no place where I could study law in English. The college of law of the University of the Philippines had not been opened at that time, and so I compromised with myself and my own ambition and started studying medicine.

I am very much interested in those preparatory studies and I wish to impart to you a feeling that now possesses my heart. I believe I have made a mistake in changing later on from medicine to law.

As I see your very calm and apparently settled faces, if I had studied medicine I would be sitting in one of those chairs the same as you, I am sure, with less silver in my hair and less wrinkles in my face, and certainly with more worldly possession than I have today.

I have a great respect for the medical profession. If the preservation of the human resources of a nation is of prime importance, for no nation can exist without the population that composes it and no nation can be healthy and strong without a strong population, we can conclude that the future happiness and welfare of the nation depends in a great measure on the health of its population and the health of the population depends not only on the Government but particularly on the members of the medical profession.

I believe our nation has learned to appreciate the services of the doctors in our country. I can say without fear of contradiction that I believe that the doctors are the only members of a profession that have not profiteered during these extraordinary times. There are, of course, some exceptions of people who have profiteered with medical supplies. In other words, they are making as much money as the Chinese at the corner. But, by and large, I believe that every medical practitioner in the Philippines can be proud of the part he played during the darkest hours of our time.

I studied medicine about two months and I assure you, I have not learned a single thing of value. But very often, we lawyers, for example, learn more from listening to a man who is not a lawyer than to a member of our profession. When a lawyer talks to me I think there is nothing he can teach me, but when a doctor talks to me, I open my ears and listen to him because everything that he imparts is something new to me.

There is nothing I can tell you about the medical profession, but I can tell you what the government is doing to restore our country to health. We are appropriating today for the Department of Health a much larger amount than we were appropriating before the war. During the current fiscal year we appropriated P7,000,000 for the Department of Health and Public Welfare. I have asked for P8,000,000 for the next fiscal year. This appropriation will be sup­plemented by an appropriation amounting to P16,000,000 coming from the U. S. Government. This P16,000,000 will be spent during the next three or four years. This amount, however, is going to be spent for public health purposes; but in some respects, it will also be spent to help the medical profession generally.

I believe you have a right to be congratulated because of your success in preventing epidemics from breaking out here as a consequence of the war. In practically every country in the world that has been a battleground, epidemics broke out. Probably, the Philippines is the only part of the earth where actual fighting occurred, a country that was occupied by the enemy for over three and a half years, in which the health of the population in general was not neglected. We have to thank Almighty God and our own efforts and the cooperation of all the members of the medical profession for its success up to now and I hope that it will continue to prevent the outbreak of epidemics in this country.

Tuberculosis is still one of our most important problems. The incidence of tuberculosis is still the largest in the Philippines. Malaria is only second to tuberculosis. I have studied this question and discussed it with my medical advisers and they say that hospitalization and segregation alone will not solve the problem of tuberculosis.

The problem of malaria is being fought right at the very source by malaria control units that our own Department of Health is establishing and other units established by the United States Health Service.

Now with respect to all these matters: tuberculosis and beri-beri and other diseases, there arise the problems of preventive medicine in which I bespeak your cooperation—problems as to better living conditions, better houses, better sewer system; problems affecting a more intelligent method of living not by a few but by all our people, by the masses, through health education.

Finally, we have the great and fundamental problem of nutrition. Nutrition is one of the basic and most urgent problems not only in this country but also in practically every country of the world today. But the problem pre­sents itself differently in each country. In devastated countries in Europe, the problem is undernourishment. People have to be satisfied with 2,500 calories a day. I believe in the Philippines that is not our problem. The problem is not that we do not have enough to eat. The problem is that we do not eat intelligently. We do not balance our diet. Take rice. For a long time I have reached the conclusion that Filipinos eat too much rice which is not good for them. They could exchange part of the rice that they eat with other food that contains more protein and fats and other materials of greater food value.

Despite the fact that in the Philippines, almost anywhere, even m Manila, on the sidewalks, you can grow certain very important vegetables of great food value, the value of these different kinds of vegetables has not been propagated enough, and it seems to me there is an impression among Filipinos that when a man eats too much vegetable, he is not keeping up with the standard of his social position; that if a man eats camote he is a man below the standard.

I do not advocate that we must substitute all the rice that we eat with camote, but I remember that during the Japanese occupation in areas about which I obtained information—areas that ate yellow camote—there was practically no beriberi. And this is the information that should be gathered, and that should be propagated: a dietary program for the masses of the population should be formulated and demonstration stations should be established to teach the Filipinos what to eat and how to eat.

Other peoples in other countries were able to build up physical prowess with less food than Filipinos use or consume in the Philippines. Because I have been very much concerned about this problem, I have asked the Department of Health as soon as possible to set up an institute of nutrition. I want your collaboration, your cooperation in expediting the organization of this institute. I should like every medical practitioner from anywhere in the country to give information to this institute as to his observations concerning the result and the physical condition of the people in his locality that are consuming certain forms of diet, that we may compare this information with others.

I should like to have a complete inventory of all the materials that could be produced in the Philippines that would be useful for the diet of our people.

There are many food materials produced in some places in our country that are unknown in other parts, which could probably be produced in those parts as well. I wish we could have the cooperation of every civic-minded citizen in this program. We will not only bring down the cost of living; we will not only reach self-sufficiency in rice much sooner; but we are going to help in building up the health of our population and thereby increase their resistance to disease.

Fight tuberculosis by teaching every individual to live under the most healthful condition and how to feed himself properly, how to breathe, how to take exercise, rather than spend millions and millions every year taking care of people whose hope for recovery is indeed very small.

I should like to emphasize the activities of the government with the cooperation of the members of the medical profession, in the field of preventive medicine, and I trust, my friends, that you will afford your cooperation to the government.

With regard to hospitals, we are still struggling with the problem of restoring our pre-war hospitals and the opening of new ones. We have a certain amount of equipment—too much of certain things, too little or probably none of the others.

We do not have buildings. We do not even have beds. We have to restore these facilities gradually. We do not have funds in many cases. The cost of operating these hospitals has increased enormously. Formerly, I believe, we used to spend thirty centavos per day for every free patient in the Philippine General Hospital. Today, I think we are spending more than P1 and I do not believe we are feeding those men as they should be fed.

I want to increase the salaries of medical employees in the government but this is a matter of arithmetic and arithmetic has no heart and cannot be manipulated no matter how you look at it. Five plus five is ten and if you put ten for expenditures and ten for income they balance, but if you put twelve for expenditures and ten for income, you have a deficit of two and you cannot wave it aside and say “Forget it”.

Let me tell you, gentlemen, that we are now paying a living bonus to employees receiving salaries up to P200 a month and that item alone in our appropriation amounts to P38 million a year. Just by providing a living bonus for employees receiving up to P200 a month, the govern­ment is spending P38 million. And, do you know what P38 million means compared to the total expenditures of the government before the war? It is 35% of the appropriation of the government before the war.

For teachers alone—let me express my satisfaction here to be able to report that before the war we had less than 2 million students and now we have 3,200,000—we have now 56,000 school teachers and we are spending approximately P60 million for schools alone, more than twice what we spent before the war.

I want to help the medical practitioners but I cannot provide them with a living wage without providing the same compensation to other employees of the government. Take the pharmacists, for instance. Take the engineers, the mechanics. They have as much right to old age pension as the medical practitioners.

So, my friends, if the government is not able to help you in those respects, I urge you to have a little patience. Let us build up this country’s economy and wait for larger revenues. Then we could be of more assistance to the medical practitioners.

Another thing I would like to ask this association is to take an earnest and constant interest in our medical schools, their courses of instruction, and the standard they are maintaining. I should like this association to have some power to discipline its own members. You will have the fullest cooperation of the government insofar as the use by them, or by private practitioners for that matter, of the facilities in the clinics and hospitals under its control is concerned.

I would like to help you if you will undertake the organization of a great medical center here. I promise you every assistance, financial or otherwise. But you have to take the initiative and assume the responsibility. The Philippines needs a great medical center, a center that could be considered the home of every medical man and a place where he can go to read about the progress of science and scientific investigations and consult his colleagues in certain cases that he may have. Let it be something that will serve and continue to serve and will permit the growth of the members of the medical profession and the enlargement of their sources of information.

I have talked to several doctors on that subject. I told them that if the members of the medical profession come together and decide to organize a medical center, I am going to help them so that they may be able to get a good location for their building that will house their laboratories and offices and help them finance in erecting the building. I believe the medical profession will never acquire the proper consciousness of its members as to its responsibility to the public as a whole and to the nation unless there is a center of activity, the source of assistance and information that you, I am sure, need for the proper practice of your profession.

Let me express my great gratitude because of the fact that you are meeting periodically to discuss problems and to learn of experiments and investigations that some of the members have conducted and all information about the progress of the science of medicine achieved in other lands of which you have a right to be informed.

If there is anything that the government can do to assist you, I trust you will communicate with the Secretary of Health and Public Welfare and I assure you that the limited resources of our government will be at your disposal.

I thank you.

NOTE.—The views expressed by the other speakers in the opening session of the convention, to which the President refers, concerned ( a ) the need for living bonus and old age pension for physicians in the public health service; ( b ) close coordination of the activities of private practitioners and those of the public physicians; ( c ) setting up of a program to give selected medical graduates a continued training beyond internship; ( d ) separation of the technical from the administrative service in the hospitals; and ( e ) making medical service available to all.

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.