Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President-elect of the Philippines Before the Commonwealth Club of San Francisco

[Delivered in California, May 18, 1946 (American Standard Time)]

ADDRESS BEFORE THE COMMONWEALTH CLUB OF SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA

I feel . . . I have always felt . . . that in San Francisco, I was not far from home. San Francisco has always seemed to me much closer to the Philippines than is indicated by geographic measure. San Francisco is the metropolis of the Pacific, the true cross-roads of the world west of the Mississippi River. I do not mean to outdo your Chamber of Commerce, nor am I quoting from any of its pamphlets. I am merely reporting the impression I have always gotten when I have come through here . . . and I have been through this city a great number of times in past years.

Here, America extends her best countenance to the Pacific, and here I always feel that I am in a neighboring and not so much in a distant land. Here I see the currents of the Orient as they flow into the great American stream of commerce and culture. San Francisco is the epitome of western, pioneer America, exhibiting in this city the expanse, the hospitality and the beauty of all of your great land.

In San Francisco, we Filipinos have always felt, even when no other ear was receptive to our problems, that we could get an interested and sympathetic hearing.

Elsewhere in the United States today the interest in the Philippines has been largely born of war. But even late-born, that interest is a thriving one today. I found it everywhere among your humblest citizens as well as among your greatest leaders. Our plight and our welfare as a people are now of deep concern to you. For that I am humbly and fervently grateful. In that concern we see our salvation.

Despite the destructive waste of war in the Philippines, we are not without resources, basic resources. The war has not stolen our gold, chrome, manganese and iron deposits, nor our coconut and hemp lands, nor our deep-timbered forests, nor the essential richness of our soil. Our people, in their millions, are still available to till the land, to cut the timbers, to dig the mines, to engage in trade and commerce. That much we have.

What we lack today, as the result of war, is not substance but form, not work but the tools with which to work. We have potential produce, but no markets; potential manufactures, but no machines; some crops, but no trucks or ships in which to move them; many potential enterprises, but no capital with which to finance them, and no coherent plan on which to organize them.

As we in the Philippines gaze upon the ruins and devastation of our land, as we look upon the shattered hulks of our buildings, and upon the gathered rubble of what were once our cities, we are naturally seized with some dismay. “How many years will it take us,” some of my countrymen ask, “to rebuild what it took the centuries to erect? Does it not look hopeless? Will we ever succeed? How can we undertake political independence possessing as we do only the battered remains of an economy, homeless as we are, and hungry?”

There are not many of faint heart in the Philippines. Courage is one of the proudest virtues of the Filipino. There are not many . . . I doubt if there are any today . . . who doubt that we will succeed in maintaining our independent existence and in restoring economic life and health to our country.

But for the feeling of assurance which we have, thanks must go to the United States. Were it not for the benevolent policy and attitude of America and Americans, we would be lost indeed. But, of course, that is like saying that were it not for San Francisco Bay, this city would be sadly handicapped, whereas the fact is that if it were not for the Bay, there would probably be no San Francisco. Thus if it were not for the benevolent policy of the United States, there would probably be no Philippine Republic in the first place.

The Philippine nation is a nation and is a democracy because of the United States. Why do you suppose that the Filipinos were loyal to the United States throughout three years of the greatest trial that any people in any age have ever been called upon to face? The Japanese offered us independence, too, although we knew that the very offer was a travesty on the word. Our loyalty was not a result of calculation. It was not a product of logic. It was a faith and a conviction that the great nation which had taught us political democracy, which had taught us patriotism and idealism, which had guided us long and far on the road to freedom and national dignity, was a nation to whom we owed a basic allegiance in her great hour of crisis. It was as axiomatic to us as faith itself, that we could not betray America without betraying the Philippine patriotism whose ideals are identical with the ideals of American patriotism. It was senseless—and the Japanese should have realized it—to ask Filipinos to forget their loyalty and faith in America and shift that loyalty and faith to Japan. The Filipino, guided by 47 years of happy association with America, holds an unshakeable conviction that the democratic way of life is a fundamental good in itself, and that any denial of democracy is a denial of virtue, a denial of God. To the Filipino, condemnation of America, as such, is condemnation of democracy; condemnation of democracy is blasphemy.

It is hard for me to picture, without seeming to fawn, how deep in the Philippines runs the current of faith in your institutions, in your way of life and in your country. Too many of my countrymen, because of lack of education, lack a profound understanding of all the implications of democracy and democratic institutions. But what they lack in factual knowledge, they compensate for in strength of conviction. Fire and sword could not change that conviction. Nor did it.

I will not keep you today, nor delay my own swift return to the urgent matters that are waiting for me in Manila, by dwelling at any greater length on this matter of the faith my countrymen have in what is today our common system of government. I will tell you only one incident, an incident of my personal experience in the early part of this war.

It was after the surrender of American forces in Mindanao. The year was 1942. As a brigadier general, although a prisoner I was in internal command of a prison camp at Malaybalay. A Filipino soldier 18 years old, was among those huddled in the bare stockade.

He was like a hundred others and I never noticed him, until one day when he escaped to join the guerrillas. Somewhere in the jungles the Japanese overtook him and brought him back for punishment by death. He was young and his eyes sparked with fire. I pleaded for his life and asked for the privilege of meting out internal punishment.

The Japanese, as always, weighed coldly the advantages of mercy in terms of prisoner morale against the delights of revenge. My entreaties were heard and he was given to me for punishment. I confined him in a cell. One day he sent for me.

“General”, he said, his eyes pleading, “would it make you much trouble if I escaped again?”

“Jose”, I said, “perhaps there would be trouble for all of us if you escaped. And as for you, it would be certain death if you were caught. And perhaps torture too.”

His eyes were eloquent with reproach. I was silent a minute and then went on.

“Anyway it is impossible for you to escape. You are guarded from within and without. Why should you want to escape anyway. Where would you go? What could you do? You are so young and inexperienced.”

“General,” he answered, “I can escape if I make up my mind to it. They cannot keep me here if I do not wish to stay. And I do not really care what happens to me if they catch me. What is happening to our people is more important than what might happen to me. But if I could hurry the liberation just one moment, I will have earned my life. The Americans will come back one day soon, and then we will all be free.”

It was an eloquent speech. I could not answer him. I could not deny him.

“Good luck,” I told him. “Let your conscience guide you.”

The next night he was gone from his cell. None knew how he had managed it. He was caught before long, but not until after he had killed some of our enemies. He was brought back to camp and killed before all of us. We were to see the penalty of escape.

The priest with whom he spent his last moments came to me later. He had a letter addressed to me. It told of a tree, and of a package buried under that tree. I would understand what to do with the contents of that package, he said.

I found that tree and the package. The package was carefully tied. I can still see it today. There was only one object in it. A clean, carefully folded, carefully kept American flag.

I had that boy’s body dug up from its shallow grave. At night, and with proper ceremony, we reinterred him. Over his body I placed with tender hand that American flag. The good earth of the land he loved covered him up. The flag went with him. He had died for it. He deserved it.

I don’t know how many Americans would keep the American flag as their last treasured possession on earth. But to that youngster, whose name swells the endless rolls of our war heroes, the American flag was a precious symbol of all that he lived for, and of what he was ready to die for, of what he did die for. In the Philippines, symbols are very important. You in the United States are less in need of symbols. You see the ideas of democracy exemplified in all manner of ways about you. Your skyscrapers, your great industries, your national power and might are all symbols and proofs of the worth and value of democracy. You take your freedom for granted; you see no people beyond your borders who can take it away from you. But the Filipinos were, before the war, and are yet today a people constantly challenged to justify their relatively higher standard of living, their western culture, ideology, and religion against the teeming, famine-stricken millions who surround them in the Orient. In such a situation, a symbol becomes a sacred thing. To us, America is that symbol.

You have become that symbol first through 47 years of beneficent rule in the Philippines, through your unprecedented action in guiding us steadily forward in the direction of self-government; and second, and perhaps more significantly, by your own success in translating the democratic philosophy into a system of government which has brought freedom, well-being and prosperity to your citizens in a greater measure than that enjoyed by any other people in the world. Since we have acquired from you the identical system of government and the identical philosophy of life, our people have the natural and even logical hope and expectation that we, too, can move forward along the same road toward the fuller life. It is this spectacle, here in America, of democracy-in-action which keeps us firm in our faith, which kept us firm in our faith during the war, that your way of life is the complete answer to our national aspirations. No other way of life will do.

For your part, should the Philippine people demonstrate, before the eyes of the world, that transplanted democracy can succeed in the Orient, you will see your creed enhanced beyond measure in prestige and power in the hearts of all mankind.

Of course this is a beautiful, but very sweeping prospect. It cannot be achieved by the uttering of pious wishes or the repetition of platitudes. It will take the same kind of sacrifices and endeavors on our part that were required from your forefathers in 1776. If I may make a historical comparison, we are far less fortunately situated today than you were at the beginning of your national history. Our land is an economic desert. Yours was not. We have only one market. You had many. Your infant Government in 1776 had immediate sources of revenue. Ours has none. In those days, surplus capital from many European countries rushed into investment channels in the United States. We can invite capital only from the United States. The rest of the world is virtually stripped of capital assets.

It all comes back to this: that to make our efforts, to enable us to use the great natural resources we have, we need basically and fundamentally the cooperation, the friendship, and the assistance of the United States . . . not only of your Government, but of your people and businessmen.

We have already obtained some of this help from your Government. Your Congress has undertaken to pay, in part, for our war damages, private and public.

Your Congress has also adopted a trade formula providing for special trade relations between our two countries for 28 years, beginning with free trade, and progressing gradually to a complete elimination of trade preferences. That will give our destroyed and ruined industries and agricultural enterprises a chance to revive under the protective shelter of your tariff, and with the stimulus of your market. The Philippine Congress has yet to act on that formula, but I shall use whatever influence I have to see to it that the formula set forth by the United States Congress is approved by the Congress of the Philippines and accepted by the Philippine people. I have determined upon this attitude because I have ascertained that the formula in the Trade Rehabilitation Act was the best which could have been worked out at the present time. We in the Philippines will do our best to work out our problems under this formula. I trust and hope that if we find, by experience, that the formula provided is inadequate to meet our essential requirements, the United States Congress will agree to the necessary modifications.

I must tell you frankly that one provision of that Trade Act has aroused some resentment in the Philippines. That provision requires us to modify our Constitution so as to grant American citizens and corporations the same rights and privileges, as to business and enterprises, as are granted to Philippine citizens. We are required to permit American citizens and corporations the same prerogatives for the exploitation of all our natural resources, including the ownership of public utilities, as are granted to Filipinos.

The first and most significant objection to this provision arises from the fact that it is not reciprocal. It is a one sided bargain. You in the United States do not grant those rights to Filipino citizens. In fact many of your States have laws discriminating specifically against Filipino citizens. I hope I am not being impolitic in mentioning this. I think that as friends, as fellow American nationals, and soon as partners in world enterprise, we owe each other a high degree of frankness. That is the way I get along with High Commissioner McNutt. That is how our two peoples should get along.

But we will overlook for the moment the lack of reciprocity, although it is a matter which touches the Filipino on the most sensitive portion of his character, his pride and dignity. Even as a strictly business proposition, this provision, requiring us to modify our fundamental law, is an insinuation of evil intention. It is like asking a normal home-loving citizen to sign a pledge and take an oath that he will not beat his wife. We had no such intentions in the first place.

However your Congress thought that this provision was desirable and necessary to induce businessmen and capital to invest in the Philippines and help us build up our war-shattered economy. I assume Congress thought that the businessmen of America required that assurance before investing in the Philippines. I am convinced that the authors of this provision had the best intentions in the world and had no thought of mischief or subtle purpose whatsoever. But it is my opinion that, had this provision never been presented, American capital would have come to the Philippines anyway; they would have joined with us in productive enterprise, and would have made their contribution to our economic recovery in exactly the same way that they are going to do now.

As long as this provision was adopted, I will do my best to implement and support it. As long as we are required to take this pledge of good intentions, we will go through the motions and make the motions whole-hearted. Yet I cannot refrain from saying, in the presence of my great friend and your magnificent representative in the Philip pines, Paul V. McNutt, that the Filipino people would, under any conditions, welcome American capital with all their heart and all their gratitude. We knew we need that capital. We knew it can come only from you. We prefer it that way. American capital has never taken excessive advantage of us in the past. I do not expect that it will in the future.

A few of my countrymen are alarmed about your imperialists. I am not alarmed. I think that between the democracy-loving people of both our countries, we heavily outnumber the imperialists. It is my impression that the majority rules in this country as in the Philippines We are not afraid of imperialist designs on the part of the United States. If imperialism had been a basic part of American policy toward the Philippines, we would not be on the road to independence today. If imperialism had been the American credo, it would not have had to wait until we were a free land to accomplish its purposes. The Philippines today are a living testimonial and a perpetual monument to the lack of imperialistic pattern in American foreign policy.

But it is my feeling that there is a studied attempt by some forces in the world today to make us and other people believe that American imperialism is on the march. I do not believe it. I reject the notion. If there is such a thing on the horizon as the American century, it will be an American century by example and by emulation rather than by extension of control by either subtle or direct power. We are a living allegation to that effect. I hope we remain so.

I do not doubt that there are forces in the United States, as there are everywhere in the world, which would like to use the power and prestige of the American Government to gain personal profit. I do not believe the American people will ever elect a Government which would allow itself to be so used. There are other countries of whose regimes I am not so confident.

The Philippines, especially because we have been economically levelled, offer unbounded opportunities for economic enterprise. Under my administration, free private enterprise will be given every opportunity, yes, every encouragement, to take the lead in the rehabilitation and the expansion of our economy. I believe firmly that the free enterprise system is the best that has yet been devised by man. But I am just as firmly convinced that it is the responsibility of government to regulate and guide private enterprise, where regulation and guidance are required for the protection of the public interest. Concentration of economic power, to my mind, is as evil as concentration of political power. Private interests of any nationality must not be allowed to prevail over the public interest in such few cases where the two interests collide. It is my purpose in the Philippines to use the powers of government as a check-rein on economic monopoly. The producers and consumers must be able to look up to the government for the protection of their basic rights. Legitimate free enterprise, which acknowledges its responsibilities to producer and consumer, will not require that kind of control. And against legitimate free enterprise, there will be no discrimination based on nationality, provided that the first consideration of such private enterprise will be the public welfare.

I want to say at this point that Governor McNutt and I decided to take time from our urgent flight schedule for this appearance before the Commonwealth Club precisely because we knew of your great interest in the Philippines. We knew that some of you already have intimate business connections with my country. I hope that many more of you will take an interest in the business of my country and will join us in what I conceive to be a great crusade for the expansion of democracy and mutually beneficial relations.

We want investments by Americans who are interested in building, in making, in producing. We want investments by Americans who are interested in forming part of a mutual bond of interest between our two countries. We want investments by those who are more interested in production than in profits although I assure you that there are profits to be made.

I was elected President in the recent voting in my country because I promised action, I promised vigorous effort. The Filipinos asked and are asking for leadership and guidance as they march into the dangerous days of independence.

Today hunger stalks my homeland. Unemployment is increasing dangerously. We have a hundred problems which must be solved immediately. Under some conditions I would feel our prospects to be dismal indeed. But I approach the assumption of my responsibilities without fear. We must banish fear. As our great benefactor, Franklin D. Roosevelt, said in those historic words which will ring through the ages . . . the only thing we have to fear is fear, itself. We are buoyed up by our faith in our way of life; we are confident that in this direction lie salvation, freedom, and prosperity. We are given heart by the basic knowledge that we have the resources, we have the men. And finally . . . perhaps most of all . . . we are given courage by the sure knowledge that our mother country the United States, will not forget us after July 4, but will be reassuringly near in all the difficult days ahead, giving comfort and inspiration by example, and standing ready to provide more practical assistance if we urgently require it. I think I am expressing the sentiment of my people when I say to you that we are proud to pledge that these conditions we will not fail. We will not falter on the way.

Source : Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 1). Manila : Bureau of Public Libraries.