Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines Before the Sugarmen’s Convention

“THE GOVERNMENT CANNOT GIVE YOU EVERYTHING”

CHAIRMAN, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THE CONVENTION:

I did not come here to make a speech; rather, I came here to feel this atmosphere of interest and determination to do everything within your power and means to rehabilitate the sugar industry. I am very much gratified to see the people who have been attending this convention. Sugar is an important industry. It is of great value to the national economy. The government is interested in the complete and rapid rehabilitation of this industry and you can be sure that the government will extend to you every effort and assistance within its power to give. (Applause .)

As I see the sugar industry today, I believe that your problems can be divided into three or four major topics. First, very much depends upon yourselves, your own efforts, your willingness to sacrifice, your readiness to tighten your belts a little bit, and put into the industry every peso that you can get, even neglecting to a certain extent your personal comfort and the luxury which you enjoyed before the war, for the purpose of putting the industry back on its feet.

Every centavo that you get from the government must be spent for the industry. You owe it to yourselves; you owe it to the country; and you owe it to the government that is giving you that assistance. It is not sufficient to cross your arms and expect the government to do everything for you.

The government is operating with limited means. The government cannot give you everything you need; it cannot build you a house in your hacienda ; it cannot rebuild the house that you had there before the war costing tens of thousands of pesos; it cannot give you money with which to buy automobiles or send your children to the United States to attend the most expensive schools there. The first thing that has to be done with the money from the government is to spend it for the rehabilitation of your industry, of your farms. And once that is done, then you can think of those other things—those that minister to your comfort and maintain your pre-war standard of living.

The second topic concerns a better, more intimate, more harmonious relationship between planters and centrals. I look upon the sugar industry as a whole. When the government does something for the industry, it does not do it for the exclusive benefit of the central, nor of the planter. The government is giving help for the benefit of the industry.

I have heard ever since I was a little boy that God helps only those who try to help themselves. You have got to put your relationship in order. You must stop quarreling as soon as possible. You must agree on the relationship between the planters and the centrals.

I would be very slow in giving my approval to any assistance to any section of the country where the centrals and the planters have not reached any definite settlement. I am not going to intervene in any way to decide the differences between centrals and planters until they reach a point where they cannot agree and then they say, “Let us submit this matter to the government and whatever decision the government hands down we shall respect.” Only on that condition will the government intervene in the settlement of questions that may have arisen between the centrals and planters.

The second problem that faces the industry is proper finance. Let me tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that this government under my administration has done more and has provided more funds for the sugar industry than for all other industries in the Philippines put together; and that can be proven by facts.

We are giving crop loans directly and through sugar centrals to all planters who can show that they are in earnest; that they are willing to work hard and to sacrifice. It will guarantee right now that no planter who is willing to work, to economize, to do his duty to himself and to the industry will never be short of funds.

But the government, with its limited resources, cannot risk millions of pesos to finance planters who obtain loans with the assurance that those loans will be invested in the industry, and, later on, spend this money on something else.

The government is going to deal with the planters and centrals strictly on a business basis. People who are able to comply with their commitments to the government except in cases beyond their control, when they cannot comply with their commitments, will always, I guarantee to all the people, receive the assistance of the government. The same is true with regard to centrals which have reached an understanding with their planters; centrals which can show that they can operate profitably under the circumstances; centrals which can show that they have planters who will be able to raise cane to support the operation of those centrals at a profit.

The government will go to the limit of its resources to help the sugar industry, but I want to tell you, ladies and gentlemen, that the government is not an inexhaustible reservoir of money or credit. I set up the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation with a definite end in view, and that is to assist the people to rehabilitate their business, their farms and industries, and to rebuild their homes. The money it loans is the people’s money and therefore cannot be squandered for the benefit of a few individuals. On matters of credit, when this government deals with the people’s money, there are no friends and no enemies. Every Filipino who is entitled to support, will be supported.

I have given definite instructions both to the National Bank and to the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation that credit given to sugar centrals must be on a business basis. Very much depends on the character and demonstrated ability or earnestness of the borrower. I would prefer lending a man without any security P50 or P100 or P200 million if his record in the past shows that he can be trusted and that he will spend that money to develop his farm, to giving P100 or P10 thousand to a man who provides security but whose conduct in the past shows that he will not meet his obligations when his obligations fall due. So, going back to my first statement, very much depends upon your own effort, your own character, your own earnestness and determination to put your own house in order.

With regard to the participation of the planters and the centrals, that is a matter for the centrals and planters to decide between themselves. The government cannot enact a law providing that the share should be on a 40-60 or 30-70 or 50-50 basis. That is a matter of contract. We cannot by law compel the owners of centrals to rehabilitate their centrals unless, on the basis of their contract with the planters, they believe they can make some profit out of their investment.

There have been many changes since the beginning of the war. Centrals that before the war could be built for four or five million pesos cannot now be rebuilt for less than ten million pesos. So, when a central decides to rehabilitate itself, it must make an estimate of the cost to achieve that rehabilitation. The owner should consider this cost against the estimated income of the central obtainable from its participation in the crops.

If prices were high, there would not be so much discussion over that matter because both centrals and planters would certainly get along very nicely with the prices, let us say, obtaining here soon after the liberation, when sugar was being sold at sixty, one hundred, one hundred and twenty, and up to two hundred pesos per picul. But now you are faced with low prices and a competitive market. The government is not in a position to guarantee to you a price. If you ask me today what will be the price for this year, I’d not be able to tell you. I don’t believe anyone could answer that question today.

We have in the world today an apparent low market for sugar, despite the fact that many sugar areas before the war are not now producing sugar. Many people will be led to suspect that some government action abroad has brought about these depressed sugar prices. The question is that there are many areas which were large consumers of sugar before the war but which now are not consuming sugar because they do not have money with which to pay for the sugar that they would have to buy. And while there is still a shortage of sugar all over the world, based on pre-war consumption figures, prices are low because of monetary difficulties. It is possible that with the approval of the Marshall Plan there might be a greater demand for sugar to be consumed in Europe and the other countries formerly occupied by the enemy or which are now in a depressed economic state. But we can only conjecture about that.

At the beginning of this season practically every producer of sugar in the Philippines believed that sugar prices would not go below P14 per picul because they based their estimate on the prevalent market prices in New York at the time. They did not anticipate nor could we anticipate the action taken by the American government to reduce the tariff on Cuban sugar, which was one of the main causes for the further decline of prices. The point I am trying to drive at is this: You have to make every effort possible to bring down the cost of production. Sugar is a commodity subject to competitive prices. The sugar industry in the Philippines can only be stabilized and its dominance secured, if you could bring your cost of production to a level where you could compete with sugar produced in countries similarly situated as ours.

For the next twenty-six years, you will have a preferred market in the United States. The quota in favor of Philippine sugar in the United States is a most valuable asset. We must hold on to that quota. Besides, if there is an opposition on our part, as far as the provisions of the London Sugar Agreement are concerned, if it should be to the interest of the Philippines to sign that agreement, we might denounce it at the close of every year. But the sugar quota in the United States of 850 thousand long tons must be maintained and it is the responsibility of the government to maintain that quota as long as possible.

This convention should deal with the problem of bringing down the cost of production. That can be accomplished, I am sure your experts will tell you, in many ways. I am a lay man with a little knowledge on this subject, but I have been so much interested in this matter that I have talked to many people about it, and I think that you can reduce the present cost of production by using more fertilizers, if the price of fertilizers could be brought down to a reasonable level.

In order to meet that requirement, the government is making effort to build a fertilizer plant in the Philippines. It will cost many millions of pesos, but the principal beneficiary will be the sugar industry. According to our present estimate, if we can carry out this program based on the development of hydro-electric power, we will be able to sell fertilizer, ammonium sulphate, in the Philippines, at a cost that will not be over P80 per ton.

My friends, let us not be over-optimistic. It will take a long time before we can set up this plant or finish its construction, even if we have all the money required to build it. It is going to cost us about $11 million. The fertilizer plant’s proposed capacity is 126,000 tons, which is about 20 per cent more than the amount of fertilizer which the sugar industry consumed before the war or which we imported from abroad.

We believe that if we can get the money this year, it will take us four years to finish that plant and to put it into production. I notice you heaving a sigh as if to say, “Well, that is too long.” Well, there is no other way of doing it, my friends. But the sooner we get started, the better it will be for us. It cannot be built sooner than that, for we will first have to develop the power. It will be necessary to build the fertilizer plant in Mindanao because we have a big hydro-electric power project there. The water power supplied by the Maria Cristina Falls will be able to produce it at a low cost and still permit us to make a profit, even if we should sell the power at half a cent per kilowatt hour.

The next thing that you will have to survey is the improvement of your seed. We have established the experiment farm in Negros for that purpose. I would like that farm to be the sugar planter’s farm of the Philippines. Come and cooperate with the people who are managing that experiment station. Bring your different seeds and ask the government to experiment on them. Let’s see if we can cross some seeds with others. Let us try to import seed from, abroad if we can, but let us develop our own varieties where they will be resistant to disease and at the same time yield the larger crop.

The third problem is that of diversification. I’d like to see every sugar planter plant the land that he allows to remain fallow every year with auxiliary crops; crops that will not only yield an income every year but also bring back fertility to his soil. Many people sneer at me because every time I have a chance to talk to farmers or economists, I talk about peanuts. There is a great market for peanuts. There are large areas in Negros that have not been planted to anything yet. You have the tractors. Why don’t you plant peanuts? The present quotation for peanuts is around $180 per ton. It is estimated that a piece of good land properly cultivated will produce about two and a half tons per hectare. And if you can grow peanuts in the proper way you will have an income from your peanut field that will be in excess of the income that you can get per hectare of cane that you have planted today. And peanut is not a crop that will require a large investment. It does not require any investment at all, having as you do already the agricultural implements needed for the production of that crop.

In other words, rotate your crops because peanuts will not only bring you an income but also enrich your soil.

The livestock: Sugar planters must not depend entirely on their sugar crop; they should also raise animals. There is now a great shortage of hogs and carabaos. In India and in many other parts of the world, there is a great abundance of cattle but they are not raised in big cattle ranches. Every farmer owns two or three, or four, or half a dozen cattle and he also owns two or three hogs and has a dozen or two of poultry layers. We are bringing in from India some goats that are good milk producers. We are bringing in good cattle from India—good for milk and beef and also for work. We have finally made our selection. We are trying to bring in a thousand heads of these cattle. We will be willing to farm them out to you gradually if you can show to us that you will take good care of them. They should be able to increase your income. You should not depend on sugar alone. And every peso that you can add to your income through these other activities will help your own sugar plantation not to be dependent on sugar entirely, because sugar depends on so many imponderables. And sometimes, it is much too risky for one man to place all his fortune on the sugar industry alone.

Your next problem is how to get credit: crop loans. We have not had a very happy result of our experiment to give crop loans to rice producers. The government is not Santa Claus. When the government lends a peso it expects that peso to be paid back and not reluctantly but willingly and gladly. That is not my money; it is not the money of Mr. Carmona here or Mr. Delfin Buencamino; it is the money of this country, the money of the people of the Philippines. And when you don’t pay what you owe to the National Bank, it is not the National Bank that you hurt but the people of the Philippines. My friends, don’t believe—don’t think—that I have anything against you people in the sugar industry. I am just taking advantage of this occasion to talk about that problem, which affects not only the sugar industry but also the rice, coconut, and many other industries. I will repeat what I said before.

The man who can show that he is a good farmer and who adheres strictly to his commitments or, at least, makes an effort to comply with them, will not have any difficulty in getting loans. Some people have complained to me that they don’t want the centrals to handle the loans to the planters. I have talked about that matter to people, in fact to several people: planters and sugar central operators. The sugar centrals would not want to have anything to do with them if they could help it. I have forced the centrals in many instances to assume that responsibility. Why? Everybody in the industry today is short of funds. They all want funds to rehabilitate their farms. How long do you think will it take us? It will take many months if not years for the Philippine National Bank or the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation to deal with each and every one of the planters all over the Philippines. You are too many; if it were a question of ten or fifteen or a hundred, or even two hundred, then we could deal directly with them. But we have to deal with thousands if not with tens of thousands.

The Bank cannot possibly consider in a few weeks’ time each of the loan applications submitted to it for consideration, with justice to itself and at the same time to the satisfaction of everybody. The complaint will recur.

Similar conditions existed even before the war. The planters had to wait for several months before their applications for loans were acted upon. If that was so before the war, when there were so many planters who no longer needed any financial assistance from the bank, how much worse would it be if we sought to deal directly with the individual planters? That is the main reason why I insisted that the centrals themselves grant these loans. This arrangement places the government in a better position, because we have the guarantee of the centrals for these loans in addition to that which the individual gives to the central for obtaining these loans. And, besides, who is better able to judge as to what planters should be helped and should not be helped, than the centrals? I expect, of course, the centrals to deal with this matter in accordance with this policy without compadrazgos , as they say, but on a purely business basis. And the centrals know who then-planters are. They know whether an individual planter is really working and can be trusted; they know how many tons of canes they will give in order to carry out the program. Therefore, they can stimulate production by increasing assistance to planters who are really willing and able to work. And those that are indifferent and are not going to work even if you give them money, do not deserve immediate aid.

There are many planters who complain that the centrals are not giving them the money that they want, for one reason or another. I will only be very happy to hear complaints submitted by individuals to the effect that centrals are not treating them properly. I promise you that those cases will be investigated and, if the centrals are not willing to give you the money, I am asking you to submit your applications directly to the bank for proper action. In other words, what we are trying to do is to expedite the proper grant of crop loans so that you will not come back to me and complain, “What is the use of these crop loans when the season is already over?”

With regard to reconstruction of sugar centrals, I believe everybody is agreed that we should consolidate sugar centrals if the consolidation is favorable from a purely economic motive. The operation of small sugar centrals will always prove to be expensive. Some planters object to the consolidation, claiming that the cane is going to suffer deterioration in its sucrose content if it is transported a long distance. I received a petition from the people of Kabangkalan and Isabela Centrals. They say, “We have to trans port our sugar over a distance of more than 70 kilometers and our cane depreciates in weight because during the transportation much of the water content of the cane evaporates.” “Well,” I told them, “if that is your only problem, it can be brought up before the board of directors of the Binalbagan and Isabela Sugar Centrals and I am sure that the directors will be reasonable about it. If you are worried about the loss of weight of your cane, I shall tell the Binalbagan Central to set up a weighing station somewhere around the area where the former central was located so that your cane may be weighed there everyday upon delivery.” In other words, those objections are not

fundamental.

What we are trying to bring about is the reduction of the cost of production per picul. And why are the planters interested in the achievement of that end? I believe that if the sugar centrals are able to make a large profit, they will be more than willing to increase the share of the planters in the crop. But when the sugar central is operating at a narrow margin of profit, as in the present case, the owners will not be in a good position to increase the share of the planters in the cane that they deliver to the centrals. The consolidation, therefore, will benefit not only the central but ultimately also the planters.

When sugar men are making 30 per cent or 40 per cent or 50 per cent on their investment, I believe the force of public opinion in the Philippines will be such that they will not be able very long to resist the demands of planters for greater participation in the crop. ( Applause .) But in the meantime, when the cost of production is also very high, when the amount of cane delivered to them is small, there will be no sugar central, with the possible exception of two or three, which will be able to pay dividends this year. It is very hard to talk about increasing participation until the centrals are actually receiving profits, in which case they should share those profits with the planters.

Those are my reasons for consolidation, and we promise to help centrals that are trying to consolidate. When the government believes that a war-damaged central should not be restored and that it is better for that central to consolidate with other centrals, there will be reluctance on the part of the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation or the National Bank to give money for the rehabilitation of just that one central.

We want to prove to you that the government under stands your problems; that we are discussing them continuously and with care; that the government is listening to all parties on this question; that we are giving attention not only to planters and centrals but also and particularly to the laborers working for you in the fields, whose working conditions I would like to see improved and whose wages I should like to see raised.

We are not neglecting the sugar industry. But don’t expect us to give you hundreds of millions of pesos, because we do not have that much to loan. We will give you what you reasonably need. This government is not going to give any money for the purpose of transferring ownership of a farm or a central to anybody, not that I don’t want to. As a matter of fact, I am desirous that the planters own the centrals if they can, but we just do not have any money to invest in buying such a large property from one man and transferring its ownership to another who does not have any money himself with which to pay the government for the reconstruction of that central. That may be done later on but now we do not have the funds with which to do it.

All the money that we have—and we do not have enough—must be spent for rebuilding and reconstruction; not for purchasing centrals or farms. And I know that the credit institutions of the government cannot be in a position to undertake this last. Besides, my friends, let me ask in frankness and directly to all of you: When the government financed the building of sugar centrals in the Philippines, was it not the government policy at the time that the stockholders of the centrals should be the planters themselves? Let us take, for example, the Talisay-Silay or the Bacolod-Murcia, or the Isabela. All these centrals were built for the benefit of the planters. They were going to be stockholders of those centrals. And then what happened? The same thing that happens everywhere in the world when you have to deal with human nature. The planters did not maintain their shares. When they needed money, they sold their shares in the open market and gradually there was a concentration of these shares in the hands of a few people.

Some planters want the government to give them money with which to buy a central and then additional money with which to reconstruct that central. They want to be the stockholders without supplying any capital except a mortgage on the property that they want, which, today, my friends, is not sufficient to pay for the cost of reconstruction in most areas because construction costs have increased tremendously.

Let us take, for example, Central Palma. I do not know how many hectares are involved in Central Palma but I think their quota is less than a hundred thousand piculs—is that correct? Hundred twenty thousand piculs. At present, the land that could produce that amount of sugar would not cost as much as the amount we would have to spend to buy the central or to build a bigger central to mill the cane coming from Kabangkalan, San Isidro, and Tanjay. It would cost probably eight or ten million pesos. There could not be enough security for that. And what will happen then? Gradually the planters will sell their shares to other people and after three or four or five years, may be sooner than that, we will find that the central is again owned by a few individuals rather than by the planters themselves.

This is a beautiful idea—make the planters owners of centrals. If I could propose the enactment of a law—which is probably unconstitutional—prohibiting the transfer of those shares to anyone else, then we might be able to achieve that. But so long as you permit the free transfer of the shares—and I don’t know of any law that can pre vent you from dealing with your own property as you please—I am afraid I will repeat that we are just chasing a “will o’ the wisp.” We want to do something but we will never succeed in doing it.

The only beneficiaries will be a few people who know how to save up money and gradually buy these shares or some big corporation organized for the purpose of buying control of the shares even to the extent of offering an exorbitant price in order to be able to control that central.

As far as the shares of the government in the sugar centrals are concerned, as in Bacolod-Murcia and Binalbagan, the government is not interested in remaining a stockholder in any central. When conditions are ripe and people have money with which to buy those shares, I am going to sell them to planters, so that they may be able to become shareholders in their company. But there again, I am telling you, they will buy those shares at a low price and very often they will turn around and sell them to whoever offers them a profit. While we deal with men who have their own interests to serve—and we cannot blame them—we will not be able to control any of these centrals in the hands of the planters themselves, especially during this time when every planter is in need of money.

If you, gentlemen, think that I am mistaken in that assumption, I should like you to appoint a committee to come to Malacañan to try to convince me that I am wrong. But I am basing my judgment on actual experience. The planters of Talisay, for example, I understand, want to rebuild that central, with themselves paying to the Talisay Sugar Central its present cost whatever it might be and the government providing the funds to pay for the central and to rebuild it. The stockholders are to be the owners of the land adjacent to that central and the central is to be operated by the planters themselves.

Well, my friends, I have studied that problem and I have always stumbled against this high wall: For whom am I doing it? Am I doing this for the planters? My answer is, at first glance, “yes”; but then I ask myself again, “How long will the planters retain the ownership of those shares? If they are valuable, many people will buy them. If they are not valuable, they are not worth any to the planters or to anybody else.” I want to be reasonable, my friends, and I want to suggest that you submit your suggestions or requests to the government if you yourselves are convinced that if you were the government you would approve those requests and applications.

In conventions of this nature, any member may propose a resolution for assistance; and if it is all right, regardless of the cost to the government or of whether the government can do it or not, it is readily approved. I believe that should some member of this convention propose that the government set aside a hundred million pesos in order to permit the farmers to rebuild and to rehabilitate their own farms, it would be approved without any dissenting vote. I would approve it myself if we had the money, but we do not have that hundred million pesos for that purpose, my friends.

I do not know how much we have given in crop loans but I am sure it is over P25,000,000 already, for sugar alone. I do not have the correct figures of the amount of money given for the rehabilitation of sugar centrals but I am sure that it is over P20,000,000 already. We are willing to give more money but give us security because the law does not permit us to give any money—any government money—without the proper security.

And my friends, don’t be angry with the government when it sues one of you—I don’t mean you, I mean anyone of the people whom you represent—for failure to comply with the commitments to the government. On the contrary, I believe that action by the bank should have the support of the sugar planters. You ought to discipline your own members. An association becomes truly useful when it is able to discipline its members in the name of the association and of the industry. That is incentive enough for everyone to provide you with credit.

But the statement is often made: “Investment in the sugar industry is the surest investment the government can make. Look at our past record. When the Wood-Forbes Mission came to the Philippines, it reported almost fifty-one million pesos of indebtedness of the sugar centrals and of the planters to the sugar centrals, and yet every cent of that indebtedness was later paid back.” And that is true, my friends, and I want to congratulate each and everyone of you for that admirable record. It took us some time to collect. There were many condonations of interest and many other adjustments but finally everyone was able to pay. Today, we are willing to give you crop loans, as I said before, but we do not have the millions that we had before the war which we could set aside for this purpose.

There are many other industries here that are waiting for assistance, too. So, if at present we decide that we are not going to give these loans in spite of your record and of the work that you are doing, don’t think that the government is doing that because it does not want to help the sugar industry.

Now, just one more question—that of prices. I have heard all sorts of criticisms against me because of the price of domestic sugar. I am blamed every time the price of domestic sugar goes down ten cents or twenty cents. I am blamed because I have released first 90,000 tons for domestic consumption. I had a meeting with sugar producers, both central owners and planters, in Baguio, and told them that 90,000 tons did not seem to be enough for local consumption because prices were so high (they were at the time selling at P28, then P30, and P32). I said, “My friends, how can I face the people of the Philippines—the consumers—since they tell me ‘What kind of government is this, which allows the sugar industry to sell to the United States sugar at P13 per picul and which compels us here, its own people, to pay P30 per picul?’ You allowed American consumers to buy sugar from you at P14 per picul and now at P12, yet you compel your own countrymen, the poor Filipinos who do not make enough to live on, to buy sugar at P22 or P18 per picul.” I told them, “How can I justify my attitude? Is there anyone among you,” I said, “who can tell me if I can hold on very much longer to that situation without a great protest on the part of the consumers in the Philippines?” They couldn’t answer. They said it was right. “Can anyone of you,” I asked, “justify our charging the Filipino consumer, who is a poor man, higher price for the sugar he needs for his livelihood—a much higher price than we are willing to sell it to American consumers in the United States?”

Well, they told me that could be done. “All right,” I said, “What is the remedy?” I made them a very strict proposal to the effect that I would fix the ceiling for sugar that would be equivalent to the export price plus transportation expenses. In other words, so that sugar in the Philippines will be sold at about the same price as sugar in the United States. They said that was right but difficult to enforce. They said that if you would just increase the quota for local consumption everything would be all right because the abundance of sugar for local consumption would bring about a reduction in prices. “Well,” I said, “All right, if that is how you feel about it, I will do it.” We discussed the amount to be allocated for local consumption and finally agreed that 150,000 would do. I said, “All right, and let us see what happens.” What happened? I fixed it at 150,000 tons and gradually the sugar prices went down.

As a matter of fact, the price went down even before I had fixed it at that amount; it had gone down from P32 to about P22 and later on to P18 per sack. And yet, when it went down to P18, everybody blamed it on the President. And this was suggested in a meeting I called with representatives of the industry! The same planters came to see me and told me that the situation was very injurious to them. So we again revised the estimate for local consumption and left it at 120,000 tons.

I don’t know if everybody is satisfied with that price now. In Negros it is P14; in Manila, I think it is still P18; in Cebu, P15.50. Well, we are charging our people here in Manila P18 per picul and selling it in the United States at about P12 per picul, and the sugar planters think that Roxas is against the sugar industry. We are getting a subsidy from the people of the Philippines—the consumers— and that is the amount of the differential in prices, for the benefit of the sugar industry. And that benefits every producer, not only the centrals but also the planters. I am permitting that to continue because I know that the planters and centrals have to rehabilitate themselves; they have to make enormous expenditures; they have to restore their farms; they have to buy new equipment, and so forth. It will help them. As I cannot give them a direct subsidy, I am permitting that situation to continue for a while. But, gentlemen, that is not to continue forever. When you will have produced your full quota or very nearly your full quota, you will find that local prices will approximate export prices very rapidly. And you cannot blame me for that; you have to admit that it is a natural consequence of the amount of sugar that you produce.

Gentlemen, why does that situation obtain? You sell your sugar in Manila at P14 and then the Chinese or some other dealer sells it at prices ranging from P25 to P36?

I do not know about the latest figures, but when I was in Baguio, I was told that centrifugal sugar was being sold in public markets at 60 centavos per kilo. I do not know what it is today; maybe from 40 to 60 centavos. Suppose it is 40 centavos. Sixty-three kilos at 40 centavos will amount to P25.20. Well, the dealer makes more out of the sugar industry than the central and the planter together. Who is to blame for it? You people. I say you and the centrals, and I cannot disguise my conviction as to that. I say you have no reason to complain because you are at fault.

Even before the war—and Mr. Coscolluela and Mr. Montelibano are witnesses to that—I asked repeatedly that you form a cooperative and distribute your own sugar so that you might be benefited by that differential in prices (Applause.) The trouble here is that whenever you cannot get something which you could get if you made some effort in that direction, you blame it on the government. I promise the sugar industry: If you form a strong co operative so that you can distribute your own sugar, the National Bank is going to pay the export price of that sugar upon surrender of the quedans of all the sugar in. a bonded warehouse so that the cooperative will have all the funds necessary to operate that agency. Now, of course, after you have sold your sugar, you can declare dividends in proportion to the amount of sugar surrendered by each planter or by each central. What is the difficulty about? Well, they tell me, “Why doesn’t the PRRA do it? The PRRA can pay us P18 per picul and let the PRRA sell it at whatever price it may.”

But listen, why should we take your chestnut out of the fire if you can do it yourself much better? You can do it. We will finance you. If you don’t know how to protect your own interests, you should not expect the government to do it. We cannot do it. If we did it, we would be involved in a lot of scandals and accusations of graft and so forth. You can do it yourselves and I trust you will take steps during this convention to organize that cooperative. There is enough profit in the differential between wholesale price and retail price to cover your losses or expenses that you may incur. We want a responsible management for that cooperative and I am sure that Mr. Carmona here, and if necessary the RFC, will pay its export price for the sugar. And you can adjust that and liquidate it after you have sold your sugar, provided it is in a bonded warehouse, upon the surrender of the receipt—of your quedans.

In that way we can finance it. You are going to get this differential which is equivalent to more than fifty per cent of the price of sugar. I am sure that if you did you could average the price of sugar today from P15 to P18 per picul, whereas, today you can receive only P12 or even less per picul. Now, that is a chance for you. Don’t expect everything from the government. Your government is willing to do everything for you but there is a limit to what it can do. There is your chance and you can give work to people who are cooperating with the industry, to distribute the sugar.

It does not mean that every planter will acquire a stall in the public market here and start to sell his sugar. It simply means that you will have a central depot here in Manila to sell to these tiendas and mercados and other places, in much the same way as we are selling rice. It does not need many people.

When I was in Baguio sugar was selling at P14 per picul. I thought that that was a good price. It seems that the sugar market in the United States has a tendency of going down. I cannot tell if that condition will end when the Marshall Plan goes into effect.

I have a proposal from some people to buy all exportable sugar in the Philippines at competitive prices plus a differential of one cent per pound for the cost of transportation. I will not reveal who they are; I am not free to reveal their identity. But a decision on your part must be made very soon—in a few days—and you must make an offer. The offer must be a competitive price and the most that they will pay you is a differential of one cent per pound. That will mean PI.40 per picul—more than what you might generally get on the basis of world market prices. They want to receive the offer from you. They are not offering anything. I am just giving you a side tip that they will probably give you the benefit of about one cent a pound more because of the difference in freight rate.

I would like the officers of this congress to get in touch with the sugar association for that purpose. All that I want you to do is to write me a letter saying, “We are willing to sell so many thousand tons of sugar at this price.” That is all, and then I will put you in touch with the representatives of the people who are interested.

My friends, I think I have talked longer than I had intended to. I wish to appeal to you for understanding of the position of your government. I should like you to realize that the government would be very, very happy to assist you in every way, but that there are limitations to what the government can do under the circumstances. The money that is now available to the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation for further loans is very limited. We have made other commitments. We are building public markets and waterworks and irrigation systems and other things that are equally important for agriculture as well as for the livelihood of the people.

I should like this Congress to make a definite proposal to the government, for example, with regard to livestock. We want to cooperate with you. We want to know you are the planters who would be willing to take care of poultry and of hogs and cattle and so forth, so that at the first available opportunity we might be able to farm them out. Those are the most important things. And these cattle that we are bringing in from India are very good work animals, too; better than the former ones that we imported. We cannot bring them in very large quantities because India also limits their exportation. I understand that this year the government of India will permit only about 1,000 head to go out from that country. We are willing to buy all of that.

We are paying a pretty high price for those cattle, but inasmuch as we don’t want to delay rehabilitation of the cattle industry here, we shall make a sacrifice and buy at the pretty high price. But these are breeding cattle and they are of the best breed. Our scientists in the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources have certified to me that these cattle have proved to be disease-resistant in the Philippines and they will thrive here very well.

With regard to the National Bank, my friends, my advice to you is to try to consider the National Bank as your friend and not as an enemy. Try to consider the National Bank as an agency of the government which is only too glad to cooperate with you. But don’t fill the air with gossip and complaints against the National Bank. Every man who goes to the National Bank and asks for a P200,000 loan but he cannot get all the P200,000 loan because he does not have enough security for it, and only gets about P100,000, he becomes an enemy of the bank and starts talking to all saying, “Well, the bank did not give me because I do not have political influence; I do not have friends here and there.” You can all ask Mr. Carmona if I ever talked to him to give a loan to any individual merely on the strength of personal friendship. He is here and he can bear witness to the fact that I have never told him, “Don’t give a loan to so and so because he voted against me in the past elections.” That is true, and I assure you that we will continue with that policy. As far as the bank is concerned, there is no friend and no political enemy and everybody and every loan must stand on their own merits.

My friends, I wish to end by saying that I am very grateful for your interest in the sugar industry. I should like to assure you that the government, too, is interested in the industry, and I expect that you will do everything you can in your deliberations to draw up a program which the government might be able to help in executing for the complete and progressive rehabilitation of the sugar industry. ( Applause .)

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.