Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the Parity Amendment to the Constitution (Extracts)

Opponents of parity, in a final effort to confuse the public mind on the eve of the vote on the constitutional amendment, have come forth with the proposal that as an alternative to parity, the Government borrow money from the World Reconstruction Bank, and undertake, with such borrowed money, the entire task of rehabilitation and reconstruction. I do not think that the Filipino people will take such a proposal with any great degree of seriousness. Nevertheless, I should like to explain carefully the false and casuistic nature of such a plan, if it is seriously suggested as an alternative to the master program of which the parity proposal is an essential part.

In the first place, the advocates of this proposed plan of borrowing from the World Bank, assume without question that the loan would be granted. In the second place, they would have you believe that such a loan could take the place of private capital, initiative, and enterprise. In the third place, they carefully pass over the fact that the parity proposal is not merely a means for getting capital into the Philippines, but is the keystone of an entire economic program, of which new investment capital is but a part, a program that would collapse without the approval of this amendment.

Rejection of this amendment will mean, first of all, the denunciation of the Executive Trade Agreement, and the loss of our free trade and preferential trade relations with the United States. It would mean, in the second place, the loss, or at least the indefinite delay, of a large and vital portion of private war damage payments. It would mean the end of the rehabilitation of the sugar industry, of the coconut oil industry, of the cordage industry, of the embroidery industry, of the pearl button industry, of the cigar and tobacco industries, and in a short time, the crippling of the coconut industry. It would mean the end of our hopes for an early end to all unemployment . . . it would mean the drying up of all major sources of government revenue, it would mean the blasting of all hopes for a progressive and steady increase of our present sources of government revenue. It would mean the destruction of our plans for an increasingly larger national income in the immediate months and years ahead.

And finally it would mean that we would be required to reexamine our essential relations with the United States. It would mean an end to the very special economic relations which we now have with that country, relations which are the pride and greatest asset of the Philippines, and the envy of the rest of the world.

We do not urge the approval of the constitutional amendment merely to induce capital to invest in the Philippines. Capital unaccompanied by any other ingredient would not meet ail our needs by any means. We need, in addition to capital, technological skills, and managerial know-how . . . the ability to make, to process, to manufacture, to package., and to market all the varied products which can be made from our natural resources. That scientific skill, background and experience will come here with American capital. It could not be induced to come here, in any amount, in any other possible way. Countries all over the world are bidding today for American technological knowledge and methods. We can get them free, accompanied with investment capital . . . by approving this amendment. Yet there are those who profess to be afraid of this capital and this scientific skill. They would rather prefer that we continue to have here an agricultural economy built around long hours of work at low pay . . . the typical colonial economy, whether in an independent country or not.

But let us for a moment return to the matter of the World Bank, and examine that proposal, entirely on its merits, without considering whether it is an adequate substitute for the entire parity program, which obviously it is not.

A leading opponent of parity, in a last and apparently desperate effort to impugn the sincerity of the Administration’s advocacy of the parity formula for rehabilitation has come up with the simple suggestion that instead of depending on American capital, the Government should borrow the necessary money from the World Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Bank. Of course this suggestion does not jibe with previous declarations by other opponents of parity that we do need American capital, but that the approval of the constitutional amendment is unnecessary to attract such capital. Nevertheless I should like to reply to this suggestion on its own merits.

It was the whole plan of a casuist and not of a sincere thinker. Every informed man knows that the World Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Bank has not yet begun to lend money, and probably will not be in a position to do so for a long, long time. There is a great debate going on among the principal supporters of this Bank as to the policy to be followed, whether its loans shall be political or strictly business. That policy must be determined before the Bank can begin to function. No one knows yet what conditions will be laid down by this Bank as a prerequisite for the granting of loans. No one knows what efforts will be required, what data will be required, what pledges will be required, what political support will be necessary before this Bank, so exemplary in principle and concept, can lend a nation like the Philippines any considerable amount of money.

The United States has subscribed one third of the capital of the Bank. The United States will have a powerful voice in the loans to be made. The International Bank is not a disembodied organ, acting independently of the nations which comprise its support, any more than the United Nations, itself, is. There are those here who say, why don’t we depend on the United Nations for our national defense? Even the most simple minded must know that the strength of the United Nations today is the strength of the United States, and of its allies; the great search in the world today is for a formula to reconcile the fundamental aims of the Great Powers, so as to give substantial support to the will of the United Nations. Without that formula and it has not yet been found . . . our security depends upon the United States. To depend for our security on the United Nations, would be to depend upon a vision of unity which we are all striving to attain, but which is still today a goal to be achieved, rather than a positive force in itself.

Every country in the world, with the exception of the United States itself, is looking for loans. Russia, Britian, France, Belgium, Poland, Czechoslovakia, China, Siam, Holland . . I could run through the whole list with but isolated exceptions. Why should we believe that we have any better chance than any other country to obtain any considerable share of the available loans?

To adjudicate between the applications of all these countries will take time. The natural disposition will be to lend money to deserving countries, but only to deserving countries which have no chance to rehabilitate themselves in any other way. Should we reject parity, would we stand a better chance to obtain a loan from the World Bank? Exactly the opposite is true. It will be said that we turned down a chance to obtain aid from private American enterprise. Only one bloc of countries might cheer our action. That group would be pleased to see us rebuff American private enterprise. But I doubt whether we would want to depend on that group for either financial support or our security.

Moreover, with a capital of ten billion dollars, that Bank, facing applications from forty or fifty countries, could not make more than a small contribution to what we think are our needs.

We must remember that although our land was bitterly devastated by war—as devastated as any in the world—our prospects today are better than those of most other similarly war-torn lands. Alone of all the war-ravaged countries of the world, our currency is a standard by which all the other currencies are measured. We have no lack of foreign exchange. Every peso in circulation has its counterpart in the United States Treasury of the strongest foreign exchange the world knows today. All other nations of the world must scrimp and save and devise plans for obtaining dollar exchange. For day-to-day operations we have all that we need. Not a single one of our neighbors in this part of the world can make such a statement. Very few nations in the Orient can boast of such economic strength. Almost all the nations of the world are beset with frantic worry over markets for their exports and over compensation for their exports. We have an exclusively privileged position in the only 100 per cent cash market on earth—the United States. Whereas other nations of the world must seek loans with which to pay for the means of economic reconstruction and even of sustenance, we receive a full and relatively unimpeded flow of most of our import necessities. Whereas most of the nations of the earth face starvation and famine, our warehouses are glutted with flour and we face no critical emergency in our supply of rice. Our physical equipment, our houses, our machinery are largely in ruins; but we are far ahead of most of the other devastated areas of the earth. Any application for loans from the World Bank which we would make would necessarily receive far less urgent attention than applications from other more hard-pressed nations.

We must remember also that our favorable situation today is largely a result of our favored position with regard to the United States—the vast amounts of money that America has spent and is spending, the assurance that more will be spent, and our preferential trade relations with the United States. Should that situation cease to exist, as it might through the rejection of this amendment, our entire economic picture would undergo a drastic change. We cannot separate the parity proposal from the rest of the economic aids which the United States is giving us. It is a part of the plan; it is an essential part of the plan. If we reject it, we reject the entire plan and must submit another in its place. The proposal to obtain a loan from the World Bank would be but a feeble gesture, when what we need are giant efforts. I do not dismiss by any means the proposal to secure such a loan. That has long been under consideration by the Government. When the necessary information becomes available and the bank’s operations are clarified, we might very well seek a loan from that organization. But to pin all our hopes for economic reconstruction and development on that organization is to lean on a weak reed indeed. It is to abandon a ship in favor of a raft whose seaworthiness has yet to be proved, when the only reason for abandoning the ship is unreasoning fear.

Of course the whole notion of the loan from the World Bank in place of encouraging private enterprise is a defeatist one. I do not like to see the Government get too deeply involved in business. I believe firmly that the Government which governs least governs best. Naturally the definition of what is “least” in any particular situation varies from time to time. Democracy is based upon free enterprise and a great and expanding middle class. Government ownership of all business is both economically unsound and socially undesirable. I distrust bureaucracy. Bureaucracy must be tolerated only insofar as it is absolutely essential. I would not like to see this country turn to state socialism. Dictatorship lies in that direction. Only under a system of free enterprise does the individual remain free, can labor aspire to legitimate strength, and the Government remain the arbiter of the destinies of the people rather than their ruler.

I consider primary initiative by the Government in economic matters financially unsound. Private enterprise can take risks, can speculate and venture. The Government, properly conducted, cannot. Public money is a public trust. No speculation with such money is permissible.

I should like to discuss at this point and in this connection the mining industry. During the course of the public debate on the constitutional amendment, reference to natural resources always brought to the minds of the people our vast mineral resources. Opponents of the amendment have consistently drawn a dramatic picture of the Americans robbing us of the riches which, in the form of minerals, abound in our good earth. This has been a telling argument. Many sincere fears have been expressed. Yet there has been little attempt to examine this question factually on the basis of information readily available. I say to you today that the mining industry furnishes one of the most impelling reasons for the approval of the constitutional amendment. Opponents of this amendment suggest that the Government should exploit our mineral resources, instead of permitting private foreign capital to do so. I disagree with that statement I should like to explain why. My reasons are based on facts and not on fears.

Between 1907 and 1941, P583,000,000 worth of minerals were extracted in the Philippines. Of that total P512,000,000 worth of minerals were extracted in the 10 years between 1932 and 1941. In all the other years only P70,000,000 worth of minerals were produced in the Philippines. The reason was simple. No capital was invested. Between 1929 and 1941, 615 mining companies were organized in the Philippines with a total capitalization of P215,000,000. In 1941 only 79 of those were in operation with a total capitalization of P133,000,000. More than P100,000,000 in capitalization was lost because those mining ventures did not prove sound—almost 50 per cent of the entire total. Of the 79 mining companies in operation, only 57 were in actual production. Of those 57, only 23 paid dividends—only 23 out of 615 companies. Is that a business for the Government to undertake? The Government would not be justified in risking public funds in such a highly speculative business. Mining is the most speculative business in the world. The mining industry of the world reports that out of 100 mines, 85 fail, go into bankruptcy and cease to exist. It is an axiom in the mining industry that it takes one gold mine to start another. In other words, a huge accumulation of capital must be risked in order to establish one profitable mine. Yet, every mine operation, whether it succeeds or it fails, brings work to the people, builds houses and pays taxes. In 1941, the mining industry in the Philippines had net earnings of approximately P100,000,000. Thirty per cent of that amount went for labor, 8 per cent to the Government in the form of taxes, and 54 per cent went for supplies, materials, and construction. Only 8 per cent was net profit. I ask you, is it not worthwhile to invite foreign capital to develop our mines and our mineral resources? If only 8 per cent of the total income is profit and 92 per cent is distributed to the people and to the Government, the Government itself surely should not undertake such an operation. In any specific mining venture, the Government would stand a better than 5 to 1 chance of losing its investment. That is not a proper use of government funds. It would be much preferable to have private enterprise risk and speculate in the hope of profit, paying in every case a proper dividend to the Government and a major share of whatever expenditures are made to the people. That is the genius of the free enterprise system. That is the heart of economic democracy.

In all the 283 years of which we have record in the Philippines claims have been filed to 1,709,000 hectares of potential mining lands out of the 29,000,000 hectares of land area in the Philippines. Out of the total of 1,709,000 hectares to which claims have been filed, only 4,000 hectares have ever been developed. Our mineral resources have scarcely been scratched. We have millions and millions of tons of iron, chromite, manganese, copper, and possibly petroleum in the earth. We have only begun to develop these resources. But to develop them will take not only millions but hundreds of millions of pesos, perhaps billions. This money cannot come from the Government; it must be attracted from outside our borders. I can think of no better capital than American capital for this purpose.

The mining industry is one of the best for economic development. Our coal and iron and chromite and manganese and copper can be utilized for our own industrialization, as well as exported overseas. But they cannot be used for this purpose if they are still in the earth, if the mines are undeveloped, if there are no means of transportation to bring the ores to the factories and mills. We do not wish these minerals to be used merely to meet the requirements of the industries of other nations. We wish to use them ourselves to industrialize and to manufacture. This can only be done in an expanding and dynamic economy, the kind of economy we propose to build here, provided the parity amendment is approved.

In 1941, 51,000 people were employed in the mining industry. Today there are less than 4,000. Even these 4,000 are employed in the expectation of major capital investment. The mining industry will not be revived unless great capital investments are made. Our generation will pass away, and the next generation . . . and still our mineral deposits will be undeveloped, just as they have been in the past 400 years. The only way by which this heritage of ours can bring happiness to any is through its early development and use.

I have referred in the past to the possibility that new scientific developments may modify completely the value of our mineral resources. Already scientists have found a way of changing lead into gold. As yet that process is not commercially feasible; but should a commercial way be found for such transmutation, our gold deposits will become virtually worthless, as even gold, itself, will change radically in value. The same can be said of petroleum and of coal.

Once upon a time many centuries ago, deposits of magnetized iron found in few areas of the earth were considered the most precious deposits of metal in the world. Then a method was developed to magnetize iron artificially. Now magnetic iron is no more valuable than any other kind of iron.

I have cited these examples to indicate how essential it is for us to develop our natural resources today and not leave the job to a future generation. I venture to say that future generations will not bless us if we shirk our responsibilities today. The mining industry requires great investments. It will pay great dividends, but the greatest dividends will be to our people rather than to the investors.

Because of our very proper concern in the preservation of our natural resources, the Government, even under American sovereignty, or rather especially under American sovereignty, established a great group of legal safeguards to protect the people’s interests in their resources. Thus mineral rights are never transferred outright, but are merely leased for a maximum of 25 years. The Government may at any time expropriate them, or modify the lease, or increase the royalties. Vast areas of lands believed to possess natural mineral resources are reserved to the Government and cannot be utilized by private interests except as permitted by Congress or by the President. There are hundreds of other legal safeguards. I will not enumerate them all. I will only say that your Government has now and will always have, I hope, full freedom of action to protect the essential interests of the nation.

To develop and utilize fully our present mineral resources, it will take us 100 years, with parity, according to mining experts. I should judge that without parity, we will have only scratched the surface in 5,000 years.

Let us take another industry, the lumber industry. Before the war we were producing lumber at the rate of 1,639,000 board feet daily. Today we are producing 150,000,000 board feet annually. We have in our commercial forest reserves today 550 billion board feet of timber. At the pre-war rate of production, it would take 904 years to exhaust our present resources, without even figuring new timber growth or replanting. Experts tell me that at the pre-war rate of production, it will take 30 years to produce all the lumber that we need today, this minute, for the rehabilitation of our destroyed homes and factories . . . and remember that we are only producing today at 30 per cent of our pre-war rate. The inference is obvious. We must expand, even multiply many times our present production rate if we would catch up with our needs. There is not the remotest chance that we will exhaust our resources. We have much more than enough. Let us then invite American capital and know-how to help us use these God-given resources for our present needs, and to develop new industries utilizing those resources. If we refuse to do that, we break faith with the Divine Providence who gave us such potential riches. We would starve in the midst of plenty, like the biblical jackass which starved to death between two equal stacks of hay.

There are those who say that should we permit foreign capital to be invested in the Philippines, this capital will control the country. They say that such capital will exert undue influence on the Government and will sway the votes of the people. How little faith such a view shows in democracy. It has been our experience, our own experience, that our people vote their own interests and convictions, regardless of their employment. It has been shown elsewhere in the world that an enlightened people, a prosperous people, and an industrialized people is the most alert and vigorous in the defense of the people’s rights. A backward and truly agricultural land is always the least politically enlightened, the least free, the least democratic.

We have today our one big chance to convert our native land into an ideal democracy. Our one chance is to grow and industrialize to reach the first rank of the nations of the world. We have this chance because of the heroism we displayed in the war; we have this chance because we have demonstrated by deed our love for freedom. We have earned the gratitude of mankind. We can and will show tomorrow that we deserve that gratitude by plunging courageously ahead in the great tasks we face.

NOTE.—This address was delivered from a platform on Plaza Miranda fronting the Quiapo Church, Manila. The President had just finished this speech when a hand grenade was thrown in his direction and landed a scant three yards from his seat. Senator, Avelino, president of the Senate, who was standing nearby kicked it away; and General Castañeda gave it another boot and it fell to the ground.

The grenade was intended for the President; but fortunately for him, it already rolled under the platform when it exploded, unluckily wounding the Malacañan official photographer and killing one person in the audience.

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.