Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines Before the Philippine Veterans Legion in Convention

[Delivered on March 6, 1948]

ADDRESS BEFORE THE PHILIPPINE VETERANS LEGION IN CONVENTION

Mr.TOASTMASTER, GENERAL DUQUE, GENERAL PERALTA, MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE VETERANS LEGION:

I am never so happy as when I address a group of veterans, veterans such as you, who have risked your lives in the defense of the integrity of your country and to uphold the principles of liberty and democracy, which must survive if we want peace and happiness in this land of ours and in the world at large.

This country of ours owes a great debt of gratitude to the Filipino veterans, both those who belonged to the USAFFE and those who joined the forces of resistance and, later, of liberation, for the service they rendered in the war effort. It is not only the feat of arms which you showed during the war that entitles you to that recognition. And it is not only the Philippines that ought to be grateful for your services. Every land where men who value freedom, democracy, and the right to speak, to think, and to worship God as they please, owes you gratitude, because in the last war you fought for these freedoms everywhere. With your support freedom has been and will ever be preserved, I trust, not only for certain peoples but for all mankind.

I am very happy to have participated in the ceremony that took place here this noon, bringing about the indissoluble union of the guerrillas and the USAFFE veterans. This end has been my earnest wish since liberation.

The responsibilities and the problems that veterans have to face are tremendous. They require the strong and proven shoulders of everyone of us to carry them out.

I have often heard the charge that not enough is being done to show the people the government’s recognition of the great service rendered by the guerrillas and those who supported them in their fight. I wish you, my friends, to pause and ponder over the foundation upon which those charges are based.

It is true that we have not been able to pay off the debt of gratitude that your people owe you. I do not believe that we will ever be able to pay in full measure such recognition. It could not be. It cannot be paid in dollars and cents. It cannot be paid by merely placing your leaders in important positions in the government. They can only be paid in one indefinitive way, that is, by making this country endure as a free country, so that the principles for which you fought and for which many of our comrades died, may endure and that our land may be preserved forever for our children and our grandchildren. (Applause.)

The United States government has tried to do its best to give recognition to the service of our armed forces including our guerrillas. I realize, and I know, that in the recognition of guerrillas some injustices have been committed, I have heard the charges and in some cases I found some ground for the charge that some units or members of some units who are not as worthy have been recognized in preference to other units or members of these units who were more deserving.

On the other hand, some units which should have been recognized have not been recognized, while others which do not deserve recognition have been given that recognition.

I do not believe that anyone of you holds in his own hands the proofs that can substantiate these charges. It is a matter of personal appreciation of trust. I am convinced that the authorities of the American Army whose responsibility has been to weigh these evidences and to make decisions have, I believe, in the great majority of cases, acted with an inner desire to be fan- and just. I have submitted some special cases to the U. S. Army for reexamination and I endeavor to determine the truth concerning some guerrilla organizations that have not yet been recognized. I found that the U. S. Army had diligently undertaken this new examination.

The trouble, my friends, is, if we must speak frankly, that soon after liberation some leaders asked for recognition of the limited number of members of their units. I do not make a specific charge. I am merely giving expression to my impression. For example, units that, during the period of occupation, counted only with a limited number of active members, presented long rosters when the time for recognition came.

However, in these cases, I am not qualified to testify as to the falsity of the new rosters that had been submitted because while I was in contact with practically all the important units, I was not informed exactly of the number of members of each one of them.

I am doing, and I am willing to do everything on my part, to insure that justice is done to those who are entitled to it. I have never refused to listen to or help guerrilla organizations that have come to me in quest of support. I have given my own personal testimonies in cases within my knowledge. But in others I have simply submitted their requests to the U. S. Army for proper consideration. I wish to assure the members of this convention that the matter of recognition of guerrillas is a very difficult problem. I understand that about 1,300,000 men have been asking for recognition as members of different guerrilla units.

Every man recognized by the U. S. Army is entitled to certain gratuities and allowances and the U. S. Army, of course, has been trying to estimate the number of these men and the amount of funds needed for the payment of their gratuities and allowances. In the very nature of things, the Army men are required to be very careful in this matter of recognition. In one sense many of us are to blame for some of the mistakes that have been committed because of our urgent demand for recognition.

In other words, without properly appreciating the importance and the difficulties of the problem, we have been insisting on prompt and immediate recognition. That was not difficult in Mindanao and the Visayas because the units which were operating there were in constant contact, at least in 1944, with the Southwest Pacific Command, and during that time, long before liberation, they had already submitted their complete rosters to the headquarters of the Supreme Command. In the case of Luzon guerrillas, however, in the first place there was no recognized leader or commander of guerrillas or resistance forces on the island of Luzon. This was most unfortunate. I did everything in my power to bring about consolidation of command. I chose our unfortunate comrade, a great soldier, one of the men who sacrificed most during the war, General Vicente Lim, who might at an opportune time be recognized as the commander of all Luzon guerrillas. Governor Chioco is here who can testify to that fact, because General Lim advised me when he accepted that commission that he would appoint Governor Chioco as his chief of staff. Very unfortunately, General Lim was arrested and executed before the time came for his coming out as the active commander.

After that it was impossible to bring about the unification of command and there was, therefore, no responsible leader in Luzon that could certify to the U. S. Army as to the membership and the identity of the various guerrilla units operating on the island. Because of that, many difficulties have arisen in the matter of recognition of guerrillas. But the U. S. Army is still endeavoring to correct mistakes and to make recognition even of individuals who can show that they actively participated in the resistance movement but have not as yet been recognized as members of units to which recognition has already been given.

As far as the Veterans Office of the U. S. Army in the Philippines is concerned, I believe that we are very fortunate that we have now as its head a fine soldier, a fine gentleman, and a good friend of Filipinos and of the veterans, General Lovett. (Long applause.) He is showing every sympathy to people who are deserving of assistance. He is accelerating settlement of cases brought before his office, especially in connection with pensions to be received by the widows and orphans of our dead soldiers.

As regards your case, I should like to remind you that the government of this Republic is only about a year and a half old. When the Republic was inaugurated, our government was operating at a great fiscal debt. We had only about P17,000,000 of income as against almost P300,000,000 of expenditure. It was not unwillingness on the part of those in the government to help you that was the cause of the meager expression of your government’s gratitude that has been extended to you in the form of gratuities and pensions. The reason was the state of its finances.

The year before last, when we were still facing a deficit of P100 000,000, we already enacted the GI Bill of Rights and organized the Philippine Veterans Board, and I placed at the head of that board one of the most patriotic and gallant soldiers that participated in the resistance movement, a member of the USAFFE and a distinguished guerrilla leader, General Peralta. (Prolonged applause.)

After his appointment, he came to me for instructions and I remember that my instructions were contained in these terms: “Do the best you can for the veterans, especially for the needy women and children”, and he has managed the affairs of his office in accordance with those instructions.

At the beginning we thought that P2,000,000 would be enough to discharge the obligations of the government to the widows and orphans of disabled veterans; to pay for gratuities and educational and other privileges extended to veterans. We set aside that appropriation, and later it was found that it was very deficient. It was increased last year. This time the appropriation was P5,000,000. It was not sufficient. It was about two months ago, upon the request of the PVB, that I, utilizing my emergency powers, increased the appropriation by P7,000,000, so that today we are spending P12,000,000 to take care temporarily of the widows and orphans of the dead soldiers and of the disabled veterans needing assistance until my friend, General Lovett, can take care of them. (Applause.)

Your government would like to do more for you, especially for those who need assistance. We must not neglect the widows and orphans of our dead soldiers. If it is a matter of priority, the widows and orphans of our dead soldiers should be granted priority over all. It is a debt that we owe our dead comrades that we must not neglect the loved ones they have left.

As for the veterans themselves, those who have, like us, the good fortune of surviving the war, I repeat, we approved the GI Bill of Rights.

Today, we are paying pensions to about 12,000 widows and orphans. We have paid tuition fees for about 10,000 veterans who are now studying in schools. If more veterans want to go to school, I shall provide the necessary funds for a larger number. (Prolonged applause.)

There is now pending, in the U. S. Congress, a piece of legislation which is of vital importance to the veterans, the Rogers Bill. This bill was drafted by an inter-departmental committee appointed by President Truman upon my request. Its provisions are probably well-known to you. I shall mention just a few.

This bill provides for hospitalization service for all recognized veterans. The program is to build here four or five hospitals. As recommended by the committee, these hospitals will have a total bed capacity of around 3,000. I have suggested that one hospital be built in Baguio for recuperation, another in the neighborhood of Manila, another in the Visayas, and the fourth one in Mindanao.

It has been agreed with the inter-departmental committee—and the bill as drafted permits that arrangement— that these hospitals will be built with U. S. funds. They will be equipped with funds that may be provided by the U. S. Congress to the Philippine government. The Philippine government will operate these hospitals, with the understanding that it will accept for accommodation and treatment in these hospitals, veterans certified as entitled to this right by the office of the U. S. Veterans Administration, and that the government of the United States is to pay to the government of the Philippines a certain sum per day for each veteran treated. The understanding also provides that in case facilities are in excess of the requirements of the veterans, the Philippine government may admit civilian patients in order to help the government support these hospitals and maintain them at a high standard of operation.

The bill also provides for the extension of the time within which insurance claims may be filed. I am happy to state, however, that just a few days ago I learned that the Congress of the United States has already passed a law authorizing acceptance of insurance claims for another period of two years, beyond the period for merely provided by the law.

The bill has not yet been approved by the President of the United States. He is, of course, at liberty to take such action as he may decide on that case, but I am quite certain—if I know the attitude of President Truman towards the Filipino veterans as I do—that he will give that bill his executive approval.

As regards educational benefits, the bill provides for the grant of educational benefits to recognized veterans of the Philippines who may seek to enroll in colleges and universities and high schools. They will be paid in pesos the same amount that is now being paid in dollars to American veterans. This difference, of course, arouses some opposition on the part of Filipino veterans. Why should there be any distinction? We fought under the same flag, and risked human lives of the same kind. We should be entitled to the same benefit. ( Applause.)

My friends, educational benefits, however, are measured in accordance with reasonable costs prevailing in a locality. In other words, if the tuition fees charged in the United States, for example, amount to $100 a year and tuition fees in the Philippines amount to $200, it is not reasonable for us to require the United States to give us an allowance of $200.

With regard to subsistence, the law of the United States gives the unmarried veteran an allowance of $90 a month. In other words, in addition to the tuition, the veterans bureau pays a student who is a veteran $90 a month for living expenses. In the Philippines we are asking for the same right. We shall try to secure the same amount, if it is possible and if it is just, that is being paid to veterans in the United States. But I believe that the least that we are entitled to ask is that we be paid in pesos what the U. S. government pays in dollars in the United States. The distinction is not that in the United States they are paying American veterans. The distinction lies in that these payments are made in the case of American veterans in the United States, and in the case of Filipino veterans in the Philippines, where costs are not the same. We are going to do all that we can. The government itself has been doing and is doing everything it can to insure the passage of the Rogers Bill with such amendments as the Veterans Association here might desire to submit to the Congress for consideration. The President of the U. S. sympathizes fully with the interests of the veterans of the Philippines. I am sure that we can count on the unstinted cooperation of the President of the United States and I know that we can count on the cooperation of a very large number of the leaders of Congress on both the Republican and Democratic sides. I know we can count on the cooperation of the United States Army and the veterans organizations in the United States and of the many friends that we have there who are convinced that this is a matter of right and justice to the Filipino veterans.

I know we can count on the active support and cooperation of one of the most distinguished statesmen I have ever met, a very good and loyal friend of the Filipinos, the man who represents the U. S. Government in the Philippines, Ambassador Emmet O’Neal. (Long applause.)

I do not see any problem or difficulty in the approval of this legislation insofar as it relates to the terms of the bill itself. The only danger lies in the possibility that the present Congress of the U. S.—working fullblast to solve very intricate, urgent and most important domestic and world problems—may not have the time and the opportunity to vote on this measure. But we are going to exert every effort to get that bill out of committee and have it presented on the floor of Congress.

I doubt that once the bill reaches the floor of Congress, there will be any dissenting votes against it because I know that the American people and their representatives are fair and just.

It is not a matter of generosity; it is a matter of justice. And our experience with the U. S. government indicates that it will do justice to those who deserve it and will always do justice to the people of the Philippines who have proven their loyalty to and friendship for the great people of America during the most critical period of her recent history. (Long applause.)

I understand that the Veterans Organization is sending a mission to the United States to express the views of this organization on the provisions of the bill and to urge its passage as soon as possible. I am in full agreement with the sending of this mission. In my capacity both as a private citizen and as a public man, I wish to assure that mission of my earnest and most interested support not only in the work it may undertake there but in helping them meet the expenses. (Long applause.)

I can, therefore, say that you can place the mission in the hands of the men of your choice and I trust that you will select able and well-informed men to go to America to plead our cause. You can leave this body in their hands and you can be assured of the support of your government.

In our endeavor to help guerrillas in accordance with laws that we have enacted and with laws that I have recommended to Congress, your government has been trying to extend to you a varied number of benefits including priority in jobs. Many who wanted jobs but have not been able to obtain them are, of course, disappointed. But there are many who have obtained jobs merely because they are veterans. I want to ask General Peralta, in your presence, how many guerrillas he has been able to place in the government service. More than four thousand. Four thousand new employees of the government taken from your ranks.

The government cannot absorb all the guerrillas who are out of job. Your number hundreds of thousands. But we give priority to the people who come to us first and every department of the government has definite instructions to follow the law, in the choice of new personnel of the government, to give preference or priority to guerrillas.

In many instances we have appointed guerrillas without civil service qualifications in preference to civil service eligibles, when these guerrillas can otherwise show that they are qualified for the position. We have also given guerrillas priority to acquire public lands to develop our forest resources. Many guerrillas have joined together, pooled their funds, and have obtained lumber concessions in different parts of the country. Most of these organizations have been successful in their operations. We have not only given them the concessions; we have also provided them with credit facilities. Many of them are now established in business and are enjoying good returns.

Next is the problem of the Japanese lands in Davao. I hear much contradictory information concerning the occurrences there. One thing I will insist on the guerrillas who are claiming priority on Japanese lands in Davao—they must be screened. There are many there now who, according to the testimony of guerrilla leaders themselves, call themselves guerrillas but are neither recognized guerrillas nor members of what might be called a deserving guerrilla unit.

Today, every immigrant that goes to Davao from the northern islands calls himself a guerrilla when he arrives there. He has no papers in many instances; yet he demands the right to occupy a portion of the Japanese land. Well, probably we have about 20 applicants for every little parcel of land. I appealed to the leaders of the guerrillas in Davao and I instructed General Peralta to go to Davao to undertake a complete screening of the members of the different organizations who claim to be guerrillas or otherwise deserving of the benefits provided by law.

Now, I am recommending to the Congress the approval of an act to permit the government to subdivide these lands into reasonably large areas—I say large to indicate an area that is considered sufficient to support with its produce the needs of a family. I am projecting a division of hemp lands into parcels of between eight and ten hectares. That is not ordinarily an area which one man can work properly, but we have to provide for the growth of the man’s family, and if we are to solve this problem of land ownership, we might as well consider an area sufficient for a man to live decently with a wife and several children. As soon as that bill is passed, or rather in anticipation of its passage, we are already surveying lands in Davao, as you all know.

But in the meantime, I wish to ask responsible guerrilla leaders and the members of their organizations in Davao most earnestly to see to it that those plantations are taken care of. Those plantations will be given to you—will be sold to you, and the prices will be their assessed value before the war. This is the recommendation that I am making to the Congress. ( Applause .)

You will be given a certain number of years within which to pay for this land. Here is your chance to show that the government’s generosity is properly and duly recognized. You have to perform your obligation to the government. Once you acquire this land you have to take proper care of it. The government and the whole nation have some stake in that land. The hemp industry is one of the most important industries and we want it to survive. We do not want to distribute these lands among men who are not going to take care of the plantations and thereby cause the destruction of this industry. Hemp is the only product, we might say, of which we have a virtual monopoly all over the world. Let us maintain that monopoly.

The production of hemp in the Philippines today is only about 50 per cent of the pre-war production and the chances are that the production will decrease. The reasons are obvious. First, big portions of Japanese hemp lands are plowed under and planted to food crops. Second, there was big over-stripping soon after liberation; people just cut the plants and stripped them without regard to the future of the plantations. They wanted to get as much money as possible in the shortest time from the plantation, and then after stripping a piece of land, they would move to another piece and repeat the same thing.

We have to rehabilitate the industry and this can only be done with the loyal and intelligent cooperation of the guerrillas who will ultimately own those lands. You do not need haste in acquiring those lands. You occupy them. You will be recognized as the people entitled to purchase them from the government. Meantime, you are going to be asked to pay a reasonable rental for those lands, just sufficient to pay the property tax.

The same is true of the coconut plantations. All these lands will be subdivided and sold to you. What else do you want? You complain against the delay. It is very hard to secure the services of surveyors in the Philippines today. We do not have enough of them. While we are surveying the lands that you are occupying, we are engaging hundreds of surveyors to survey open public lands to take care of other people who want to settle and acquire new land belonging to the government. Have patience. There is no injury done to you. Nobody would disturb you in the possession of the land, and I want you to report to me any case of discrimination or unfairness or refusal on the part of the NAFCO to obey my policy and instructions. (Applause.)

Insofar as the policy is concerned, it is no longer a controversial matter. I have announced the policy; Congress has implemented it with necessary legislation. But the actual surveying of these lands and their distribution to the different occupants will necessarily take some time.

Right here, in the City of Manila, the government purchased several hectares of land formerly belonging to the Church. They are here in the city occupied by people who want to have the right to purchase these lands from the government. We are doing the best we can. We are expediting the survey of these lands. It will take several months for us to complete the survey. We have already completed the survey of Baclaran and Parañaque, and sales are now being made there.

We are going to undertake the survey of the Ana Sarmiento and the De Guia estates. When surveying the lands, we find that there are occupants even on the roads, and when we ask these people to clear off the roads so that we can open them again for the benefit of those who also wish to buy the lands, they refuse and say that the government is cruel. We cannot please everybody.

You know, just the other day I received a very long letter from a quite intelligent man, judging from the way he wrote it. He complained against the building of a concrete road on España extension and damned the government for it. He said, “This is proof that the government only wants to help or protect the big, the wealthy people who go in automobiles or other vehicles. But for us who have to walk barefooted, the construction of the cement road compels us not to be able to cross the street,” (Laughter and applause) “because the hot cement in the middle of the day burns our feet.”

And so, my friends in Davao, there is no cause for needless worry and anxiety. Those lands will be distributed among you. Give us time to do it in an orderly way. Let me announce another thing: In addition to the distribution of this land, the government will soon start on a new hemp plantation to replace those that have been destroyed or have become idle. We are going to plant about 10,000 hectares near the penal colony. Anyone who wants to come and take a small parcel of that plantation will be given an opportunity to do so. (Applause.)

Well, my friends, I am not going to take more of your time to inform you of the things that the government is trying to do for your benefit. But there is one thing you can be sure of: If there is anything that I can do for the veterans’ organization or for any individual veteran, I shall be very happy to do it.

With regard to guerrilla currency, in a few days I am going to submit to the Congress all the records and my final recommendation on the redemption of guerrilla currency. My recommendation will embrace not only the emergency currency issued by the Philippine Government during the initial period of the war and before the enemy occupation. All registered guerrilla currency will be recognized as valid and will be redeemed at the rate which the Congress will fix.

We have now P30,000,000 at the disposal of the government for the redemption of that currency. The total that we have registered, properly known as guerrilla currency, amounts to about P90,000,000. In other words, unless the Congress should provide more funds for the purpose—and that does not seem possible these days—guerrilla currency will be redeemed at the rate of 33 1/3 per cent. I cannot guarantee that exact rate. It may be two or three per cent more or two or three per cent less.

In connection with this matter, I have been informed that veterans who have been receiving deductions in terms of the face value of guerrilla currency that they had accepted during the occupation as part payment of their salary, suffer a deduction of P100 from their pay checks. I have been receiving complaints from guerrillas that it is not fair to charge them 100 per cent of the face value of the currency they received, since its purchasing power was certainly less—very much less—than its present purchasing power, while on the other hand, the government is redeeming guerrilla currency at 33 1/3 per cent. I found reasonableness in this argument and with the cooperation of General Peralta I have prepared a memorandum which I submitted to the head of the American military authorities through the U. S. Ambassador to the Philippines. I hope and trust that the U. S. Army will realize the justice of this complaint and that something will be done to settle this controversy.

There are many other things I should like to talk to you about, but I don’t believe that they have any importance today. I know that many of my guerrilla friends have been doubting whether I have changed my objectives or my principles in issuing the Amnesty Proclamation. I am not going to defend that proclamation here, beyond telling you that I have not changed my principles or my objectives. I did what I thought was for the good, the permanent good, of the Philippines.

I did not attempt to do favor to a man or to a group of men. I did what I thought was right and conducive to the country’s peace, happiness and well-being. There have been differences of opinion concerning that matter and those differences, I trust, in the course of time, will become less and less acute. I did what I thought was my duty to my country in accordance with my conscience. I have not been influenced by anyone; I consulted no one before issuing the Amnesty Proclamation, and I included the so-called economic collaborators.

I understand that many guerrillas were very angry because I included economic collaborators, and I did so, for three reasons. First, under the doctrine laid down by our Supreme Court, it is impossible to obtain a judgment of conviction against any economic collaborator. The Supreme Court says that under our laws, before you can convict a man for economic collaboration, you must prove first that the material sold to the Japanese not only was a material that could be used in the war but had to be something that the Japanese actually used in the war. Secondly, it must be proved that the material he was selling was going to be used for war purposes. Now, are we going to spend money and time trying these cases, when we know before hand that conviction would be impossible?

Thirdly, some accused of economic collaboration have already been acquitted by the court. I knew these men and if any collaborator was going to be condemned, some of these people would have merited conviction for economic collaboration. I was not willing to place this country in a position where poor men accused of collaboration who could not defend themselves properly were going to be convicted, when others who were more guilty have already been acquitted by the court.

Those are my reasons. If I made a mistake, I trust my people and my country will forgive me for that reason. But I thought I was doing something just and fair. These persons, although they are no longer going to be accused before the courts, are going to suffer penalty that will be more severe than any other punishment the courts of this country can impose upon them. The people know who they are (Applause), and the people very seldom forget.

Besides, we have a very stiff war profits tax law. These taxes reach a rate of around 95 per cent of the profits which a man may have obtained during the war. I trust that if you know of any man who made money during the war, especially when he was disloyal to his country, you will report the case to the proper authorities, and I assure you that that man will not enjoy the fruits of his profit. That is my defense. I want you to weigh it in your mind.

Some of our friends have also insisted, and I do not know if any guerrillas have supported the idea, that if we give amnesty to political and economic collaborators, we should give amnesty to everyone accused of collaboration, and my friends and fellow-guerrillas, Senator Pendatun and Mr. Atienza and others—I am not sure about Atienza— have sustained that view. I respect their opinion, but I did not include the others, and I will explain to you for the first time. This is my first public explanation of that fact. My refusal to include these other people is because I want to exclude people who have been disloyal to us to the extent of bearing arms against the Commonwealth— against our country—and the allied nations; of having acted as spies, especially when their activities resulted in the death and execution or torture of our fellow-countrymen.

I want to obtain the conviction of these people who went to Malabon, Navotas, Pasay, and many other places and pointed to the Japanese one by one the people whom they believed to be members of the resistance movement. I cannot pardon those men; I do not believe you want to pardon them; I don’t believe that guerrillas here want to excuse or pardon men in the pay of the enemy who, willingly and voluntarily, accompanied the Japanese forces seeking to arrest members of the resistance movement, or who denounced them to the Japanese, when the denunciation brought about their arrest and eventual execution. I cannot pardon the men who brought about the arrest of General Lim or the arrest and execution of Colonel Ozamiz and a thousand other Filipinos in the resistance movement who suffered because of the intervention and disloyalty of these men. Now, they say, “Under whose orders did they act?” If there is anyone who can prove that these people—these spies and informers—acted under the orders of anyone who has been covered by the amnesty, I assure you he will be prosecuted because that fact will remove him from the shield of amnesty.

And so, my friends, I wish to congratulate each and everyone of you and the different guerrilla organizations which you represent for the union that you have organized. I wish to preserve that union. I should like you to discuss more problems outside of your immediate economic interest. This country needs urgently today, and certainly more so in the future, the spirit of rebellion against injustice that had inspired guerrillas to take up arms and fight during the occupation. This government needs the cooperation of everyone, especially members of this union in the maintenance of peace and order in this country. The government expects you to support its activities in this direction. Your sacrifices and the great sacrifices of our dead comrades will have been in vain if we cannot, today and in the days to come, insure for our people a better life, more opportunities, more justice, and the maximum amount of individual liberty for which all of you fought during the dark days of the occupation. That is your duty. The fight is over. You have found that you won the battle of arms. We have got to see to it that the principles for which you have fought are actually implanted and permanently established in this country, whose integrity you fought to maintain. And that is my message and appeal to you.

I do not want all of you to become politicians; I do not think it fruitful. As a matter of fact, I believe politics as a profession is the worst invention of the brain of man. But in a democracy, every citizen must be a politician and politics is his most important business. If it is true that in a democracy it is the people who organize and form and decide questions of government, what could be a more important business for any people of this country? But don’t be in a hurry to become candidates for senator and representative. I wish to assure you that it is easier to organize a battalion than to be a candidate for the House of Representatives or for the Senate. You have in me a man who sympathizes deeply with your aspirations, but I wish to warn you that politics is a hardboiled business proposition, and that it is not a mere matter of counting heads.

Our party, as well as any other party, does not decide upon candidates for personal consideration, because he or she is a friend of the leader of that party. Every party will select a candidate whom it believes has the best chances of winning.

If you want to be a candidate and General Peralta comes to my office and tells me, “So and So wishes to become a candidate in his province, So and So wants to be elected representative, or So and So wants to be candidate for senator,” I always tell him that I am happy they want to be candidates. The next thing for them to do is to prove to me and to the other leaders of the party that if they are candidates they can be elected. Then they will have our support.

But I want to tell you, my friends, more guerrillas are taking an active part by occupying important positions in the government. I am doing my best to help veterans, and every time there is an important post or vacancy of some importance, I ask General Peralta, “Who is your candidate for that position?” (Applause.) And if he can give me a candidate with the necessary qualifications, generally he comes down from my office laughing, very happy that I have given it to him.

Well, my friends, I wish you all Godspeed. Have faith in your own selves; have faith in your cause; have faith in your government; and lastly, I want you also to have faith in the sense of justice of the great people of the United States.

NOTE.—This address before the 3rd convention of the Legion was timely in that it dissected one by one the gripes of the Veterans who were becoming more and more critical of what they believed to be government indifference to them. The President reminded them of the Filipino GI Bill of Rights in Republic Act No. 65 approved October 18, 1946. He also mentioned the plan to hospitalize sick veterans which, as a result of continuous negotiations, eventually became a reality when the 80th American Congress enacted U. S. Public Law 865 in 1949 appropriating P45 million as grant to aid the Philippines build and equip hospitals. Another step taken by the Government to help the veterans was the passage of Republic Act No. 369 which set aside P68 million for the redemption of guerrilla scrips and the emergency currency issued in the Visayas and in Mindanao before these regions were occupied by the Japanese.

At this moment the Japanese lands in Davao that the veterans want to occupy are being subdivided into lots, and it is now the policy to give preference to ex-soldiers and ex-guerrillas in the distribution of these lots.

It was in this convention that the two rival groups of veterans—the Philippine Legion and the Philippine Veterans Legion— merged together under the latter name, for which step the President expressed satisfaction.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.