Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines Before a Convention of Lawyers

[Delivered on May 18, 1947]

CHAIRMAN, FELLOW LAWYERS:

As I rise to respond to the call of the chair to address this convention, I must say in jest that this assemblage looks more like a bankers’ convention than a lawyers’ convention. That is the impression I gather as I gaze upon the members of this profession not only because of the outward manifestation of hopefulness which you carry but because of the look of seriousness and earnestness that I see in your faces.

It seems that lawyers all over the Philippines recognize that something should be done by them not only to raise the standard of their noble profession but to give their unstinted cooperation to the government in order to preserve and safeguard at all times not only the independence of the judiciary but the improvement of the administration of justice.

As a lawyer, probably as much as President of the Philippines, I have felt that, too. During these days when the world is in a state of flux, when concepts of justice and of equity flicker in the brains of men, and because people try to secure that which they believe are their rights as members of the legal profession, I feel that I have a great duty to perform.

We are confronted not only with the material and physical problems that face a war-torn country, but likewise, with a need for rededicating our own selves to the realm of ethics and morals. There has been a great degeneration in the moral fiber of the people, although this is true not only in our country but probably in every other country in the world.

When the administration of justice is very deeply and directly concerned with the maintenance of those inhibitions alone can we protect the moral fiber, the moral concept of the nation? Humanity at large is bewildered.

Peoples of all nations are happy because the war has ended. They are happy because we have peace. But in their eagerness for the enjoyment of those precious and priceless things which peace alone can give, they look around and find that there is no peace. Every country in the world is trying to answer this very vital question which the people of all parts of the world are asking, “What have we won?”

Equity and fairness in dealing among men as well as in dealing among nations, are concepts which seem to have no place in the minds of men called upon to decide this vital question. All the nations in international conferences speak of rights as they see without opening their eyes to the rights claimed by other peoples. There does not seem to be a regard for the absolute necessity that so long as the international situation is such, and so long as no organization has yet been established to enforce justice, men must be guided by fairness and equity. But we must see every side of the situation in order that conflicts may be avoided, and that is true in the social systems of the different nations of the world, particularly in our own.

Labor clamors for justice. Capital seeks justice. The members of different professions demand justice. Some professional men want certain things. The engineers and others demand other things. Even some members of that profession, called chemical engineers, the number of the members of which I ignore, demand attention. I only know there is not a single university that grants that degree in the Philippines, yet I notice that a law has been passed by Congress requiring that no factory in the Philippines may be opened, established or operated unless they employ one chemical engineer. I fear there are not enough chemical engineers in the Philippines to go around. An industrial chemist is not enough, whatever might be the difference between the chemical engineer and the industrial chemist. Sugar centrals before the war used to employ ordinary chemists or industrial chemists, but this condition will not obtain when the law is approved. Sugar centrals, all factories—soap factories or even candle factories—cannot be opened unless they employ chemical engineers.

It seems that every group of men is no longer satisfied with the general principles of fairness and equity but the members thereof must band themselves together in order to insure the protection of that particular group.

When I advocated some months ago before a gathering of lawyers the need of organizing a bar association, I had in mind not the protection of the particular selfish interests of lawyers as a group. I had in mind the creation of an organization representing the lawyers of the Philippines which should be instrumental in helping the government establish in this country a judicial system of which we can all be proud, an organization that will really insure the selection of the ablest and most honest members of the bar for positions in the judiciary, an organization which the government might call on to consult on these important appointments, an organization representative enough and composed of high-minded, honest, fearless men who can be relied upon by the government and by me particularly for sound and good advice.

I proposed that association in order that we might establish a body that can cooperate with the Supreme Court in taking disciplinary action against members of the profession, members that may dishonor rather than glorify that profession. I proposed that organization because I desire the cooperation of every lawyer to see to it that all the courts in this country, not only the high courts, not only the courts of first instance, but also the municipal courts and justice of the peace courts as well, might at all times be instruments of justice in the defense of the rights guaranteed by the Constitution to every individual member and might be respected by the people of the different communities which they serve.

I have been told that it is impossible for the lawyers in the Philippines to organize a national bar association unless they are compelled or coerced to do so by law. I do not believe it. As a lawyer, I would be the first one to rebel against any proposal to compel me to join an association if I thought I should not join that association. Compulsory methods are hateful to the members of our profession.

I believe there is enough civic spirit and patriotism and intelligence in every lawyer in the Philippines to realize without compulsion the need for the organization of a national bar association—a bar association not only national in name but national in truth—with which all the members of the profession, practically all members of the profession, may be affiliated. That can be done, and will be done.

There are many things that interest the lawyers of this country, which very soon will attract your attention. I wish to tell you this confidentially, my friends, and when I say confidentially I mean confidentially, because I wish to take members of the profession into my confidence on this matter. Every time Secretary Ozaeta approaches me with the information that there is a vacancy in the judiciary, I do not eat for three days. I know how difficult it is to decide in the selection of men who should be appointed. I assure you that I do my best to select the best men that I know for these positions. But I may make mistakes, probably I have already made some mistakes.

When a man from the provinces is proposed for appointment as a judge, I cannot go to the individual lawyers and ask them what they think of the appointment. Sometimes, I do not even know the man. I have to content myself with gathering information about him. I ask the judge of first instance and find that in many cases his information is very superficial because his stay in the given province has not been long enough for him to be acquainted with the private life or the professional ability of the nominee. I inquire about the nominee from lawyers. However, in this case I find a number of conflicting pieces of information about the man. If a friend is asked, he is all for him. He praises him to the skies. If the man asked happens to be a man who has his own ambition or a man belonging to the opposite party, or is not very friendly to that particular individual, I find his information so diametrically opposite to that supplied by friends of the nominee that I find myself asking the question whether men are so devoid of the power of observation that an exceptionally intelligent and honest man living with his friends can at the same time be a saint and a devil.

But if we have a national bar association, I could come to your committee and ask you about any given individual, and if the members of the committee do not know him, they can communicate with the chapters in the different provinces and obtain from them the consensus of opinion among the members of the legal profession concerning that individual and his particular ability. There is one thing, however, that I will not do. I am not going to ask the representatives of the national bar association to initiate appointments. I mean, I do not want the national committee of the bar association to come to me in case vacancies exist, with a long list of candidates for those vacancies. I would be very happy to have a list of lawyers who, in the opinion of the national committee, may be considered for appointment; but I would very much dislike to have the members of the national committee act to promote the appointment of particular friends or associates of these different men. I have thought of that rule for the protection of the members of the bar association’s national committee themselves; otherwise, we may find that members of the national committee will be prompted by requests of particular lawyers from some parts of the country asking for appointment to one position or another and before long we will find members of the national bar association committee having as their main function merely to obtain appointment for the men who are their friends or more intimate associates as members of the judiciary.

I should like to have an arrangement whereby I can go to members of the bar association and ask their opinion on appointments that I am considering. I want their answers, “yes” or “no”. Their opinion may not be always definitive to me but I assure you their opinion will have great weight in my judgment.

With regard to the civil code, I desire to say that we are doing everything we can to expedite the work of the committee. I have received assurances at this time that the work will be undertaken with earnestness and efficiency. I have received assurances that early next year, I am going to receive a report of the committee on the civil code. I should like to have an organization of the bar association to which I could indorse copies of this proposed civil code and give it ample time to distribute the copies among its members and receive suggestions thereon so that it will be of really great importance to everyone when it is submitted to Congress for consideration. The code will then carry with it the name and the representation of the members of the national bar association of the Philippines.

You may have to create several committees to study the different portions of this code. I should like you to devote some hours to that matter. The government is eager to receive your cooperation. As a matter of fact, I believe your cooperation is absolutely necessary. I do not believe it will be radically different from the present civil code; but there will be some important changes and I trust that the government, particularly the Congress, will be able to count with the cooperation of the members of the national bar association.

And now, my friends, I wish to ask you when you return to your different provinces to feel that, as private practitioners, you are not only in theory but in fact part and parcel of the judicial system of the Philippines. Under the law and jurisprudence, lawyers are officers of the court. That should not only be a theory but it should be a concept accepted by every lawyer together with a consciousness of the obligations that his relations with the courts impose upon him.

And, I should like you to communicate with the Department of Justice anything that in your opinion may help to improve the judicial system of the Philippines. That imposes upon you the duty of formulating complaints, of giving information to the Department of Justice and the courts of first instance as to the conduct of each judge and the other officers of the court and of the provincial fiscal, whether they are acting with absolute loyalty to their offices and are doing their duty as the law expects them to do their duty, or whether they are neglecting those duties and in some cases flagrantly violating them. That, at least, the government and your people have the right to expect from you.

But in the performance of that duty, I trust that the lawyers of the Philippines will so establish their prestige for honest dealing with the government in this matter that it may be justified in giving full importance, full credit and importance, to information received from lawyers from different parts of the country.

I trust you will not be swayed by selfish considerations, by partisan motives, or motives of purely personal nature. You are, after all, together with the judges and other officers of the country the tripod upon which is established the administration of justice in our country. Justice, to me, is something more than the moral intangible concept of giving to everyone his due and punishing those that are guilty of violating the law. Justice must be pure. It must be practical. It must be fair. It must be prompt. It must be fierce. A mere lip service to justice does not establish justice in our land. Justice must take form; it must take substance. Justice must affect the life of every individual.

And I assure you that this country would be an important, a better country even during these critical days, if we have a bar and courts of justice that are fearless, that cannot be swayed from duty by political or other extraneous influence, if we have a fearless bar composed of members of the profession that think first of duty to God and to Country before their own particular interest.

And so, my friends, I invite you to take stock of your responsibilities to your profession, to your country, and to your fellow-citizens. We cannot do that alone. Discharge the obligations that we owe to our people under the courts and under the laws. We need your cooperation. We must have your cooperation.

I trust that each one in his own heart make the pledge to do his duty in that respect as we do.

I thank you.

NOTE.—In this address he reiterated what he said on October 12 1946 before the Philippine Bar Association that such an organization is justified if it can become “a useful and organic adjunct to the judicial system”. See No. 37.

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.