“THE FUTURE PROSPERITY AND HAPPINESS OF THIS COUNTRY DEPENDS ON FREE ENTERPRISE IN A FREE WORLD” Address to the Rotary Club of Manila

GENTLEMEN OF THE ROTARY CLUB:

In the Philippines these days, after almost four years of oppression, the people are anxious to express their views on public matters. Every businessman has his economic philosophy. Every businessman has his own ideas as to how to cure the ailments of the world. It will take some time before we can clear the atmosphere and set ourselves to work on the task of national reconstruction. The rebuilding of the national economy on the ruins of war will be a long process. I shall endeavor this noon to share with you my thoughts regarding the solution of the problems we shall meet with in our common endeavor to place our economy on a sound foundation.

This country is in many respects economically prostrate. The destruction wrought by the war is greater and more extensive than many of us are willing to admit. The present situation demands special treatment. The productive systems of many nations of the world have been destroyed. World trade is just in the early beginnings of restoration. We have problems of production, of transportation, of communication, of distribution . . . problems affecting money, problems affecting credit, and problems which affect directly the lives of millions of human beings.

The United Nations Organization with its several agencies has tried to clear a way for an intelligent solution of some of those problems. There is an organization, which deals with international trade and international investment, and another organization, which deals with the monetary situation. There is an organization which deals with exchange rates, and another which deals with transportation and communication in an effort to restore as soon as possible the facilities for production, distribution, and exchange of commodities.

In the Philippines, we are doing our part to establish conditions, which will facilitate not only the restoration of our pre-war economy, but also the expansion of that economy. The Government by itself cannot change the situation. The Government can only create conditions that will facilitate production and distribution of wealth. The Government can only give assistance to create and otherwise provide stimulation of productive enterprise. Under our democratic philosophy, our Government is basically opposed to artificial control of the process of production and distribution. I am definitely opposed to government interference in the process of production and distribution. It is my conviction that the future prosperity and happiness of this country depend on free enterprise in a free world.

There is, however, a sense of disappointment and discouragement pervading the businessman of this country. There are many questions of fundamental importance that are not yet settled. The man interested in the sugar industry cannot start rehabilitating that industry until he knows that preferential trade between the Philippines and the United States will be approved. The man who wants to build a factory or to engage in the business of general merchandising desires, before he makes the investment, to be accurately informed of the conditions under which he will operate. I trust, however, that after the 11th day of next March, when the plebiscite on the parity amendment is held, whatever be the result, uncertainty in the minds of men in industry and in business will be eliminated and that by then they will know what they can expect from conditions here in the Philippines. By the way, I know definitely, positively, that the parity amendment will pass by a majority vote.

I have been disturbed recently by statements made by businessmen and neo-economists who argue against free trade with the United States. And I have been disturbed not because I fear that their statements, their campaign against the parity amendment will sway the people to their side. I am disturbed because of the impression that they create among people who are not fully informed on the subject. The free trade between the Philippines and the United States was imposed by the United States. I do not believe it is necessary for this audience to be enlightened on that policy. The United States is not interested in carrying on preferential trade with the Philippines. The American market is not dependent in any way on the continuation of Philippine trade with that country. On the contrary, free trade between the United States and the Philippines implies a substantial subsidy to our producers. Products dependent upon the preferential market of the United States enjoy a subsidy, the total value of which is certainly a great deal more than the duty which American products are relieved from paying. The contention that free trade with the United States is favorable to America because American products enter the Philippines free of duty and that it is therefore insisted on by the United States is malicious. American products today are probably the only products obtainable by us in the Philippines. There is hardly any competition against these products offered by exporters of any country in the world.

It is because free trade is beneficial to the Philippines that I am supporting the Executive Agreement with the United States. Free trade is absolutely necessary for the Philippines during this period of reconstruction. If we do not have preferential trade with the United States to offer to investors and capitalists, the first industry that will be disrupted is the sugar industry. This industry employs 200,000 people. It is this industry that pays a substantial percentage of our government revenues, and supports many other industries. And it would disappear at a time when we are not ready to replace that industry. I have heard economists here say that this country can never be industrialized so long as American products enter the Philippines free of duty, and that the industrialization of the Philippines will be effected as soon as free trade relations with the United States are terminated. I cannot see any possible reason to justify that allegation. The assertion that free trade with the United States would prevent the establishment of industries here because our industries cannot compete with those of the United States does not seem to hold any validity in the light of recent international developments. The old classical economic philosophy of international distribution of trade and specialization of production among the different countries of the world has been revived and is now being followed and accepted by every nation of the world. Protection through tariff imposition is not the only way of protection. Such protection in fact is a toll, a subsidy, and that subsidy is paid by the consumer. Classical philosophy maintains a principle that in the world economy the nation that is best fitted to produce a certain commodity should be the nation that should produce that commodity. There is room; there is opportunity for all nations of the world to participate in this building up of a new free economy for the whole world. Some economists, among them Doctor Klein, make a few exceptions to this principle of international distribution of labor, saying that science has made such fast advances that even dirt and dust are today being used as raw materials for the manufacture of commodities that can supply the essential needs of man. The idea of synthetic production of such commodities, while scientifically possible, is gradually being abandoned in many respects because of the higher cost of production. Only totalitarian nations will continue to adhere to that philosophy because of the exhaustion of their natural resources or because of their inability to provide themselves with exchange with which to buy the raw materials they need. Free trade between the Philippines and the United States for eight years substantially as it was before the war and trade for a 20-year period thereafter on the basis of declining quota or increasing tariff impositions, is not a scheme or device formulated by the American Congress for the purpose of tying up the Philippine economy with the American economy. It is merely a device that will grant us a transitional period during which we shall be able to adjust our economy to conditions upon the expiration of preferential trade with the United States. I am surprised to see that men who before our independence believed it would be disastrous for this country to lose preferential trade with the United States, are the same men who accepted independence but now are opposing free trade. Just what kind of argument that is, I am at a loss to understand.

The next argument against free trade and the Executive Agreement that has been given wide circulation here is that in the Executive Agreement the Philippines agrees to maintain the present legal exchange rate between the peso and the dollar, that is, a ratio of one to two. It is argued that it would be harmful to the national economy because it would prevent the country from changing its monetary system even if we should find such a change expedient. In the first place, there is no nation in the world that has a stable currency. Our commitment in the Trade Agreement concerning our monetary system is not substantially different from the commitment made by this country when it adhered to the Bretton Woods Agreement concerning the International Monetary Fund. As you all know, the Bretton Woods Agreement was approved unanimously by the Philippine Senate before the last election. Practically every nation of the world that is a member of the United Nations Organization, not excepting Russia, is a party to the Bretton Woods Agreement. Every signatory to this Agreement has bound itself not to change the monetary value of its currency. The exchange rate adopted was the rate that prevailed in the markets of the world two months before the conclusion of this Agreement. And there is a provision in that Agreement that no nation shall permit a fluctuation in the exchange rate of its currency beyond ten per cent. That may be done from time to time without consulting the authorities managing the monetary agreement, but in no case can the change in value of the exchange rate be more than a total of ten per cent of the original parity rate. In other words, even without the commitment of our Government binding ourselves to maintain the present legal exchange rate between the peso and the dollar, we would still be bound by the Bretton Woods Agreement to the extent of at least 90 per cent of the parity value of the peso to the dollar. But the reason why this provision was inserted in the Executive Agreement, I must state again, was not an imposition by the United States for the purpose of deriving advantages in the Philippines. That provision is there because it is a part of the rehabilitation program formulated for the Philippines by the Congress of the United States, after consultation with the representatives of the Philippine Government. Today, international capital, because of the disrupted condition of the world, is very rare. Today, no investor will go into a country to risk his capital if he is not certain of the stability of the monetary system of that country. Today, no man will set up a factory or engage in commerce with any nation of the world unless he knows that whatever profits he may derive from those operations he can convert into dollars at a reasonable rate of exchange and send them to the United States.

The same is true with regard to prospective investors in the Philippines. American capitalists before the war invested large amounts just to be certain that there would be a free flow of money between the United States and the Philippines, that there would be no controls and interferences. The second objective of the American capitalist is that he wants to be sure that every two pesos he makes in the Philippines he can convert into a dollar and send it back home. That provision, therefore, is part of the program to induce capital investments here in this country.

But the question will be asked, “Why should we tie ourselves to the dollar?” Practically every nation of the world today wants to tie up its currency with the American dollar. The sterling block exists and efforts are made to strengthen it. But it is said, “If America devaluates its, currency, our currency would accordingly be devaluated.” That is true, but there is no chance for America to devaluate its currency within a foreseeable future because America is a signatory to the Bretton Woods Agreement and has agreed, as we have agreed, not to change its monetary system or the exchange value of the American dollar. In addition, I may say there is nothing in the Executive Agreement which would prevent the Philippines from presenting a claim for a just rate of compensation for our Government in the unlikely event of a devaluation of the American dollar. It is only because it is very easy to bring home to the masses of our people the fact that this is an imposition by the United States and yet no explanation is made of the circumstances why that provision was inserted, that I am disturbed by the way the campaign for parity has been waged.

My friends, the problems of the Philippines are of our own creation because we lack faith and confidence in our own selves and in our fellowmen. We have forgotten our friends very frequently, friends that have come here not only to feed us but also to give us our liberty. We are even capable of imagining evil motives in them. I am not among those who believe that whatever America does or decides for the Philippines is good, but I am one of those who believe that America will never ask the Philippines to do anything which America does not believe sincerely would be for the best interest of the Philippines. And I am one of those who believe that America will never force the Philippines to agree to something which we are convinced would be injurious to the interest of our nation.

What country in the world today, I should like to ask (and I do not except the United States), can offer more attractive prospects to capital, honest capital, for investment other than the Philippines? Our political condition is stable. Constitutional democracy is functioning here. Constitutional processes are in operation. We have had an election. This is truly a government that is democratic not only in form but in spirit and in fact. It is a government that does not intend to obstruct the efforts, the legitimate efforts, of businessmen. I should like to create among businessmen in the Philippines absolute confidence in the interest the Government has in their welfare. I should like businessmen in the Philippines to look upon the Government as their friend. The Government is going to create all the facilities needed for profitable enterprise in this country. We have created the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation with an initial capital of P300,000,000, to provide credit for the rehabilitation of our old industries and even for the construction of residential houses. I wish to assure you that I will not encourage the expenditure of this capital on doubtful projects. I will have every cent of that rehabilitation money put to work. I will endeavor to get out of their hiding places all the money stored up by private individuals in their trunks today. We are going to issue short term, low-price redeemable bonds in order to induce the poorest Filipino to invest his savings in these bonds. I anticipate that before long the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation will have enough money and enough resources to operate on a capital of more than one billion pesos. That is an enormous amount of money if properly used for productive enterprise.

If you add to that the expenditures for carrying on the ordinary government services and for public works amounting to P250,000,000 a year; if you add to that a hundred million dollars worth of surplus property, the procurement cost of which amounts to $637,000,000, which will be left here and sold to the public at the most reasonable prices, and for the purpose of providing equipment and other facilities to people who want to engage in production or distribution; if you add to that the ships which will be transferred to us by the United States within the next few weeks, 49 merchant ships for operation by our own operators; when you add to that about 83 ships which will be transferred to us, some of them adapted to commercial use; when you add to that the P240,000,000 which will be paid to the Philippine Government from the War Damage Commission for the purpose of rebuilding and restoring government buildings; when you add to that the P800,000,000 which will be paid for war damage; when you realize that the United States is helping this country in many other ways like providing the Philippine Army not only with arms and ammunition but with supplies and equipment, with uniforms and shoes and even food supplies (as a matter of fact, the United States Congress in its last session appropriated $18,000,000 to be used for the purchase of supplies and other equipment for the Philippine Army which it may need and are not obtainable from the stock files of the United States Army); when you realize that the Government of the United States is going to help us in establishing here aeronautical and navigation facilities and is going to spend many millions of dollars for our airport and other air facilities; when the United States will carry on a well-conceived program of education—we are sending 500 students a year to the United States―and is going to open fishery and other trade schools at its own expense; when the United States has expressed its willingness to help us solve the budgetary requirements of this country for a period of five years; when you realize that the United States Army and the United States Navy are going to establish bases in the Philippines and will spend millions of dollars in the Philippines for the construction of those facilities, for the building of bridges and for the purchase of materials and supplies,—you will readily see, my friends, that this country has a tremendous future.

Before the war, all the assessed value of properties in the Philippines was only about P2,400,000,000. That includes government and church property. For war damage payments alone and some other proceeds to be paid by the American Government, we will actually receive Pl,500,000,000. When you add the loans that we are going to obtain from the United States, we will have a total that will exceed substantially the total value of private properties in the Philippines before the war. The continued operation of the United States Army and Navy, as far as international payments are concerned, will bring to the Philippines a great industrial prosperity, possibly the greatest we can hope to have. I anticipate that the American Army and Navy, during their stay here in the Philippines, will spend around $200,000,000 a year―money that will remain in this country. While we shall derive material benefits from this expenditure, we also shall derive something better―security for our nation. Time will not permit me to discuss all this before you, but I should like you businessmen, especially Filipino businessmen, to try to form your opinions on this question and to advocate whatever you feel is right for your country’s well-being. Your apparent indifference to these matters weakens our efforts not only in the reconstruction of this country but more particularly in the development here of an enthusiastic support of the basic things without which this country will sink deeper into economic depression.

I will ask you businessmen, including Americans, to speak your mind on the question. I know Americans are afraid to express their views on this question because they fear that such views may be branded as biased. I assure you, my American friends, that there is enough good sense in this country and our thinking public has enough confidence in the honesty of purpose of our old American associates here to be able to consider their views without bias. But more particularly I should like businessmen who are directly interested in these and similar matters not to permit formation of public sentiment here by people who are not directly concerned and who will look upon this question superficially and without full knowledge of the facts. I bespeak your support and confidence. I bespeak it for the good of our country. I do not ask that you support our policy if you believe it is wrong. Go out and fight it as hard as you can. I would consider that less harmful than remaining silent and seemingly indifferent to these things.

We have to develop this country and we have to do it rapidly. Our revenues for this year are estimated at P75,000,000 as against a budgetary expenditure of P250,000,000. We cannot increase the revenues of the Government and we cannot minister to the needs of the people without increasing our revenues. I am not in favor of taxing existing industries further or more heavily. We can increase our revenues in the Philippines only by increasing new sources of revenue, and new sources of revenue can only consist of new industries, new agricultural developments, new services—in other words, the expansion of our national economy. Our national income before the war was estimated at P2,000,000,000 a year. I think the value of our production now, compared to that of production before the war, is only 50 per cent. Some economists would say our national income this year is as large as our income before the war. That may be true because of the prices our products command today. But that is not a good test during this time when we are suffering from a certain degree of inflation. We have inflation to face and we have to do things to forestall the aggravation of that threat. I think that the cause of inflation is well in hand and there should be no feeling of fear.

My administration has certain definite objectives. The first one is full employment. I should like to be able to give an opportunity for every man, woman and child who is willing and is able to work. But that needs expansion of our economy: it means more farms, more factories, more trucks, and more telegraph facilities.

The next is the raising of the people’s standard of living. Let no one think that the Filipinos are more contented with the life they have today than that which they had before the war. The war has raised high hopes all over the world and the Philippines is no exception. We must face that fact. When I talk of full employment, I mean full employment at reasonable wages, wages that would permit the maintenance of a decent living.

The third objective in our domestic economic policy is the expansion of our national economy. To do that it is absolutely necessary—I repeat it is absolutely necessary—that the parity amendment to the Constitution be passed. I am not so much interested in that respect, in preventing the stopping of the payment for war damage which would necessarily result from the disapproval of the parity amendment. I am not interested in this matter because of my desire to speed up the industrialization of this country. We may have capital. We may have manpower. We may have natural resources. But today there are other essentials to efficient production. One is technology. That is one big essential in modern industry, which we cannot supply. We cannot afford to send students to the United States to study in the universities there. Modern technology has to be learned not only in universities but also in the factories themselves. Engineers must see the wheels turn. They have got to handle these machines in the factories. It will take us generations to industrialize this country without the know-how, the technological skill of the people who are engaged in that business. With the approval of parity, I anticipate the transfer of industries to this country. Assembly plants will be set up here because this is the only spot in the Orient where there is security. When those factories are established here, they will not be American factories; they will provide new Philippine industries. We shall have work for thousands of our laborers. These industries will provide us the means with which to increase the purchasing power of the mass of our citizens. We shall thereby increase our national income and stimulate the expansion of our economy.

In South America, there are countries that invite foreign capital to help them develop their industries, and countries that have become isolated. Take Argentina with only around 13,000,000 people. When I speak of Argentina, I do not mean to say that I agree with the political system in Argentina. I don’t want that my remarks be interpreted as in any way referring to that subject, but purely from the economic point of view. Argentina is now one of the strongest countries, probably the strongest country economically, in South America. She attained that status by offering opportunities to foreign investors―Americans, British, Italians, etc.—to help in her development. But Argentina continues to be a country of the Argentines. Foreign capital has been put to work for the benefit of that country. On the other hand, take the case of Paraguay. Of all the countries in South America, Paraguay has the richest natural resources and yet it is the poorest country in South America because of her laws concerning foreign capital and the development of her natural resources. Take Colombia and Nicaragua. They are prosperous countries today because they welcome foreign investors.

Let me repeat, my friends, what I said some time ago. Let us stop fighting today’s battles with yesterday’s weapons. The argument that we should be afraid of foreign capital because it would deprive us of our liberty no longer holds true today. It is America that we should trust because she has pledged to send here surplus properties and to help us develop our own nation. My friends, I place before you a glowing vista of the future of the country. It is a future that can be ours if we have the courage to strive for it. If we can induce the United States to continue to look upon us with understanding and friendship as I know it is her desire to do; if we do not create suspicion in the hearts of the Americans; if the Filipinos will apply themselves to their present tasks, unafraid to work and to sacrifice: in ten years this country will be one of the wealthiest and most prosperous in the world and the one bright spot in the Far East. It may become a leader in democracy and in liberty. It will become a leader in the social program of the enlightened peoples of the world. It will be inhabited by free and contented Filipinos, Who will be able to raise their heads high, proud that they are Filipinos, proud that this is their country, and proud that they can consider themselves a friend of the United States.