Reply of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On British Minister Harry Linton Foulds’s address at the presentation of credentials by the former to the latter

[Delivered in Malacañan, October 30, 1946]

Miniser Fould’s address:

Mr. PRESIDENT,

The King, my August Sovereign, whose Royal Letter accrediting me as His Majesty’s Minister to the Republic of the Philippines I am about to present to you, has commanded me to renew to Your Excellency the friendly greetings and good wishes which He recently conveyed to you through His Special Ambassador, the Right Honourable Lord Killearn, and to express His Majesty’s earnest hope for the happiness and prosperity of the Philippines.

In accordance with the instructions which I have received from my Government, I shall make it my constant endeavour to maintain and strengthen the good relations which have so happily been established between the British Commonwealth and the new Republic, in the firm belief that by so doing I shall be fulfilling my high duty. I feel sure, Mr. President, that for this purpose I may count upon full encouragement and help from yourself and the members of Your Excellency’s Administration.

I count myself particularly honoured to have been chosen as the first British Minister at Manila. But I am happy to reflect that this is only a new phase in British official relations with the Philippines which, apart from the violent interruption caused by the Japanese attack, have subsisted continuously and harmoniously since the first opening of a British Consulate at Manila in the year 1844. Even before that date, British merchants had come to the Philippines and had set up business houses which are still well known in the country and are still, despite the recent war, carrying on their peaceful avocations. It is my sincere hope that these trade relations may long prosper and develop the mutual advantage of our two countries.

May I conclude by saying that I have returned to the Philippines as an old friend, some of whose happiest years were spent here, and that I look forward to the renewal of many old associations as well as the formation of new ones.

I beg to express to Your Excellency my most sincere and confident hope for the renewed prosperity of this beautiful country and its friendly people.

President Roxas’ reply:

Mr. MINISTER:

On behalf of the Republic of the Philippines, I am happy to receive you as the first Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of His Britanic Majesty to the Republic of the Philippines. I am particularly happy that you who have spent many years among our people has been chosen to represent His Majesty’s Government in this country. To reciprocate the mutually beneficial aims sought by your Government in setting up diplomatic representation here, it is my hope that we may soon be able to establish a legation in your country.

Our two countries are linked by historical, economic and cultural ties. As early as the 18th century, our two peoples engaged in commercial intercourse. Today British business houses established in the Philippines are an important factor in our commercial life. The same language spoken in your country is spoken throughout the length and breadth of the Philippines. Your philosophy of government came to us as a precious legacy from the great Republic of the United States of America, herself an heir to the Anglo-Saxon principles of liberty and justice. It is my sincerest desire that the ties that bind our two countries may become stronger with every passing year.

Throughout our long struggle for freedom, our leaders have drawn unfailing inspiration from the ideals and principles enunciated by Anglo-Saxon political thinkers. The Magna Charta, your immortal contribution to the cause of human freedom, is deeply imbedded in the Filipino soul and its principles form the mainstay of our political faith.

We admire your people for their indomitable courage and tenacity. The Battle of Britain during the recent conflict is recalled by us, as by all free men everywhere, as having been waged by you in defense of human liberty. Britain played her part nobly and well. It is hoped that the great struggles of the last war in which we were allies in fact will bind us closer than ever before and that our two countries will cooperate towards the promotion of peace and understanding among all the nations of the earth.

In directing your constant endeavors to maintain and strengthen the ties of friendship which have so happily been established between this Republic and the British Commonwealth, you can count on the full support of my Government.

You have my best wishes, Mr. Minister, for a pleasant sojourn with us. I feel sure that your mission will be fruitful and bring mutual benefit and advantage to our two peoples.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). British Minister Harry Linton Foulds’ address and President Roxas’ reply at the presentation of credentials by the former to the latter at Malacañan on the afternoon of October 30, 1946. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(10) , 2549-2550.