Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the First Anniversary of the Philippine Independence

[Delivered on July 4, 1947]

MY COUNTRYMEN AND FRIENDS:

One year ago today we achieved our national independence and established the Republic of the Philippines. On this same spot, hallowed by the blood of Rizal and consecrated to his memory, the American flag was lowered and our flag, that glorious flag of our forefathers, was raised upon yonder masthead to wave thenceforth alone and unshadowed over all this land we love. ( Applause )

It is well that on each anniversary of that historic event we recall the significance of that symbolic ceremony, to remind us of the magnanimity of America and to awaken in our hearts a renewed devotion to freedom, a fresh determination to defend it with our lives.

We won our independence through the processes of democracy, by the will of a free people. We will scan the pages of history in vain for another such example. In the past no star ever fell from an imperial diadem except through force and at the cost of torrents of human blood. It is to the undying credit of Americans and Filipinos that by trusting each other and having faith in one another, they cleared the way for the fullest cooperation in the consummation of the historic act we now commemorate—a priceless flowering of Christian civilization.

A new morality in the dealings of nations, particularly between dominant and subject peoples, was thus inaugurated. Liberty fluttered her wings and spread the glad tidings throughout the earth. It shook the foundations of empires and brought new hope to the benighted millions seeking to be free.

Now we may discern the effects of that transcendental event. Colonialism is crumbling rapidly everywhere. The right to independence is being recognized by all free and enlightened powers. The indivisibility of peace and liberty is being accepted. We know now that the world cannot long live at peace half slave and half free. Within a few months, following the pattern that we established, India will attain her freedom, Indonesia will gain her independence, Burma will be granted full sovereignty, and other subject nations will reach the same cherished goals.

It is true that there are forces at large in the world today striving to turn back the surging tide of freedom. But they will be of no avail, for the mighty concepts of liberty and justice that raised the victorious hosts in the last war are irresistible forces that no power however strong can permanently stem or subdue. The time is past when military might was the decisive factor in human struggles. Today the aroused conscience of free men, capable in time of need of creating overpowering instruments of war, is the mightiest force on earth. The Age of Reason has dawned!

We Filipinos can feel proud that we were actors in that historic drama that ushered in this new age. We are grateful to America for having kept faith with us and for pointing the way for other nations to follow in the trusteeship of the peoples under their flags.

In many quarters our independence was greeted with dark forebodings for our future. These predictions were not entirely unjustified. We had just emerged from a cruel war. Tens of thousands among the best of our youth were lost in the conflict. Our country was devastated, our economic system was destroyed, billions of our money had become worthless, social values had been dislocated, and even the morals of a large portion of our people had decayed through contact with a ruthless and Godless foe. During the three years of enemy occupation hundreds of thousands of Filipinos lived in defiance of the government and had lost respect for law. New ideologies had found lodgement in the minds of many of our countrymen as a revolt against the then prevailing economic and social conditions. Some had seemingly forgotten the virtues of democracy and had embraced the doctrine of class supremacy to be achieved through force. Our heroic veterans had returned to their homes in rags and were demanding the fulfillment of promises. Most of our people were bewildered and in want. There was general confusion; threats of revolution were whispered and even voiced openly from the public platform.

There was little to sustain us in our difficulties except our faith in ourselves. We promptly laid solid foundations for our Republic. We resolutely seized the instruments of sovereignty and quickly started to put our house in order. We fought a rear-guard action against the elements of chaos and disintegration and at the same time pushed forward to repair our shattered economy and institutions.

Now, look around you. Consider the adverse factors we had to face. Recall the painful experience of other nations that had to contend with problems such as ours at the inception of their independent existence. No nation in modern history, not even the United States of America, after its first twenty years of independence, could compare with us in the progress we have achieved in the first year of our Republic. ( Applause. ) Let no one sneer at this comparison; it is based on recorded facts. And the circumstances are essentially alike, for we are dealing with practical human problems which are altered neither by the epoch nor the age in which they occurred. The relative values of all the factors involved are the same in every case.

It will also profit us to compare our situation with that which obtains today in all the countries of the world which had been occupied by the enemy during the last war. In those countries political and social unrest prevails. There is shortage of food and of other minimum requirements, for decent existence. They are prostrate and in ruins. They are in the midstream of world events and are carried by the currents of power politics without capacity to hold fast to moorings of their choice. The Philippines, on the other hand, is truly master of its own destiny, is free from fear and want, and is actually solving satisfactorily its basic economic and social problems.

There is no desire on my part, I assure you, to indulge in self-adulation. Neither do I wish to induce you to believe that all that need be done has been done. But the truth is that we have made great progress in the face of tremendous odds.

The Government of the Republic has been fully organized. Its authority has been extended to the remotest nook and cranny of our land. We have been welcomed by the family of nations; we have been recognized by practically every government on earth. Our voice is heard in the United Nations and in many conferences on world affairs. We are participating financially and otherwise in the international instrumentalities created to restore rapidly the productive economy of the world. We are taking an active part in the efforts to build a new world order based on the freedom and equality of all nations, to insure a just and permanent peace and the welfare of all peoples.

Constitutional guarantees and the processes of a free government are firmly rooted in our soil. Our democracy is not a name but a fact. Our free institutions are in full operation. Human rights are being maintained and safeguarded. We have established an independent judiciary to stand sentinel for the preservation of those rights. Our people enjoy freedom of speech and of the press, in a measure unsurpassed in any other country of the world. Here, the press or any individual may indulge in the bitterest criticisms against the government and its highest officials, without fear and without sanction. We uphold the right of every man to worship God as he pleases. We impose no limitations on the freedom of thought or of conscience. The right of petition and the privilege of the people to gather and to exert efforts for the redress of grievances are never impugned. The sanctity of the home and the freedom from search and seizure are scrupulously defended. Free elections are guaranteed. But we also guarantee to suppress any and all attempts to gain through force or other illegal means any change in our system of government, or in the social order, or in the laws enacted by the representatives of the people. We adhere strictly to our democratic creed. We respect the sovereignty and the will of the people. We believe in a government by popular consent. We stand for liberty regulated by law. We abhor fascism and the methods employed by dictators, whether of the military or of a class. We have built a truly popular government subservient only to the popular will. A syndicalistic government, or a communistic government, or a fascistic government—whatever its name—is contrary to our Constitution and our ideals, and will not be permitted to gain foothold on this free land. ( Long applause. )

The national economy is being gradually rehabilitated. In one year we have greatly increased the volume of our production. Although it has not yet reached pre-war levels, its monetary value today is more than three times the value of our total production income before the war. Govern­ment revenues have also greatly increased during the first year of our independence.

When the Republic was inaugurated, our revenues were barely ten per cent of our government expenditures. Now, they are six times greater, and at the present rate of collections, our revenues will cover about seventy per cent of our expenditures. I have great hopes that in the current fiscal year we shall be able approximately to balance the expenses of government with revenues from taxation. ( Applause. )

In this first year we have succeeded in reducing the cost of living by thirty per cent, notwithstanding a material increase in the money income of wage earners. We are enjoying a relative degree of prosperity, and the living standards of the people are higher.

More public schools have been opened; we have today over one million more children enrolled in the schools than before the war. Institutions of higher learning have increased in number and their attendance has more than doubled.

We have commenced the execution of a program for the redistribution of land in congested areas. This is the initial step leading to the ultimate abolition of an archaic tenancy system which ties human beings to a life of bondage on the land that they work and which their fathers before them had tilled, with little hope of social improvement. In the meantime we have granted to tenants a larger participation in the produce of ricelands. We are rapidly getting back the valuable hemp, coconut and rubber plantations owned by enemy nationals and we have laid plans for the distribution of these lands among the veterans of the last war.

Our export trade is rapidly increasing, and in money value is now much larger than before the war. Our destroyed industries are being reopened as fast as needed equipment can be procured. We have established a government institution to provide credit for speeding up the rehabilitation program. We have introduced more efficiency in the government service, and we are firmly eradicating corruption and dishonesty among government officials. ( Applause. )

Peace and order has been restored in practically every province and every town of our country. For the last three months no important disturbance of the peace by organized bands has occurred. The people have returned to their homes in the remotest barrios and are peacefully cultivating their lands. Common crimes are still frequent in a few localities, but these are being effectively dealt with, a fact which has resulted in a marked reduction of such crimes.

Our monetary situation is excellent. Inflation has been arrested and is under control. No country on earth, except the United States, has a more stable currency than ours. We maintain a hundred per cent reserve for our outstanding circulation. Because of the guaranteed convertibility of Philippine pesos in American dollars, our money is expendable anywhere in the world.

The public health is being duly safeguarded. We have prevented epidemics during the past year. A large number of government hospitals are now in operation. We are fighting malaria, tuberculosis and leprosy with the newest weapons to the limit of our resources.

A large public works program is now underway. We are rebuilding bridges, roads, portworks, schools, water systems and other government facilities. We have started the industrialization program, including the development of water power. Gold, coal, copper and other mines are being reopened. New industries are being planned and encouraged.

We have not neglected our obligations to our fighting men, nor those which we owe their widows and orphans. We are now assisting the crippled and the sick and the dependents of our dead soldiers. The President of the United States has already urged the American Congress to pass suitable legislation granting to Filipino veterans the same privileges and gratuities accorded to American soldiers. Meantime we have approved a Bill of Rights for needy veterans and for the widows and orphans of our dead soldiers assuring them subsistence, educational and other benefits.

Despite the prophecies made before the elections that we would become a hopelessly divided people, we find today that the nation is more united than ever before in its history. Flushed with a noble pride in our sovereignty, our citizens are supporting the Republic and are cooperating in the rebuilding of our country without distinction of creed or section. We are loyal to one flag, one nation and one government.

By concluding a trade agreement with America, we have practically a free market for all our products in the largest and most attractive market in the world. No nation enjoys that privilege except ours. But despite this trade agreement, we are completely free to sell our products anywhere and to buy what we need from anywhere.

One of the first concerns of our Republic was our security. This we have met by entering into a military alliance with the United States for the mutual protection of America and the Philippines. During the present period of confusion and chaos in the world, when dark clouds are again hovering over the horizon and an early war is being predicted by statesmen of many countries, we have every reason to rejoice that we have locked our destiny with the strongest and noblest nation of the earth. We must not risk another experience such as we had in the last war. We must insure ourselves against that danger. Our armed forces are being properly organized and equipped, and we have completed plans for the training of a citizen army on which we can rely in time of stress. The conclusion of a treaty allowing the United States to establish military and naval bases here is a signal achievement of our Republic.

Organized resistance to the government has practically ceased. The recalcitrant elements that instigated this treacherous movement have been dispersed. Their leaders are in hiding. I trust that by this time they have convinced themselves of the futility and the destructive effects of their undertaking. I hope that they will understand that my every attempt to dissuade them from pursuing their course is not to deprive them either of their rights or of their political influence, but rather to win their acceptance of the authority of the government established by their own countrymen, with the assurance that their rights to seek reforms in accordance with our democratic processes will be unhampered and unchecked. On this sacred day when every true patriot is celebrating the anniversary of the birth of our nation, I ask these dissidents again to return to the fold of the law and to enjoy the protection of our Constitution.

I have recited in broad lines the highlights of the achievements of our people and our Republic during the first year of its life. While many other nations are wasting their substance in the struggle over new ideologies and the very problems of human existence, we are today well on the road to recovery and progress. While many other nations face revolutions and civil war, purges and military coups, we in the Philippines have left the causes of such conflicts far behind us. We are no longer disturbed by them. While in many other countries living conditions are still being regimented because of food and other shortages, here we have a free economy in actual operation. And we are not lacking in food or clothing, and our housing difficulties are gradually being eliminated.

The dire circumstances under which the people of other nations live today exist not only in the erstwhile enemy-occupied countries but even in many of the nations that took part in winning the war. Ask the world traveler who has visited these countries to compare the conditions there with the conditions prevailing here, and he will tell you without hesitation that our people should feel fortunate because of the freedom and prosperity that they enjoy and because of the government under which they live and work. I trust we shall be able to maintain these conditions and continue to improve them. We should work towards the establishment of an economic democracy in which all the people take part and every citizen derives a just and fair share of the fruits of the common effort. I have great faith that through intelligent and unremitting toil, free enterprise, and strong adherence to a democratic way of life, we shall succeed in making this Republic one of the few garden spots of the earth.

On this day sacred to us all, we should, as free men and true patriots, renew our pledge to serve our Republic and to labor for the enduring welfare and happiness of our people. The full sovereignty which we attained a year ago is still intact. We have not bartered away the smallest particle of that sovereignty for any material or other consideration. We should resolve to maintain that sovereignty in all its integrity, whatever the cost, so that we may continue to enjoy it to the fullest measure and bequeath it to our children, undiminished and unsullied. In this resolve and in the task ahead to achieve the enduring happiness of the Filipino people, I call upon the whole nation to lend me its continued confidence and support. Given that, with the help of Almighty God, this Republic will, I am sure, rapidly grow in stature, wealth and power, loved and revered by its citizens, honored and respected abroad, the haven of liberty and justice, the cherished home of contented free men. ( Long applause )

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.