THE SALUTARY INFLUENCE OF WOMEN

MADAM PRESIDENT, MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF WOMEN’S CLUBS:

When your very distinguished and able president invited me to address this convention, I must say that I accepted it because I couldn’t afford to decline. It is most proper that I speak on the subject to the role of women in the Republic of the Philippines. There are so many things women could do and are doing so loyally for the welfare of our people and country. Women are so important. As a matter of fact, if I were to select which of the two sexes is more essential to the country and to the nation, I would select the women. ( Applause .)

Without mothers there could be no fathers. I cannot imagine of any home without the graceful presence and salutary influence of a woman. Women in the Philippines are particularly important in this period of our history. Women are so much more dependable, more earnest, and more loyal, especially to those fundamental ethics and moral principles which are the foundations of our society, that, without their collaboration, this Republic could not progress very much. Many Filipino women today have entered politics and I think justifiably so. Speaking for myself, I have endeavored, from the very beginning of my public career, to grant women as much a measure of privilege as is enjoyed by men at any given time.

I know many of you do not believe in woman suffrage. But after that suffrage was granted, I trust that women would consider it their duty as citizens of this country to exercise that grant. I feel that the exercise of suffrage by women, despite the impression among many citizens in a number of communities, has exerted a strong influence in the progress of this country. For the first time, we see in our own senate a worthy representative of the women of the Philippines, Senator Pecson. ( Applause. ) This was an attempt by the Liberal Party to prove that the women of this country have the same rights as men if they have the qualification to occupy the highest office in this land, and I want to assure you that as far as I am concerned, X shall always see to it that the way is open for the women of the Philippines to attain the most important position in this country if the people want to place them there. ( Applause. )

The degree of service and social advancement of any community lies in, depends on or, I might say, may be accurately gauged by, the conception which the people and the government have of the dignity and individuality that women have. I realize that our laws in this Republic are still those that prevailed almost a century ago. We have failed to revise the laws affecting the rights of women as rapidly as we have progressed in several other fields. We are now trying to correct that anomaly. I would suggest that a committee of this convention study the reforms on this subject introduced in the proposed Civil code. I am heartily in favor of those reforms. ( Applause .) I believe that these reforms constitute one of the best and most desirable features of the new code.

To put these reforms in a nutshell, I may say that the direction of the family which in our present law is exclusively in the hands of the father, is placed in the proposed Civil code jointly in the hands of the father and the mother. The women, or wives rather, are no longer being treated as incapacitated persons as regards the holdings of her family. Under the new code, the women will be able to dispose of and administer their paternal property in the same way as a man disposes of his private property. In other words, the wife may dispose, sell, or mortgage her paternal property even without the consent of the husband. She will have the right to enter into contracts without the intervention of her husband in all matters affecting her family. Many persons might object to this reform, saying that this right or privilege granted to women or wives may inject causes of friction and disloyalty in the family.

I believe that that attack is predicated on the assumption that husbands are not intelligent or fair-minded enough to recognize the rights of their wives to dispose of the property that they brought into the marriage and which belongs to them exclusively. I believe that, instead of provoking misunderstanding in the family, this privilege if granted to women will bring about a higher respect on the part of the husband for the wife, and will result in preventing many misunderstandings and conflicts and, I might even say, disloyalty which might otherwise occur. I hope you understand what I mean. I am a man and I believe that all men are pretty good husbands. But very often, in order to maintain the dignity of the family, it is requisite that wives exercise some of their privileges and prerogatives and other influences to insure the stability of the family.

I trust that the Congress will realize the importance of that reform and I also hope that this convention will take enough interest in this matter to appoint a committee that first will study and then work for the approval of the piece of legislation now pending consideration in Congress.

In other respects, I must say that women’s clubs in the Philippines have done most commendable service in their different communities. You have cooperated in the establishment and operation of puericulture centers, a most laudable undertaking. I hope that you will continue to take interest in those institutions.

One of the greatest plagues in the Philippines today is infant mortality due to improper care of mothers. I know that women’s clubs have done a very creditable work in the field of infant care. I trust you will continue with that work. The government is exerting every effort to help you finance the activities of the puericulture centers. I should like to see not only one puericulture center in every municipality or municipal district in the Philippines. I am looking forward to the establishment of a puericulture center in every large barrio in the Philippines. I should like to furnish puericulture centers and clinics, trained physicians and qualified nurses to give treatment to people living in those places. I hope that you will cooperate with the government in inducing more people to enter the nursing profession. There is a lack of nurses in the Philippines. We have only 6,500 registered nurses. We could avail of the services of 60,000 nurses, if we had that number.

When you go back to the provinces, in connection with your work in puericulture centers, try to interest active, healthy girls to take up the nursing profession. We shall try to give them all the facilities they require, for if we need anything in the Philippines today, it is more physicians and more nurses. And we also need more intelligent mothers.

If I may offer a suggestion, I do not believe that sufficient instruction is being given to those that go to maternity hospitals or institutions and puericulture centers pertaining to the care of their children. I would suggest that members of women’s clubs in the provinces organize themselves into small groups and hold meetings in remote barrios, giving instructions to mothers on how to bring up their children properly. No subject could be more important to the women of the Philippines than the task of saving so many boys and girls that die annually from disease and malnutrition.

I will also say with satisfaction that in accordance with the report of the Department of Health, the rate of infant mortality in the Philippines has been gradually decreasing. Infant mortality today is lower than before the war, due in a large measure to the cooperation of the National Federation of Women’s Clubs.

The question of nutrition is a basic problem for those clubs. Women’s clubs should avail themselves of every opportunity to acquire knowledge on nutrition. I organized the local Institute of Nutrition very recently. Recently, an international conference on nutrition was held in Baguio. This is a most important problem because it can only be attained with the cooperation of the women of this country.

The Institute of Nutrition can prescribe an ideal diet for both the adult population and the small children. But unless there is an organized campaign—which cannot be done by the government or its agencies alone and which might be done only by civic-minded citizens, as those present here—all efforts of the government will fail. Disease prevention is probably more important than disease cure. There are many things that we must learn concerning nutrition. We know, for example, that men and women at a certain age must take food that contains a certain number of calories every day. We also know what kind of food should go into the diet of every individual to balance his diet and to supply the needs of the human body—things which are very complex.’

Other countries have undertaken the study of nutrition with greater success. To mention just one well-known example: Japan, before the war, had a very large and effective program for nutrition. The first thing you would see in Japan are groups of people, especially young children, who are obviously in a very healthy condition. And they don’t drink milk. In the Philippines there is a shortage of milk. It will take many years before we can supply from our own cattle the milk requirements of our population. The financial condition of the people in many places does not permit them to pay the price of imported milk. We must be practical in the consideration of the problems of nutrition. We must try to develop here a diet adapted to the needs of our people, economical enough to be within the reach of the lowliest members of our population.

For example, take rice. We have a shortage of the cereal. Before the war we produced practically all the rice we needed. Today, we are about ten per cent short of our national requirements. While this shortage is not very large, it is sufficient to affect the prices, and that is the reason why rice prices are high today. We are doing our best to intensify the production of rice. One of the greatest obstacles is the shortage of work animals. We lost practically fifty per cent of our carabaos during the war, and you cannot cultivate the rice paddies without the carabao. It will probably take five or six years before we can replenish our losses in animals during the war. We are trying to mechanize agriculture, but that is a gradual process. We are now carrying on experiments in mechanized farming.

We can only attempt to solve the problem of shortage of rice in either of two ways, namely: by increasing the production of rice and thereby reduce the price to the consumer, or, by reducing the consumption of rice. I was very much shocked one day after I had made this press statement in Baguio. One of the newspapers published in Manila that I was going to force the people to eat less rice. I never said anything of that kind. My program is to convince every person living in the Philippines that he is eating more rice than is good for him. His diet contains so much starch and carbohydrates and very little protein. He must eat more vegetables. He must eat more of other things needed to balance his diet.

I know that some intelligent people in the Philippines, who desire to reduce their bulk, actually eat less rice, and yet find to their chagrin that the lesser rice they eat the more they put on fat. This is so because they do not eat other foods that can supply the necessary elements for the harmonious growths of the human body.

Well, these are things which might be preached by women’s clubs to the people. I have heard it said by some people that they cannot use vegetables because these are very expensive. Well, I told them that was not true. I have in Malacañan a flower pot below my window—just a small flower pot. I planted it with—what do they call it? Filipino spinach? I think it is much better than that. People in the Visayas know what it is. It needs no cultivation. It does not need water. It is a vine and is very palatable. Every family here in Manila can have a flower pot, if it cannot have a piece of land, below their windows. In two or three months the vine will have enough leaves to feed the family. And you plant it only once in a lifetime. It is so provident you don’t even have to look after it or smile at it.

There are other plants or animals that could be used to supply the other needs of the family. I think it is just a question of willingness on the part of some of our people to solve some of these problems. Women’s clubs can bring to the government many practical problems which arise in their different communities, especially in regard to food.

We are soon going to develop a food which we believe will be very economical, to supply or substitute for the milk requirements of babies and little children. When the government undertakes a widespread program for its production, I am sure that some people will be against it. I cannot understand why, when the government does something good for the people, some of them don’t want to take it, just like medicine. I dare say that some important members of this club would not like it either; so I would suggest that you campaign for it diplomatically. If you want to make the program successful, don’t force it upon the people.

We plan to take a group of men, as we had done in Bataan with regard to vitaminized rice, rice to which vitamins have been added. We took two or three groups in the towns and for several months had fed them the same kind. We observed after a few weeks that their weight, spirit, and energy had improved, thereby proving that the experiment was a success. We are gathering all the data so that at the earliest time possible, we may be able to present to this country a program of diet that will be within the reach of our poorest citizens.

I should like to enlist the cooperation of the women’s clubs in this work, because in the formulation of this dietary program we shall examine the nutrient values of every food product that we have. I should like the members of women’s clubs in different provinces to give us information as to the products existing in their communities which are not known in other parts of the Philippines. I believe there are many things eaten in Ilocos Norte and in Ilocos Sur, for example, which have never been heard of in the Visayas and in Mindanao, and vice versa. Give us information about those food products. For example, you ladies from Ilocos Norte may send “saluyot” to the people of Negros, Panay, Cebu, or other places. Here’s a fine vegetable but it is not known down there. There are other food preparations known in some provinces but unknown in others. Even in the preparation of dried fish, for example, some provinces do it better than other provinces. I should like to arouse enough interest in nutrition, especially among our educated citizens, who should recognize how important it is for the masses of our population to be made to realize the value to their individual and social health of a well-balanced diet. You may start the educational campaign and aid will be extended to you, including literature on the subject.

Sometime before the first World War, Mrs. Roosevelt, with the assistance of the Bureau of Standards and Nutrition and the American universities, concocted a diet or a meal that did not cost more than five cents. It was scientifically prepared and adjudged sufficient to supply the needs of the human body. She went out to different restaurants and ate it herself. But she failed in her campaign because she did not have the cooperation of women’s clubs such as, I believe, we will have here in the Philippines. I hope the diet will not cost more than ten centavos. And I believe we can succeed if only we can formulate that diet and succeed in having it adopted by the masses of our population. What worthier objective could be pursued by institutions of this nature than helping feed our people better and making them learn to solve the problems involved in the high cost of living?

Next is something which I hope you will undertake in a missionary spirit. I would like the women’s clubs of the Philippines to stand for a simple life—to live simply but wholesomely, wholesomely not only physically but spiritually. By simple life, I mean the life that people live with the minimum of luxury and the maximum of comfort; a life affording children good and clean homes and healthy physical and moral surroundings. Tell the small girls and boys that they must be good girls and boys. Teach them the ethical and the moral principles, which after all constitute the indestructible norms of human existence. That should prove to be a most interesting task. My friends, the rewards are tremendous. There are many people doing that kind of work—missionaries, nurses, ministers, civic-minded men and women who have taught the masses the meaning and purpose of life. If you have no opportunity to go beyond the boundaries of your house, you must at least realize that everyone should be taught to comply with his duty to himself, to his country, and to God, and to guide the children in the right paths of life. More than ever, combat lawlessness and loose living in this country. Revive the old traditions of our people. There are boys and girls that do not live within ethical and moral principles. Sometimes, of course, women are so busy attending so many parties that they no longer have time for this kind of work. Don’t rely on your husbands for it. The tempo of modern life is such and the difficulties of earning a living are such, that fathers very often have to neglect the home training and guidance of their children. But the mothers are there. They are there to undertake that work. That work is better handled by mothers than by fathers. I want to enjoin them to set the example for others to follow. Many consider it a pride to educate children in a manner to win the admiration not only of other children but of the mothers of other children.

I don’t want to talk about religious instruction in public schools. As President, I am not in a position to talk about it. But I think you will agree with me when I say there is need for religion in the life of every man and woman in this country. Religion is the anchor of order, righteousness, and justice. Religion is so essential to human existence that a distinguished man once said, “If no religion exists, one should be invented.” We do not permit religious instruction in public schools despite the fact that religious instruction is essential. Where then should religious instruction be given? In the parish, yes, if we have priests to open and handle classes in religion. But whether children receive religious instruction or not outside their home, it is necessary that instruction in ethics and morals be taught in the home. I don’t care whether they are Catholic or Protestant, Aglipayan or member of the Iglesia ni Kristo , Jew or Mohammedan.

I trust that women’s clubs will at least arouse interest in that great problem, so important today, especially during this time, when the affairs of the world have to be determined by men—by their sense of justice and fairness, by the rectitude of their purposes, by their mental attitude towards the rights and problems of others.

Another problem to which I would like to invite your attention is the case of not only the orphans of our dead soldiers, but children who cannot be properly taken care of by their parents. I know how difficult it is for women’s clubs in the provinces to establish an orphanage because of the expenses it would entail. The ability of the different communities to set up such institution in many cases is doubtful, but I should like to suggest that the National Federation of Women’s Clubs, with the assistance of the different clubs in the provinces, establish somewhere in Manila, in Baguio, or in any other appropriate place, a National Foundation of Women’s Clubs orphanage, and I promise to give you not only moral but financial assistance. ( Long applause. ) I should like that to be a model for orphanages that may be established first by provinces and later on by municipalities. In other words, this federation can serve this country more effectively if it can render service in an organized form with definite plans and objectives.

If you desire to pursue this program, I believe it is wise for us to establish first an orphanage and then probably an old men’s home to house the old men from the streets. First a national institution, because it would be easier to support that. Then with that as a model, establish additional orphanages in provinces which are capable of maintaining institutions of this nature.

I would want the government to do all of that work, but the government is not now in a position to do it. I may, however, suggest a few details as to how the orphanage should operate at the beginning, for your information and guidance. If there are orphans sent to the orphanages from the Province of Cebu, women’s clubs in Cebu might well try to raise funds for the maintenance of that institution. Such an institution should be supported from voluntary contributions as well as from government funds. I am going to contribute a generous fund ( Applause ) and I trust that under the leadership of your very able, civic-minded president, you will be able to carry out this program.

Again, I repeat, you are going to receive all the assistance we can give. We are at present spending over a million pesos to support puericulture centers. If more is needed, we are going to give it.

My friends, I did not come here to make a speech but to give a few remarks. I tried to imagine myself as a woman and member of this federation. Before I came, I was very busy and had only two or three minutes to think about what I was going to say.

I trust that these problems will receive your very earnest consideration. When I say I am going to assist the Federation of Women’s Clubs in organizing an orphanage here, with money, I do not mean ten, or fifty, or even one hundred thousand pesos. I mean more than that. ( Long applause. )

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.