Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines Before the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East

THE ESSENTIAL OF PEACE IS WELL-BEING AND PROSPERITY OF ALL MANKIND

Mr. CHAIRMAN, MEMBERS OF THE ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE FAR EAST:

On behalf of the Government and People of the Republic of the Philippines, I extend to you a most cordial welcome. I also desire to express my warmest greetings to the governments and peoples whom you represent.

It is the good fortune of the Philippines that you have decided to hold your second session here. I trust you will find the arrangements satisfactory.

The ECAFE is one of the organizations of the United Nations which give greatest hope of practical achievements. Its members can meet, and I know you do, in a genuine spirit of cooperation and understanding, unburdened by conflicting national interests. Although you represent governments, your preoccupation is not to gain selfish advantage for your respective countries, but rather the welfare and happiness of all the peoples living in this section of the earth. It is, indeed, an inspiring example of intelligent and constructive international collaboration. It proves that in the new world that we are trying to build, men of different countries, colors and creeds can gather as friends and associates to work out solutions to their common problems.

Your particular mission, as I understand it, is to formulate plans for the most expeditious reconstruction of the economies of our different nations and, insofar as it may prove advantageous, to integrate them on a regional level. It is a gigantic task. It will require courage and vision and statesmanship of the highest order. But of all these, I know you are capable, and I am confident of your success.

The problems that confront us are varied and complex, and they are acute. Their urgency is reflected in the poverty and extremely low living standards which prevail among large portions of our populations. These conditions already existed in varying degrees in some of our countries before the war; the war aggravated and generalized them. It is futile now to attempt to fix responsibility for pre-war conditions but we cannot forget that for centuries we were never free to direct and much less to control the course of our lives. Our economic systems were highly incapable of insuring either fiscal adequacy for our governments or a satisfactory standard of living for our respective peoples. Large groups of our populations never succeeded in attaining what we commonly regard as a decent human existence.

But even that weak economy was seriously dislocated by the last war. Today the majority of our peoples are closer to starvation than they have ever been in the past. Suffering is acute among them. They are struggling heroically to improve their situation, but they seem impotent in the face of insurmountable difficulties. The population pressure on land is intense. The per capita production is very low. Tools and implements are scarce and inefficient. Credit facilities are very insufficient and interest rates are high. Methods of production are archaic and uneconomical. Food requirements absorb practically all individual incomes, leaving almost nothing for clothing, housing and other necessities of life. Communication and transportation services are limited and expensive. Tens of millions are in the ranks of the unemployed. Widespread shortages of consumption goods aggravate inflation due to excessive and largely unsecured currency in circulation. These are but a few indices of economic prostration which grip so many millions among us. They constitute a grave danger to political stability in this part of the world.

It is not possible, therefore, merely to plan for the restoration of our economies as they existed before the war. Our colonial economy must be completely discarded. Our agricultural economy must be rapidly complemented by sound industrial development. Per capita productive capacity must be greatly increased; living standards must be rapidly improved. We should no longer be content merely to produce raw materials to fill the tables and supply the factories of others. We will, of course, continue to grow but we must also make things that we vitally need. We must give people work—all the people. We must insure for them effective purchasing power which will be sufficient to provide not only their essential requirements but also the means to attain a higher social status. We will never truly prosper if we continue to be just a source of raw materials and a market for manufactures made by others from the products that we produce. We must endeavor to process a large portion of those materials ourselves.

The need of stimulating intra-regional trade and commerce cannot be over-emphasized. The Commission, I trust, will be able to propose specific plans looking to a drastic reduction of tariffs and the lowering of other trade barriers among our different nations. There are other matters in which regional collaboration is desirable: conservation and prudent exploitation of our common marine resources, a convenient medium of exchange or other measure of value to facilitate trade among us, the improvement of rice production, and a plan of allocations of exportable surpluses granting priority to deficient countries in this region.

The formulation of blueprints for the economic development of our respective countries is relatively an easy task. The real difficulties will be found in the effectuation of these plans. The chief obstacles are lack of sufficient capital needed for productive enterprises and the enormous credits that will be required to finance the program. Without adequately meeting these two imperatives, we can neither hope to solve our economic and social problems nor prevent widespread discontent and suffering among our peoples. The countries of Asia and the Far East need help and assistance from other nations which are capable of supplying those needs.

It is to be regretted that the world’s attention seems to be focused apparently only on the problems of Europe. We cannot deny that the peoples of Europe also need help, and urgently so. They need food and other necessities. But it is also undeniable that the needs of Europe are relatively less acute and less pressing than those of the peoples of this part of the world. It is true that the living standards of the peoples of Europe are now much lower than the standards they enjoyed before the war; nevertheless, low as those standards are, they still compare favorably with those prevailing today among our peoples.

We have every right to appeal to the generosity of nations able to help others not to forget the sad plight of the hundreds of millions in our part of the globe. The concern over European problems alone may be a result of the false notion that our peoples, not being accustomed to high standards, can be relied upon to endure patiently greater and more acute privations. This is a grievous mistake, for our peoples, having had very little, will have only a pittance left with the further curtailment of that little that they had.

If the motive behind present plans to aid European nations is pure altruism, I submit that the more depressed peoples of Asia and the Far East have at least an equal claim to that generosity. If the motive is materialistic, or partly so, predicated on the need of maintaining a certain volume of exports, then I submit that Asia and the Far East, if assisted in equal measure, would provide a greater and progressively more profitable market for such exports. Finally, if the motive is to avoid what some nations believe is the danger of large populations of the world embracing political and economic systems which destroy human freedom and endanger the peace of the world, in that case I submit that Asia and the Far East should not be neglected; for here we are concerned with one-half of the population of the world who, because they are immersed in deeper poverty and helplessness, are closer to desperation and, therefore, can be more easily attracted to ideologies which promise them radical improvement in their present plight.

If the ideal of one world is to be achieved, world cooperation in the solution of world problems must be rationalized. Men and women, irrespective of race or nationality, should be looked upon as human beings entitled to the same consideration and attention. The peoples of Asia and the Far East are not beggars waiting at the door of wealthy powers. All they seek is an equal opportunity to work out their own destiny. If the nations that are able to help them should choose to forget them and leave them to starvation and misery, that is their privilege; our peoples will accept that decision with dignity and manly pride. But this seeming injustice will leave in their hearts unanswered the persistent and intriguing questions: whether the one world concept is limited to the nations of Europe and Western Hemisphere; whether the generosity or altruism of the great powers has a color mark upon it; and whether the millions in this part of the globe who fought and died for liberty, justice and enduring peace deserve less from the victors, their allies in the last war, than the peoples who were their enemies and who attempted to stifle the voice of human freedom from the face of the earth. God may grant that we do not find reason to lose confidence in the nobility of those in whom we have placed our trust.

I feel strongly that world peace is indivisible, that to preserve that peace it is essential to promote the well-being and prosperity of all mankind. There can be no enduring peace for this distracted world of ours unless all peoples are free and are able to enjoy decent standards of fife. This world cannot long five at peace half-slave and half-free; neither can it live at peace when half of the world has too much and the other half has less than is needed to maintain human existence. Without the recognition of these fundamental principles, we cannot avoid another war and our striving to establish a new order of peace, liberty and justice would be doomed to fail. We must not fail. We will surely not fail if we should just decide to invest in this epochal undertaking a small portion of the wealth, work and wisdom needed to win the war that everyone fears.

God willing we will yet see the light.

—

Note.—The Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE) is an agency of the Economic and Social Commission of the United Nations. Its objectives are:

1. To initiate and participate in measures for facilitating concerted action for the economic reconstruction of Asia and the Far East, for raising the level of economic activity, and for strengthening the economic relations of the people in these areas.

2. To sponsor studies of economic and technological problems and developments in these areas.

3. To undertake the collection, evaluation and dissemination of information that may be useful in the solution of these problems.

After laboring from November 24 to December 6, the Commission succeeded in agreeing over several resolutions, the three most significant of which were:

1. The joint U.S.-P.I. resolution calling for a two-year food production program and the improvement of the distribution of supplies. In this connection, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), another United Nations agency, was to be requested to create a regional committee on food and agriculture in which the ECAFE will be represented.

2. A resolution calling for a report on ways and means to develop more trade within the region and with the rest of the world, creating for the purpose a body to promote such trade.

3. A resolution calling for the establishment of a working party to draft a masterplan for the industrial development of Asia and the Far East to assure a balanced economy.

The address of the President at the opening session of the Commission drew varied reaction here and abroad. The most noticeable point of the speech is the emphasis he made on the apparent neglect being shown to this part of the world in comparison to the attention being given to the European communities. Although he did not say so himself, interpreters of his speech were of the belief that he was referring to the Marshall aid to Europe when he said, “It is to be regretted that the world’s attention seems to be focused apparently only on the problems of Europe.” It cannot be denied that the President used strong language, and he was criticized for too intense regionalism; but the outburst of his emotions seemed natural considering his knowledge of the full extent of the sacrifices and sufferings of his people in the last war.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.