Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On Constitution Day

Safeguarding the Constitution is the task for all the people.

My Fellow Citizens:

Today is Constitution Day. This day was set aside to give an opportunity to the people of this country to renew their devotion and to strengthen their faith in the Constitution of the Philippines. In a sense, this celebration honors not only the struggles for freedom that our people have waged for many, many years, but is an occasion to recall to our memory the sacrifices of men and nations that our liberties may be enjoyed by us in full measure and that freedom should spread throughout the whole world. The Constitution was not struck on the brains of men all complete and as an original task. The provisions have been culled from the thoughts and the lifework and the struggles of millions of men and women throughout the ages.

Even before recorded history, men everywhere had struggled courageously for freedom. Jesus Christ was perhaps the first man since the dawn of civilization whose lifework and whose teachings find lodgment today in the fundamental law of this land. Jesus Christ preached the common humanity and the common divinity of man. At the same time He preached and He insisted on the recognition of human dignity which, after all, is the basis for the recognition of human freedom.

In the great battle of Tours, great armies contesting for victory were not really fighting for political supremacy. They were fighting for the principle as to whether the Crescent or the Cross would be the symbol of our modern civilization.

During the First World War, the men who fought in the Argonne and in the other bloody battlefields of Europe were not fighting for national aggrandizement. They were fighting for the very principles that are inscribed in the Constitution of the Philippines as well as in their own. The men who fought so bravely at Tarawa Island in the last war, at Guadalcanal; the men who died a hero’s death in the Gulf of Leyte and in the Gulf of Lingayen; the great heroes of Bataan and Corregidor, of Saipan and Iwo Jima— they were all men who were fighting for human liberty and the right of people to govern themselves. These are the very principles, my fellow citizens, that are solemnly recognized in the Constitution of our country. The Constitution is not the fountain source of your liberties. It is the result of the exercise of your sovereign rights.

The Constitution was made by our people. It was drafted by your duly elected representatives. It was submitted to you for ratification and you ratified it by an overwhelming majority. It is your handiwork. It is a great covenant, whereby the people of this country had decided that they were going to establish a government of the people, to be administered by representatives of the people, for the benefit of all the people. It is a government that you can change at will. The elected representatives who are to administer the functions and powers of that government are your representatives and they are subject to your control.

The Constitution divides the functions of government into three great parts: the legislative branch, which is charged with the function of making laws; the executive branch, which is vested with the power to execute the laws; and the judicial power, which is given the mission of interpreting the laws of our country.

When the Legislature discharges its functions in a manner that is not in accord with the wishes of the people, every four years when the legislators face the people to ask for a renewal of their confidence, the people may renew their confidence or withdraw it from them if the people are not satisfied with the manner in which they have discharged the duties of their office. The same is true with regard to the Executive. Every four years, the President must face the people to give an account of his stewardship, and the people have the privilege of either continuing him in power or rejecting his appeal for a renewal of that power and of entrusting the powers of the executive department in the hands of another man.

The Judiciary, in some sense, is the most powerful branch of the government. When the Legislative transcends its powers, the Judiciary is there standing guard to protect the Constitution, and can nullify the acts of the Legislature. When the Executive abuses his powers, when he takes actions contrary to the provisions of the Constitution and of the law, the Judiciary, likewise, stands sentinel for the preservation of constitutional government and nullifies the actions of the Executive. But there is no department of the government that can nullify the decisions or interpretations of the judicial branch with regard to the Constitution when the Judiciary interprets its provisions. Nor is there a way of submitting these decisions for revision by the people themselves. The only way is for the people to hold a constitutional convention to clarify the provisions that have been the subject of judicial interpretation.

In addition, we must recognize that the Constitution is not static. It is dynamic. It grows with the progress of the nation. Some of its important principles may be altered with the change of time. The representatives of the American colonies who met at Philadelphia to write the Constitution of the United States never dreamed at that time that they were establishing a government such as it is today. During that time, there was great reluctance on the part of the colonies to yield the powers of their local government to the national government. And yet the growth of the powers of the national government has been so great that there are many people who doubt whether the pattern as it now exists was really the pattern contemplated by the fathers of the Constitution.

But that was a necessary consequence of the principles laid down by the Supreme Court of the United States, especially those laid down by Justice Marshall. First, because Marshall recognized that the powers of government given to the United States were the powers necessary for any independent nation to have. With the recognition of that principle, from day to day, many questions have arisen as to whether certain powers of government belong to the local or to the national. And the decisions have been uniformly in favor of the national government.

I have stated that point to show that very much depends on what I call the judicial statesmanship of the members of the Supreme Court in connection with the growth and development of our constitutional law. And for more than one reason, we cannot understand or interpret properly the Constitution of the Philippines unless we understand fully the constitutional law of the United States. Every provision of our Constitution, with very few exceptions, has a history all its own. The Bill of Rights originated in the struggles of the barons of Runnymede early in the thirteenth century. It took form in 1689 as a declaration of the House of Lords and the House of Commons in England. It was developed, supplemented and perfected by those who wrote the Virginia Constitution. It contains what is called in that document the Rights of Man, in the formulation of which the great Jefferson and Madison participated. Then it was incorporated practically in the first amendments to the Constitution of the United States. Then it came to us through the first Philippine Bill approved on July 2, 1902; afterwards, in the Jones Act; and, today, it is lodged permanently in the Constitution of the Philippines.

These fundamental rights are precious to every man. They are priceless to every citizen of this country. If we are to preserve those liberties, we have to be ever watchful against their curtailment or invasion by the powers of government that we ourselves have created.

In a democracy, those freedoms are presumed to exist, even if they were not written in the Constitution. Our courts would maintain that freedom of speech reigns here; that a man is free from arrest or deprivation of his Property without due process of law; that freedom of speech should never be curtailed.

And yet the Constitution in its wisdom, following the precedent established in the Constitution of the United States, has clearly declared that these liberties are not to be invaded or curtailed, nor their exercise prevented by the government itself or by private individuals. And it is the great mission of the courts of justice to safeguard those rights, to safeguard those rights not only against individuals but also against the abuses and usurpations by the government itself.

Soldiers who are listening to me, especially members of the Constabulary: You should acquaint yourselves fully with the individual rights of every citizen of this country; and, in the course of the discharge of your duties, you are not only not allowed but you are forbidden from invading those rights in any way.

Any man in this country has the right to appeal to the courts of the land for the preservation of his rights against any official of the government no matter how high or how powerful he might be. We, therefore, shall depend on the strictness and vigilance on the part of the courts of justice for the preservation of the individual rights so precious to our people.

In establishing the Constitution, the delegates to the national convention took pains to make the document as permanent as possible without denying to the people the right to change it at their pleasure. But it is difficult to amend the Constitution. And it is well that such a difficulty exists, because the Constitution should be a stable and firm foundation for the body politic and should not be changed for slight or transient cause. The Constitution makes amendment difficult so as to give the people full opportunity to study, consider and ponder upon the import of the changes that are proposed to be made, bearing in mind that any change in the basic structure of our government will affect the lives not only of the people of the present generation but also of our children and those who will come after them.

The Constitution can be changed only in two ways: First, through a proposal approved by joint resolution of the two houses of Congress with the requisite three-fourths of the votes of all the members of Congress, not only of the members present but of all the members of that body. After such a proposal has been made, the proposed amendment is then submitted to the people for ratification. If the people ratify it, then the proposal becomes a part of the Constitution. But the people may reject it; if so, it will not form part of the Constitution.

The other method provided by the Constitution to bring about its amendment is through a constitutional convention called expressly for the purpose of considering amendments to the Constitution. The people will elect the delegates to this convention and after the amendments have been drafted, they must be submitted to the people for ratification or rejection.

The writers of the Constitution, therefore, have made plain their intention to safeguard as much as possible, consistent with the continuing control by the people, this great charter of government, by a strict procedure of proposing amendments to it.

Our Constitution is a good constitution. It is probably the most advanced Constitution, barring none, among those that exist today. It is advanced in this sense:

First, it is the only Constitution in the world that by express provision renounces war as an instrument of national policy. By the express and definite mandate of the Constitution, the Government of this Republic is enjoined not to wage war for the purpose of conquest or offense or aggression. We can only wage war if it is necessary to defend the integrity of our territory and to preserve the sovereignty of our country.

Second, the Philippine Constitution is probably the only Constitution in the world that formally recognizes international law—international law as accepted by common consent of the majority of the powers of the world—as part of the law of the land. This government, therefore, is prohibited by the Constitution from passing any law or taking any action contrary to the recognized or accepted principles of international law.

Third, recognizing the inability of democracies to take prompt and adequate action in cases of national emergency, the Philippine Constitution expressly authorizes the Congress of the Philippines to grant to the President all powers of government including a delegation of legislative powers to carry out the declared national policy. This, however, is only applicable in case of war or of a great national emergency. In other words, this Republic can function and will function as a constitutional democracy in normal times. When an emergency should arise and the Congress should recognize the need of placing stronger powers or more powers in the hands of the Executive so that he may be able to deal with the emergency situation as effectively as the nation’s safety demands, it can delegate to the President legislative powers and increase his executive powers.

Fourth, the right of eminent domain which exists in practically all governments and which is recognized in the Constitution of the United States provides in ours more extensive powers. In other countries, private property may be expropriated only for public use. And by public use, according to the courts, the Constitution means that the property expropriated will be for the use of the general public for the benefit of all the people and not for certain groups or classes of people. Here, in order to solve some of our peculiar problems and as a concession to the people who have been longing for solution of those problems, the Government of the Philippines has been given the right to expropriate private property not only for public use but also for the purpose of subdividing great estates of agricultural land and homesites, and also to expropriate public utilities to be operated for the benefit of all the people in case that should be found necessary.

Fifth, it has long been an issue in the United States throughout the many years that the courts have been asked to define the boundary of power and authority exercised by the different branches of government—as to whether the Supreme Court should be given the right to declare laws unconstitutional. It was only by a great and memorable decision rendered by the Supreme Court of the United States more than one hundred years ago that the question was settled, and I hope settled definitely, because the decision was wise: that the Federal Supreme Court, or court of last resort, has the right to declare laws unconstitutional.

But in the course of years, with the many intricate questions that have been submitted to the Supreme Court since then, the liberals of America have repeatedly asked the question whether the nine members of the Supreme Court should be permitted to interpret freely the provisions of the Constitution; whether by their dictum they can prevent the execution of programs for the social benefit of the people of the country by merely citing a provision of the Constitution which would preclude, in their opinion, such an act.

In the Philippines, after studying that question with great attention, the Constitutional Convention arrived at a com promise. We recognize expressly in the Constitution the right of the Supreme Court to declare laws unconstitutional.

There is no such provision in the Constitution of the United States or in other constitutions. As a matter of fact, in many jurisdictions under similar provisions, the Supreme Courts of many countries have denied their right to declare laws unconstitutional.

In the Philippines, I repeat, we have compromised on that point in response to the demands of orderly and wise government and the requirements of social progress. In the Philippines, the Constitution authorizes the Supreme Court to declare laws unconstitutional provided two-thirds of its members concur in that decision. The members of the Supreme Court cannot, in the Philippines, by a simple majority vote, declare a law unconstitutional. I feel very strongly that that is a wise provision.

Importance and recognition should also be given to the good judgment and patriotism of the members of the Congress and of the Executive that approve the law. Likewise, the need of cooperating with the legislative branch of government in the solution of urgent problems rests upon the Executive and the people who must look after the welfare of the public.

Fellow citizens, the Constitution, therefore, is a document that merits your unconditional and unswerving support. I promise you and I pledge my every effort and all my energy to defend the integrity of that document. And may my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth if I ever say anything or do anything in the discharge of my functions which in any way might violate any provision of that great instrument of our people. ( Applause .)

But you, my fellow citizens, have to do your part. I, alone, though I am the President of the Philippines, cannot safeguard that fundamental law of our country. I, alone, cannot, without your cooperation and your self-sacrificing vigilance, preserve the integrity of our institutions established in that document. I, alone, cannot defend that instrument and the government that it has established from subversive elements who are trying to undermine the very foundations of our established institutions. This is the task not only for the government but for all the people—for each and everyone of you. You cannot remain indifferent while the government that you have established is being attacked from within or when it is endangered by attacks from without. The greatest defense of the Constitution and the liberties on which it is founded and the freedoms it safeguards must, in the last analysis, be lodged in the hearts and the sinews of the people of the Philippines.

It is very easy to say, “In time of war we are willing to die for our country and for our liberty.” The hardest thing to say is, “In time of peace we are willing to live for our liberty, for the preservation of our freedoms, and for the permanence of our public institutions.” ( Applause .)

And that is the message, my fellow citizens, that I wish to convey to you today, especially to the young men and young women who are here coming from many provinces of our nation, to live for the preservation of your liberty, to live for the preservation of your government, to live and work for the honor and glory and greatness of this great Republic that we all love. ( Applause .)

NOTE.—This appeal was delivered before a big crowd of 40,000 persons who gathered at the Rizal Memorial Stadium for the patriotic occasion.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.