Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President-elect of the Philippines Before the National Press Club

[Delivered in Washington, D.C. on May 15, 1946 (American Standard Time)]

“THERE SHOULD BE A STRONGER TIE BETWEEN OUR TWO COUNTRIES THAN THE MERE MEMORY OF HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION AND A SENSE OF ECONOMIC GRATITUDE”

I have been looking forward to this occasion. On my several visits to the United States in the past, I have had the privilege of being in the audience here and of listening to some of the distinguished speakers that you have had here through the years. I have always felt that given the occasion, I might improve upon some of the presentations here. But that was before I had the chance. At this particular moment, I would rather be just sitting and listening.

Nevertheless, I have wanted this chance. And now I have it. I will say my nickel’s worth, as you call it, and then you will write yours. You will have the last word in any event. I have learned sometimes to my sorrow that it is always so with newspapermen.

In speaking to you today, I do not feel that I need sketch in much background regarding the Philippines. It is not as if I were from a foreign country. Although the Philippines are 10,000 miles distant from here, most of you have as good an understanding of our problems and of our politics as you have of the problems and politics of Oregon or New Jersey. We must thank High Commissioner McNutt and my friend, General Romulo, for their remarkable work in that connection. And speaking of Governor McNutt, I would like to say that he is a brilliant example of the kind of men America has sent us over the years to lead, to advise, and to inspire us toward our common goals. The men who have been sent to the Philippines as governors-general and as high commissioners have added stature and luster to America. They have been great colonial administrators and almost without exception have been men of such outstanding quality that they have returned to grow still further in the American scene, and have contributed to the greatness of America at home as well as abroad. I need only mention such names as Gen. Leonard Wood, William Howard Taft, Henry L. Stimson, Young Teddy Roosevelt, Frank Murphy, and Paul McNutt, to recall just a few. Perhaps it was the richness of their experiences in the Philippines; perhaps it was their own outstanding qualities; in any event, all of these men, after serving in the Philippines, have come back to bigger and better things. All of them, greatly beloved and revered by the Filipino people, have greatly loved the Filipino people in turn. One of them, Governor McNutt, came back to the United States to take over one of the most difficult jobs in the war effort; and when that job was done, he agreed to return to the Philippines for a second term as high commissioner during our critical period between liberation and independence. In that service, which is soon to end, High Commissioner McNutt has shown an energy and a devotion to the interests of my people, and to the interests of his own country—in this case the two are identical— which are in the finest tradition of American leadership and idealism in the Orient.

I have been told of the job which Governor McNutt did here to get the Trade Act and the War Damage Act through Congress. We have every reason to be deeply grateful to him. As far as I know, Governor McNutt, who is soon to leave public life—and only temporarily, I hope—had no personal or political interest to support his efforts on our behalf. Yet he spared neither his energies nor his time to help accomplish what had to be accomplished in our cause. No other man could have done what he has done for us in the last six months.

And now I would like to say—and I haven’t discussed this with Governor McNutt at all, nor with anyone, for that matter, and I recognize that under ordinary conditions this would be a most improper statement to make—that if President Truman were to name Governor McNutt as the first American Ambassador to the Philippines, and if Governor McNutt were willing, the Philippine people would welcome that choice. I personally would be overjoyed.

I have departed from the general theme I had in mind for today’s remarks to praise Governor McNutt, not because he is present and was good enough to make immediately possible this trip of mine to the United States, but because his service has been typical of that rendered us by his predecessors, a great line of great men. I do not think America has ever sent us a second-rater. We have battled with some of your governors-general. I remember in particular some of the knock-down-and-drag-out fights we had with that pugnacious old gentleman, Maj. Gen. Leonard Wood. The late President Quezon and General Wood had some of the grandest fights—I can say in retrospect—that have ever taken place on any continent. They fought about appointments, about policies, about personalities and precedence. But General Wood, typical of your finest military genius, was respected as a man and as an American We all respected him and today we revere his memory. Among those who respected him most was Manuel Quezon.

It was this type of man and this type of administration—largely unselfish, of unquestioned integrity, of unassailable people, burdened for three centuries with the tyranny of Spanish rule, to an understanding of and devotion to American democracy.

Not too many in my homeland have enjoyed the economic fruits of the democratic way of life you exemplify. Ownership of productive enterprise has been far too concentrated. The majority of my countrymen have had only a limited horizon, until fairly recent years, for their poverty-bound existence. But the great miracle of the Pacific was that these people learned to love democracy, to love liberty, to love independence, and to love America. They may not have had true economic democracy, but they saw in political democracy the promise of social justice, that promise which the great President Quezon held out to them. It was that promise which shone like a beacon to light up the dark years of Japanese occupation. The Filipino people fought and resisted in the cause of the political democracy they knew and had enjoyed as a heritage from America, and for the promise of full economic democracy which they expected, by the example of America to follow.

The Filipino tao, humbled to centuries of bowing in subservience to his master, learned quickly and joyfully the satisfaction of dignity and political equality. His vote, he learned, was equivalent in weight to that of the hacendero or the wealthy money lender, the two magnetic poles of his economic existence. He drank deep the heady wine of free political choice and solicitation, of free expression, and of free thought. He listened to the local radical extol the virtues of expropriation or of socialism, and saw that the radical was protected in his right to express himself, even if his views were in violent disagreement with the facts of life. This was good, he thought. This is democracy. My son, too, can be a political leader and make fine speeches and help rule my people, even though he is the son of a poor tao or cochero.

In some provinces of the Philippines the average farm under cultivation is 3 acres, supporting an average family of 10. In these provinces, well over 50 per cent of the land is tenant-farmed. In some of these areas, before the war, the average annual income of the farm family was 30 gold dollars.

I am not exhibiting the old sores of economic maladjustment in the Philippines as an exercise in self-flagellation. The conditions I have described stem from the feudal regime before 1898. We have tried to alleviate these conditions in recent years.

As chairman of the National Development Company before the war, I proposed and saw to completion a project for the purchase of a few large estates and their resale to the tenants. But the land problem of the Philippines is deep and difficult. It is not to be solved merely by the purchase and division of lands already under cultivation. A broadscale program of dividing up the large estates must be coupled with resettlement of our great undeveloped areas, coincident with electrification and community planning, with modernization of agricultural methods, with education and public health. The attachment of the Filipino farmer to his little 3-acre plot of rice land is deep and elemental. He gathers round him his entire family. Together they till and re-till the land until it is exhausted, until hunger drives them apart. The Filipino must be educated in the spirit of the pioneer, of the mover across seas and across mountains. I have merely mentioned these things in digressing again from my general theme, to indicate monumental problems facing us as we begin our independent existence. I mention them to indicate the great distance we still have to travel on the road to economic democracy. I mention them to show how deep must have been the appeals of political democracy to cause these people to resist the alien ideologies of Japan, with their bland and superficial plausibility, and to sacrifice life and treasure in the cause which you in America understand more by its fruits than by its definitions.

Of course, loyalty to America on the part of the Filipinos should not have been such a surprise as it seemed to many elsewhere in the world. From the days of William McKinley, we have been given a progressively greater and greater measure of self-government. We resisted the American conqueror in 1898. But after the pacification, the United States sent us not troops but school teachers; not colonists but doctors and road builders. Cholera was stamped out; typhus was eradicated. Roads took the place of trails. School buildings and post offices took the place of forts and barricades.

William Howard Taft and Francis Burton Harrison both preached and practiced the doctrine of “Filipinization,” encouraging us to take over more and more of the responsibilities of government and leadership.

Under the Wilson administration we were given a congressional pledge of eventual independence. Under the Roosevelt administration we were given a definite date of independence.

The tidal wave of war washed over our islands, leaving in its wake such a flotsam of destruction as has many times been described but which actually defies description. I was in the Philippines all during the war. I saw with my own eyes the brutal savagery of the enemy. Life was cheap and death was common. Torture was ordinary. But in my recent campaign tour throughout most of the Philippines, I was continuously shocked and horrified to see more and more of the evidence of barbarism practiced by the enemy on persons and on things. It was unbelievable. This alone has scarred the existence of my people beyond all reparations and repayment.

The damage to the national economy was incalculable and cannot be estimated in dollars alone. It must be thought of in three dimensions—in dimensions of dollar-men-years. It will take years, dollars, and the unstinted energies and sacrifices of all Filipinos to restore what has been damaged, destroyed, and stolen. We can import carabaos from Indo-China, rice from Siam, and building materials from the United States. But who can estimate the damage when an entire economy is blasted and disrupted, when an inflation has increased the cost of living 12 times, when communications and public health have been set back .half a century; when the morals and morale of an entire people have been hideously affected by exposure to the evil climate of Japanese casuistry.

I have spoken of Filipino loyalty to America. These are words which you might think are polite compliments to your hospitality. I could recite to you at whatever length you wish incident after incident of my personal experience to illustrate and point up this loyalty. Let me recall one such incident, one of many, and less heroic than most.

It was after the surrender of American forces in Mindanao. The year was 1942. As a brigadier general, although a prisoner, I was in internal command of a prison camp at Malaybalay. A Filipino soldier, 18 years old, was among those huddled in the bare stockade.

He was like a hundred others and I never noticed him, until one day he escaped to join the guerrillas. Somewhere in the jungles the Japanese overtook him and brought him back for punishment by death. He was young and his eyes sparked with fire. I pleaded for his life and asked for the privilege of meting out internal punishment.

The Japanese, as always, weighed coldly the advantages of mercy in terms of prisoner morale against the delights of revenge. My entreaties were heard and he was given to me for punishment. I confined him in a cell. One day he sent for me.

“General,” he said, his eyes pleading, “would it make you much trouble if I escaped again?”

“Jose,” I said, “perhaps there would be trouble for all of us if you escaped. And as for you, it would be certain death if you were caught. And perhaps torture, too. Your mother and your father, they too might suffer.”

His eyes were eloquent with reproach. I was silent in a minute and then went on.

“Anvway it is impossible for you to escape. You are guarded from within and without Why should you want to escape anyway? Where would you go? What could you do? You are so young and inexperienced.”

“General,” he answered, “I can escape if I make up my mind to it. They cannot keep me here if I do not wish to stay. And I do not really care what happens to me if they catch me. What is happening to our people is more important than what might happen to me. But if I could hurry the liberation just one moment, I will have earned my life. The Americans will come back one day soon, and then we will all be free, my mother, my father, you. Maybe, I, too.”

It was an eloquent speech. I could not answer him. I could not deny him.

“Good luck,” I told him. “Let your conscience guide you.”

The next night he was gone from his cell. None knew how he had managed it. He was caught before long, but not until after he had killed some of our enemies. He was brought back to camp and killed before all of us. We were to see the penalty for escape.

The priest with whom he spent his last moments came to me later. He had a letter addressed to me. It told of a tree, and of a package buried under that tree. I would understand what to do with the contents of that package, he said.

I found that tree and the package. The package was carefully tied. I can still see it today. There was only one object in it. A clean, carefully folded, carefully kept American flag.

I had that boy’s body dug up from its shallow grave. At night, and with proper ceremony, we reinterred him. Over his body I placed with tender hand that American flag. The good earth of the land he loved covered him up. The flag went with him. He had died for it. He deserved it.

Oh, this boy was not especially a hero. He was not an exceptional case. His number was legion. There were a thousand, a hundred thousand others. General Wainwright told me, while we were in Corregidor, of a Philippine scout of his, a member of the famed Igorot tribe of the northern Luzon mountains. He had grown old in the service, this Igorot scout, old and tough and irascible. On Bataan he would disappear night after night. None dared to question him. But sooner or later his conduct came to the attention of his commanding officer and Pedro was called to account. General Wainwright happened to be present.

The general, who knew and loved the old veteran, took up the questioning

“What have you been doing, Pedro?” the general asked. “General,” he said, “I do not lie to you. It is said that we Igorots are head-hunters. Many generations ago we were. It was said that our people liked to rob and kill. Perhaps it was so, because I have had that impulse. But I have never done it. Now I am having a chance to justify what is said of my people.”

“I robbed and killed, but only Japanese. It is very entertaining.”

“But Pedro,” the general said, “that is disobedience of orders. Besides, it is very dangerous. We cannot afford to lose a man like you.”

“General,” Pedro said, “it is not dangerous. I merely make small noise and then I attack. The Japanese do not put up much fight. They are afraid of us Americans. They always think that I outnumber them.”

These are the Filipinos who fought for you. These are the Filipinos who struggled through 3 1/2 years of darkness toward the day of liberation. These are the Filipinos to whom you are giving independence and economic assistance. The loyalty of the Filipino is a byword in the Orient. He will not desert you when victory fails you. He will not falter when the odds are against you. He is the Irishman of the Orient. There are 18,000,000 of us 10,000 miles across the Pacific. They are 18,000,000 allies. They are 18,000,000 men, women, and children who love your way of life. You do well to retain their devotion.

I do not draw this word picture idly. I have weighed these words. As I see the future, it belongs to either one of two ways of life. The one way is the way you have developed, the way of economic and political freedom through free choice and free enterprise, guided and governed by such controls as are necessary to protect the public interest, responsive to the will of the majority, but with the fundamental right of opposition, the rights of the minority eternally and zealously protected. The minority may become the majority through the instrument of the ballot box.

Then there is a second way of life, the way which presupposes that one group, economic or political, is ordained by the prerogative of power, however seized to govern, and all other groups must blindly accept and follow for the sake of the state or of the classless society. This way allows for no discussion, for no freedom to differ and oppose. Perhaps in some circumstances this way may be accepted by some. Some peoples may choose it as their way. Our people reject it. We have learned to love democracy, with all its halting, stumbling, and confusion, with all its weakness and inefficiency; we, like you, prefer it and will fight by your side to protect it.

But democracy presupposes one thing. It presupposes that the direction of movement is progress, and that the purpose of progress is to assure not power or glory but well-being and contentment for an ever-growing number of individuals who make up that democracy. It presupposes that the goal of Government is to assure not only freedom but also economic prosperity and security to its citizens. It is the job of Government to find the means to move in that direction. We in the Philippines have many miles to travel. We have many more than you, especially today that we have been prostrated by war and laid waste by devastation.

We look to the United States, as we are about to enter the era of independence, for the assistance and guidance we require. We are not seeking to collect on an obligation. We ask only such assistance as is indicated by our vital needs, and by the undeniable relationship which has existed, which exists, and which I hope will always exist between our peoples. We are not of the Orient, except by geography. We are part of the Western World by reason of culture, religion, ideology, and economics. Although the color of our skin is brown, the temper of our mind and heart is almost identical with yours.

We expect to remain part of the West, possibly as the ideological bridge between the Occident and the Orient.

Economically, our immediate future depends upon the United States. We know no substantial market for the goods we can most easily produce except the American market. You, on your side, need our products. The whole world needs our products today but cannot pay for any substantial share of them.

We do not intend to retain primarily and indefinitely an agricultural economy. Before the war, 85 per cent of our national production was agricultural. Much of that agriculture was based on low wages, producing for export— higher, yes, than the general level in the Orient, but still much lower than your wages here.

Since our liberation, we have had a vast inflation. Wages in many areas in the Philippines today are equivalent with yours. It is an artificial condition. We must endure some deflation. But our goal is to industrialize, to diversify, and to broaden out our economy. We hope for financial and technical assistance from the United States to accomplish this. I believe it is to our common interest for you to provide us with that assistance. Your country has now in the Philippines much more than a mere market for your exports. You have in us a protagonist of your political and economic system—a broadcasting station for Americanism.

The more you help us to achieve prosperity, the more you advance the cause of democracy. The Philippine people are not without pride. They have, perhaps, too much of it. They would not be content to play for pay the role of Charlie McCarthy to your Edgar Bergen. They believe in your words and will therefore repeat them. But neither for the sake of subsidy nor economic favor will they play an international role which is not worthy of the dignity of freemen

In a few weeks we begin our career as an independent nation. We owe our independence, our national existence to you. We are not ungrateful, as I have tried to indicate. But there should be a stronger tie between our two countries than the mere memory of historical association and a sense of economic gratitude. There can be a community of interest to bind the Philippines and America past all power to divide. That community of interest can consist, first, of common economic principles, free, guided enterprise and, second, of a common political system. A mutually advantageous commercial relationship and constant cultural exchanges will furnish the cement for this union. But today it is up to you to determine whether that community of interest is to continue to exist. It will take some trouble and some effort on both our parts. You can decide for yourself whether it is worth while.

Our political independence is a recognition of a geographic fact and also of the circumstances that your Constitution does not provide for coequal political association other than statehood. But our independence does not necessarily mean that we will go our separate ways. I imagine that there are gravitational attractions which would gladly draw the Philippines from her occidental orbit. We intend to resist them. I hope that in the future the natural forces of mutual interest will keep us together in a closer, certainly more conscious, relationship than ever before. We will do our part. Will you do yours?

Source : Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 1). Manila : Bureau of Public Libraries.