Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines Before the Convention of Provincial Governors and City Mayors

[Delivered on January 22, 1948]

“YOU AND I ARE SERVANTS OF THE PEOPLE”

Mr. CHAIRMAN, MEMBERS OF THE CONVENTION:

I wish to congratulate each and every one of you upon your election as governors of your respective provinces. I wish to greet you and the mayors here present for your attendance at this most important conference.

Provincial governors and mayors are something more than mere proconsuls of government assigned to their respective communities. Provincial governors represent government authority, that is true, but you are more than that. You are the leaders of your respective communities. The people look upon you as the embodiment not only of governmental authority but also of those intangibles which refer to social conduct as well as to public and private morality.

I was a governor once. That was many years ago. It took me several months before I could realize the importance of the position to which I had been elected. In some sections of my province, even today, the governor is called “the law” and is so regarded by the common, simple barrio folk. They recognize no other authority superior to him. He is in fact the representative of all governmental powers in his dealings with the masses.

The governor and the mayor live in a sort of glass house during their incumbency. Their public and even their private lives are within the view and close scrutiny of their constituency. Their individual conduct is examined very closely and it becomes the subject of lively comment by the people.

No government on earth is better, in the last analysis, than the man who embodies that government or exercises governmental functions. That, gentlemen, is the principle that each and everyone of you would do well to bear in mind. The local and even the national administration will be judged by the people through your conduct. That is so in practice, notwithstanding the fact that we live under a government of laws in which men and persons theoretically play a small part, where the shortcomings or virtues of individuals are not considered important in the conduct of government because government, by virtue of the Constitution, is supposed to be based solely on the will of the people.

The exercise of government authority must depend upon your own virtues, your own earnestness, your willingness to devote your energies to the public good, your desire to carry out in practice the will of the people and to materialize the hopes of those who have elevated you to your high office.

I believe sincerely that there is no office under the Government of the Philippines more important than the office of a provincial governor or that of a city mayor or mayor of a municipality. I mention this fact to you, gentlemen, that you may realize, feel within you, the importance—the dynamic importance—of discharging your responsibilities not only in accordance with the law but in accordance with the spirit of government as prescribed in our Constitution. You must remember that it is not your good and your own welfare that you must promote. On the contrary, you must advance the good and the welfare of the greatest number of your constituency, even if your efforts in that direction should prove a neglect or an injury to your own personal good and interest.

In order that you may discharge your duties to the satisfaction of your constituency and for the welfare of your province, it is very important that you maintain continued and close contact with the people. Provincial governors should visit as frequently as possible their municipalities and as many of the barrios as time will permit them to inspect. You realize, I am sure, how important it is for the common people to be able to talk to the provincial governor—to express to him not only their complaints but also their longings and their problems, that they may have an opportunity to submit their petition for the communities in which they live or for the common welfare.

You will find that when you visit the barrios and municipalities, especially if you do not limit your activity to talking to the public officials in those localities, you will learn more of how the provincial and local governments are functioning than by reading the innumerable reports that are submitted weekly by the different agents of government in the municipalities and cities of your province.

You go to a barrio and talk to a common man and he will give you his opinion as to how the justice of the peace court is functioning. You will learn something regarding the conduct of affairs by the police force of the municipality. You will learn about their experience as to their crops and the problems they have to face, what pests, if any, have attacked their crops, so that you may report the matter to the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources in order that the pests may be properly combated. You will learn what they have heard as to the honesty or integrity of public officials. You can talk with them sympathetically, explain to them your problems of government, give them an opportunity to understand that there are many things that should be done but which under the circumstances, because of lack of funds or for some other reasons, cannot yet be accomplished.

In addition to that, I assure you that if you are in close contact with these men, when again you present yourself for a renewal of your term of office seeking a reaffirmation of the confidence of the people, you will have won not only one more voter but a leader for your reelection.

From the viewpoint of national government it is very important that you maintain those contacts, whether you are Liberals or Nacionalistas, because you and the mayors under you are the most important agents of the government upon whose activities the lives of the masses of our population depend. And I expect that when you make these visits and these inspections, you will learn the views of some of your fellow-citizens in your provinces concerning important public questions. I expect, I repeat, that you will have an opportunity to submit the petitions or the complaints of the people to the Department of the Interior in order that they may reach my attention because, my friends, we must not presume that we have the monopoly of wisdom and ability to run this government. Very often you will find that a humble, modest resident of the farthest barrio, as it was my experience when I was provincial governor, can also offer some suggestions that will prove greatly beneficial to your administration and to the people of your province.

I made mention of Nacionalistas and Liberals. The Liberals, of course, are my friends. The Nacionalistas are not my enemies. They just happen to be on the other side of the fence. But let me assure Liberals and Nacionalistas alike that as far as I am concerned, and I know as far as the Vice President and the Secretary of the Interior and all the agencies and offices of the government are concerned, your election as provincial governors removes from our consideration the question of the party to which you belong.

Nacionalista governors: you have been elected governors of your provinces by the free suffrage of your people as provided by our laws and our Constitution. In my eyes, when you appeared before me, to submit petitions for your province, the question as to whether you are a Nacionalista or not, or whether you are a Liberal or not, was of no importance. ( Applause. ) You represent the people and you are entitled to recognition as such by me and by every department or office of the Philippine government. Let there be no misgivings, therefore, as to whether the national government will cooperate with the governor belonging to the Nacionalista party elected in the last elections.

Whenever you want something for your province and it is within the power of the national government to grant it to you, it shall be granted, whether you are a Liberal or a Nacionalista, and I think I would be happier deep down in my heart if I might be able to do that for a Nacionalista governor in order to belie every insinuation that has been made in the past that Nacionalista governors will not be treated as they are entitled to by the national government. ( Applause. )

This convention has been called upon my request and that of the Secretary of the Interior for several purposes. First, I am very desirous to get acquainted with each and everyone of you. I desire to know your policies. I should like to be able to determine the spirit in which you will undertake the great responsibility of your office. I wish that you be acquainted with one another and that you may have an opportunity to discuss with the Secretary, the Undersecretary, and other officials of the department and with the officials of other offices, the problems that confront your respective provinces and cities.

The second purpose is to give you an opportunity to submit petitions or suggest to the Executive and to the Congress such reforms in the conduct of local administration as you may consider wise and beneficial to your respective communities. I should like to give you an opportunity to discuss openly these great problems. I know you are faced with many and some of them are insoluble. But if we cannot solve these problems, we, at least, should take steps to approximate ourselves as closely as possible to their proper solution.

The third reason for this conference is to afford me an opportunity to submit to you the studies and recommendations of the Board created under authority of Congress to revise the laws providing for the administration of local governments so that you might discuss the proposed reforms and submit your recommendations to me.

I cannot tell you that I will accept all your recommendations. I wish to assure you, however, that I am going to consider your recommendations with sympathy and in every case of doubt I will be inclined to follow your views. I am going to submit formally to you, through the Secretary of the Interior, three proposals for reform: First, the creation of the provincial legislative council about which I am sure you have already been informed. The council will be composed of the provincial governor as chairman, the two members of the provincial board as members ex-officio, a certain number of mayors elected by the mayors themselves, the number depending upon the number of congressional districts which compose your province, and certain members ex-officio: to wit, the provincial treasurer, the district engineer, the division superintendent of schools, the health officer, and other officials of the government.

I believe some of you will object to the inclusion of these ex-officio members. I have already heard objections to that effect on the ground that these ex-officio members, being experts in their respective departments, will try to dominate the policies of the provincial governors. I am sure that provincial governors do not have and should not have such an inferiority complex. Whether or not you know as much about the treasury department, for example, as your provincial treasurer, once you have all the necessary information before you, I am sure you will be able to decide questions affecting the matter on hand without being obligated to follow blindly the recommendations of the provincial treasurer.

That will also be true with regard to the work of the division superintendent of schools, the district engineer, or the head of any department in the provincial or city government.

These reforms seek to democratize the provincial board. Today, we have two members in addition to the governor. These members are elected at large. Very often the provincial board does not have an opportunity to listen to the viewpoints of men representing smaller political subdivisions. On the other hand, in the formation of this legislative council, political officials elected by the people will constitute a majority.

I trust that you will give this proposal your very careful consideration. You will come to realize that that council will be able to discuss intelligently many complex problems affecting your province, and the advantage of having these ex-officio members in the council is that you will have readily all the information that you need in order to decide some of these intricate questions.

Today, governments are not so much perturbed by not knowing what they want or what they would like to do. Today, the great problem of government is priorities. You will find in your administration of provincial affairs a multiplicity of projects that deserve your support. But you will also find that the means at your command are so constricted that you cannot even begin to attempt to carry into effect your policies concerning these projects on account of the limited funds at your disposal. Your great problem will be to determine priorities which constitute the most important and most pertinent problem for the permanent welfare of your people. And there, you will again find a rather intriguing question. Are you going to undertake reforms for the improvement of sanitary conditions in preference to building more schools? Are you going to construct a new bridge before you undertake to rebuild a barrio road? Very often we politicians decide these questions by the relative number of votes that we feel we can win if we give preference to one project over another.

That is natural and human, but is not proper. You must strike at a reasonable compromise between what is good for you politically and what is of permanent good for your different communities. It will not be difficult to decide that. Study the question properly and do not forget that your responsibility is primarily to all the people of your province and only secondarily, if at all, to the people by whose vote you have been elected. In addition may I say this, that the affections of the electorate sometimes are not stable. Sometimes the more good you do to a certain group of people, the less chance you have of expecting their support, because once having tasted of your help they feel that they can demand more from you and, of course, their desires are never satiated. So when they come and ask for something and you cannot grant it to them they will have forgotten the good you have done them.

There is only one course for public men or politicians to take which will surely be successful not only from the viewpoint of public men. There is only one course, I repeat, and happily that course serves both interests. That course is, irrespective of the temporary political effect which your answers must produce, to serve the interest of the people, the interest of the greatest good for the greatest number.

Do not worry about your elections or about the attitude that the electorate will take. Give your province a good government, show to your constituencies that irrespective of your own personal interest or of such a man, or such a member of the party, you are serving the people as best you can for the enduring benefit of all, and you will not only be blessed but I am sure that if you would seek an expression of confidence by the people, that will be given to you in larger measure, than it was given to you in the past.

The second proposal that will be submitted to you pertains to the revision of the present laws concerning powers of taxation given to provincial and local governments. At the level of progress that we have reached, the finances of local governments are no longer adequate to support a progressive administration of provincial and municipal affairs. We must remedy, as soon as possible, the present or from the national government. Governors, today, in if he can get a large amount of money from the national situation wherein a governor is considered a good governor can successfully seek financial assistance from the province government, and a mayor is considered a good mayor if he large part, are beggars for financial assistance at the door of the halls of Congress or of the offices of the Secretary of the Interior, of Public Works, of Education, of Agriculture and Natural Resources, or of the head of every other department and office of this Government.

That should not continue. It is high time that provinces and municipalities realize that they should have the power to control the financial life of their respective communities. You must assume your own responsibility. We will give you the power to tax. The question of whether you are going to use that power or not will depend upon each and everyone of you and the members of your provincial council.

You want more autonomy and rightly so. One of the most important items in the factors that constitute autonomy is the power to tax or to impose licenses. I desire that these powers be given to you so that when you come to the national government for assistance we may be able to ask you, “You need funds to cover your deficits. Why don’t you tax your people?”

In the national government Congress imposes taxes that it considers fair and proper and conducive to the public good irrespective of the effect that those taxes may have upon the political attitude of the people called upon to pay those taxes. In the progressive countries of the world, the basis of democracy is in the local government. In the United States and in France and in England the school problem, for example, is a subject that is within the jurisdiction of local governments. A sound and very salutary competition is developed among the different public officials in showing how much they can do over and above what local officials in other municipalities are doing concerning those matters.

The school problem could be solved more readily if provinces and municipalities were willing and disposed to participate in carrying the burden, the financial burden particularly that our school system imposes upon the national administration. Let me expand on that. Before the war our appropriation for public schools was around P37,500,000 if my memory does not fail me. We had approximately two million two hundred and twenty-eight thousand children in the schools. Last year, our appropriation was P53,600,000 and we have added to it P5,000,000. We have today in the public schools approximately 3,500,000 children. At the beginning of the school year, there were at least about five hundred and fifty thousand children of school age who wanted to be admitted in the public schools. And there was a general clamor all over the country—and telegrams came from the remotest municipalities and municipal districts—asking the government for more extension classes.

Our means were limited but certainly we exhausted those means, and if I have the correct information, because of these petitions we admitted in the public schools, through extension classes, between two hundred and two hundred fifty thousand more school children. So today we have around 3,500,000 students in the public schools.

At the beginning of the next school year, there will be new demands for more extension classes while at the same time we are doing our best and spending money to improve classes already established. The Department of Education is asking for the new classes an appropriation of P34,223,000 in addition to what we are already appropriating for public schools. In other words, if we are now spending P59,000,000 for public schools, the Department of Education wants P34,223,000 more than that plus other sums for other needs. With a total budget of P250,000,000, if we should appropriate about a hundred and twenty-six million pesos for schools and P73,000,000 for the army and the police force, we would have no money left even to vaccinate our children, repair our roads, or to pay the salary of my friend the Chief Justice or the Vice President or the Speaker or the members of the Congress. Of course, we know that before the war we had the same problem recurring every year. By the end of next year we shall have practically double the enrollment in the public schools, despite our great financial difficulties created by the war. Before the war, my friends, the total revenues of the government did not exceed one hundred million pesos, so that the total revenue of the government, if we were to grant the request of the Department of Education, would pay only 79 per cent of the total expenditures requested. And I remind my friends that it is only twenty months since I have taken my oath of office as President of this Republic, of this country.

It is only 18 months since the Government of the Republic was inaugurated. We have travelled fast and far in putting our house in order within that short period of time. There are some people who expect the government to make of the Philippines a paradise in a year and a half, not only to reconstruct our public facilities but to make every citizen of this country economically secure. How long does it take to build a sizable house? It has taken the Congress of the Philippines to construct this annex to the Legislative building more than a year and it will take some time before they will complete it.

In relation to some factories that we are planning today, especially those for the development of water power, with funds ready, with equipment that can be purchased or made, the estimates are that it will take us from four to five years to complete those projects. And your constituents in the provinces expect rather too much from you, as they expect too much from this government.

But there is an accomplishment of provincial and municipal governments which should be made clear to everyone and which I shall mention here, to show how governments can progress gradually, progressively. During the first year after liberation, all the expenditures of local governments were financed by the National Government. Every peso, every centavo paid as salaries to the provincial governors and municipal mayors and to the last municipal policeman was donated by the National Government. These expenditures involved an appropriation of around P28,000 , 000. I, of course, realize the fact that it was our duty to assist the provinces and municipalities in their financial difficulties, but only as long as they would find it necessary to receive that assistance or until they themselves could rehabilitate the collection of their revenues. And I decided that this process toward fiscal self-sufficiency for local governments should be done gradually. In the last fiscal year I asked the Congress to appropriate P17,000,000 so that the National Government should bear only one-half of the burden of maintaining local administration. Seventeen million pesos were divided proportionately among provinces and municipalities to help them in their financial difficulties.

This year—and every public official was warned that this would be done by the National Government—we are withdrawing all assistance to provinces and municipalities except to a few small provinces which, because of extraordinary circumstances, would not in good reason be expected to raise all the revenues needed for their support. We expect to spend, during the current fiscal year, over four million or five million pesos for assistance to local governments. It is a great accomplishment, my friends, for the provinces and municipalities in the short period of less than two years to have been able to pull themselves up from their bootstraps, you might say, because they started with almost nothing, with records of assessments of real property and other public files destroyed, looted or lost.

It is a great accomplishment that you can proudly present to the people of your respective provinces by pointing out that, whereas two years ago you were dependent entirely on the charity, I might say, of the National Government, now you can hold up your heads and say, “We are raising enough revenue to maintain our most important and essential activities.” I wish to congratulate the people of your different provinces and cities for that great accomplishment. Do the best you can with your revenues. And if we realize that after doing your very best you still are short of the amount required to support your essential activities, the National government will always be willing to come to your assistance.

In this connection, I wish to mention the revaluation of real estate for purposes of assessment. We appropriated five million pesos last year to loan to provinces and cities that they might bring about a reassessment of real properties in your different communities. My appeal to you is, “Do that as quickly as possible and as courageously as you can.”

The people of the Philippines must be made to understand that a good government is not that which does not collect any taxes, which does not arrest a man when he commits a crime, which does not try to set up an acceptable government administration which would cost some money. They must be made to understand that a good government is one that sees to it that every citizen complies with his duties under the Constitution which the people of this country themselves have written. They must support the government that has been established for their welfare. You are to show them that a good government is one that governs least but can best promote their welfare. If you are defeated in the next election because you brought about the reassessment of real properties in your provinces and the increase in taxes as a result of such reassessment, don’t worry. I believe that you will be happier in your defeat because you would realize that you have served your people loyally and well. The man who has defeated you, if the temper of the people remains the same, would in the next election also suffer defeat, if he tried to comply with his duty, because the people would repudiate his leadership.

I was governor of my province once, as I said before. The first problem that I had to face was the rehabilitation of our finances. I proposed in the first convention of provincial governors that all real estate in the Philippines be reassessed. That was made an issue against me in the elections. I explained to the people why, and instead of losing votes I won more votes from my electorate. You must have confidence in the patriotism and intelligence of your people. The people are not composed, my friends, only of an active and vocal minority which criticizes the government every time the government touches their pockets. Any property owner, who criticizes you for in­creasing the real property tax when such increase is justified by actual facts, has no reason to do so. If you explain this to the people, I am sure that you will gain ten votes for every vote that you lose from a property owner. Don’t be afraid. Have faith, I repeat, in the sense of justice, in the patriotism of our countrymen, and you will not be disappointed.

Another great achievement made by the provinces and municipalities in the past three years has been the solution of the housing and food problems. Many of the towns and capitals of provinces all over the Philippines were destroyed by the war. But the resiliency of our people, their courage, their strength of character have solved the housing problem sooner than we expected. Our people after the war did not fold their arms and cry for help and mercy and charity. They immediately put themselves to work and with their own strength built their own houses. Their destroyed farms were rehabilitated. The shortage of animals was remedied by the men using their own hands to cultivate the fields.

There is no food problem in the Philippines today. By food problem I mean a shortage of food. There was a food problem soon after the liberation. We were faced with that tremendous food problem when I took my oath of office. There was a shortage of rice in Manila and in many provinces. People were again eating camotes and cassava. We conducted an energetic campaign for food production, the success of which surpassed our expectations. That is the reason why the government has a tremendous amount of rice in its hands now. Because of typhoons and storms and floods, all the estimates made by experts proved to be too pessimistic. We imported approximately three and a half million bags of rice in order to supply the estimated deficiency of the Philippines during that year. We paid a high price for that rice but the government considered it was its first duty to feed the people to prevent starvation here, and I courageously authorized the acquisition of this rice to insure an adequate food supply for our population.

The food campaign program, as I said, gave excellent results. Provinces that had never before produced rice now started cultivating rice. Corn was produced in great quantities, camote was planted again, vegetables were grown, the poultry industry was rehabilitated, hogs were being raised everywhere. And we can say with a great deal of satisfaction and pride that in twenty months we have solved the food problem in the Philippines. What other country in the world devastated by war, in the Orient or in Europe, can show a similar record? Of course, some prices are still high but they are not high compared with the prices that were prevalent when we assumed office. In May, 1946, when this administration was inaugurated, rice was sold in the markets of Manila at between P2.50 and P3 per ganta. Three months after assuming office, I started rationing rice. And that price was immediately cut from P2.50 or P3 per ganta to around P1.35 per ganta. Today, the NARIC is selling rice of several classes, of course; but rice of the common class, which is not bad rice, is being sold at P0.80 and P0.90 per ganta.

In 1946, the price fixed by me for palay produced in the Philippines was P12 per cavan. I am bringing that price gradually down. This year, the price fixed by the NARIC, at which it will buy this product, is P6 per cavan. For better varieties, higher prices will, of course, be paid.

The government has been criticized off and on by some public men. How ridiculous it was, they say, for the government to export rice now when because of the typhoon there is to be expected a shortage of rice! They also say, “Why export this rice? Why not give it away to the people, especially here in Manila? It is very difficult for the rice to reach the provinces, for some reason or another.”

I want to answer these criticisms now because some provincial governors also inquired why we have to export this rice when there is an expected shortage of rice in their different communities because of the last typhoons. First, with regard to the exportation of this rice, I am sure that everyone of you knows that you cannot keep rice in a warehouse forever. Rice deteriorates very rapidly especially if the palay was damp or wet when it was milled. Damp rice would deteriorate in a month or two. The best rice in the Philippines deteriorates between three and six months’ time. Fungi grow on the rice, or the rice is attacked by weevils and thereby is rendered unfit for consumption. Most of the rice that the NARIC now has or holds has been imported. It is of very good quality. It was dried because the mills in other parts of the world have driers. But we could not keep this rice forever. We have had this rice for over a year now. Some of it, that which we have recently sold, has been in our possession for almost two years.

It would have been ruinous for the government to keep this rice in its bodegas because we cannot just give this rice away to the people. One million bags of rice cost us around 25 million pesos. The government is not in a position to give away 25 million pesos now. The Congress has not authorized me to do that, and the Congress could not authorize that because we did not have the money with which to pay for this rice. The NARIC owed the National Bank at the beginning of this fiscal year 44 million pesos for money advanced by the bank to purchase this rice. It is a preposterous suggestion for the government just to open the doors of its warehouses and allow the people to get all the rice they want.

Why do we not sell this rice at a lower price instead of exporting it? For two reasons, first, because when you have two or three million bags in your warehouses, and you reduce the price per ganta by five centavos, it means a reduction of over PI per bag, or a loss of P3,000,000 on three million bags. And if you would reduce that price by P5 per bag the government would lose P15,000,000, which we can not now afford.

Another reason is, the moment you reduced drastically the price of rice, you would have all these countrymen of ours who produce rice, especially the small farmers and tenants, ranged against us. They would feel that the government has betrayed them. We realize the difficulties under which they produced that crop, the risk and the dangers to their own persons. The moment you reduced drastically the price of rice, you would withdraw a very important incentive in the continued production of rice in this country, a fact which would make our food problem acute indeed.

You have to balance the interest of the producers with the interest of the consumers. The producers are already shouldering their part of the burden in order to ameliorate conditions among consumers. When I came to office, palay prices in Central Luzon were averaging between P22 and P25 per sack, despite all government price controls. Last year despite the fact that we fixed P12 as the price at which the NARIC was going to buy rice, producers actually sold this product at between P13 and P14 per sack. This year our price is P8. They are actually selling their rice at prices ranging from P9, P9.50 to P10 per bag.

But you will see that there is a gradual reduction in the price of rice and a corresponding reduction in the price of rice to the consumer. Those who attack the government for exporting this rice either are imbued with malice or are living in ignorance of actual facts. We sold this rice to Indo-China and to India and now to the U. S. Army in Japan, because it would have been spoiled and completely destroyed if we did not sell it at this time. The price paid to us is more than enough to cover our investment in that product. So we have not actually suffered any loss in the disposition of that rice.

Now the question will be asked, “What will happen if there is a shortage of rice here in the Philippines?” The government assumes responsibility for that. We still have more than a million bags of rice in our bodegas. Let me reveal to you the basis for our estimates on this problem. Last year during the months of October, November, and December, the NARIC was selling rice at a rate of between 30 and 40 thousand bags a day, at much higher prices than we are selling today. This indicated to us that there was a shortage in the supply in the Manila market alone. Now you ask me, “How much has the NARIC been selling since October, November, December, and even now?” Our sales average is between 1,000 and 2,500 bags a day. What does that indicate? That there is no shortage of rice in this area, the supply from within being sufficient.

Just for the sake of prudence, although it is a risky proposition, we are retaining about one million bags of rice in the NARIC warehouses, to allay any fears for any possible shortage of rice during the next five months. But even supposing that a shortage occurs. When will it occur? The shortage will occur, as it ordinarily occurs, around the months of July, August, September, October, and November. The question will be asked, “What will the government do if there is a shortage during those months?” My answer is that we have already an allocation to purchase rice from abroad during the second half of this year. There should absolutely be no fear that there will be a shortage of rice during the first half of this year. During the second half of this year we have ample quotas to satisfy the local demand and the government will again in that event import all the rice that may be necessary to fill the local demand.

Two other subjects, my friends, I should like to bring to your attention. The first is our eagerness that you may cooperate with the different departments of the government in carrying out their program which, although national in character, interests you directly and vitally. First, consider the Bureau of Health of the Department of Health. The Philippines is one of the most fortunate countries in the world. Although our country was a battlefield we have not had any epidemics. And the rate of mortality in the Philippines today, compared with the rate of mortality before the war, shows a decided improvement. The same is true with regard to infantile mortality. But we have to be ever watchful. Provincial governors sometimes believe that they have nothing to do with the activities of the Department of Health. That is not true. You have a right to confer, to call these district health officers, and tell them in what respects you feel their service is deficient. Help them to correct mistakes. Help them in enforcing quarantine regulations when these are imposed. Help them in their campaign to vaccinate the people who should be vaccinated either against typhoid or cholera or smallpox. That is essential. You are interested in that because it is the health of your own people that is more directly affected.

Regarding the question of public works, don’t rely entirely on the district engineer. I should like that the provincial governors, once in a while, spend some time to inquire as to the cost of construction, and likewise to obtain information, to assure themselves that there is no anomaly in the awarding of contracts and the construction of public works. See to it that every official or employee of the different departments of the National government is actually working instead of playing mahjong during office hours; call the attention of the head of that department in your province to any irregularity in the conduct of employees; and if he gives no satisfaction, report the matter to the corresponding Department head in Manila. In some respects, you are the agents of the National government to inform us of the manner in which the national services are being carried out in your respective provinces.

The courts—watch the conduct of the justices of the peace and their contacts. Hear the comments of the lawyers, and don’t permit a single justice of the peace or judge of the Court of First Instance that is unworthy of his oath and his office to continue in office. My friends, there are two services of the government that are absolutely important, two services that are in close contact with the people and by whose actions your administration and my administration will be judged by the people—the police department and the justice of the peace court. If you ever see a justice of the peace who himself compounds offenses in combination with the chief of police, or who accepts money as the determining factor of his decision in any case, don’t feel that you have nothing to do with that, because that is a wrong attitude. You will be blamed by the people for allowing that man to continue in office. Report the fact immediately to the Secretary of Justice.

The people can only have confidence in the courts if they believe and are convinced that the judges are incorruptible—if they are convinced that the judge does not accept bribes or does not permit his personal relationships to weigh in the judgment of his cases. When we talk of the con­fidence of the people in the administration of justice, you may forget the Supreme Court or even the Courts of First Instance because, after all, there is a limited number of people that have cases in those courts and in the Court of Appeals. The problem is in the lowest court, the court of the justice of the peace. No matter how honest and how able the Supreme Court may be, no matter how efficient and just the decisions of the Court of Appeals and of the Court of First Instance may be, if your justice of the peace courts do not function in such a way as to inspire confidence in the honesty and rectitude of our courts, you will have destroyed the most important factor of our government. And when you come to deal with justices of the peace, I want you to believe me when I tell you that no matter who he may be, no matter to what party he belongs, or who recommended him for appointment, if he is unworthy of that post, I entreat you and I expect you to report him to the judge of the Court of First Instance and to the Secretary of the Department and, if you want to be certain that action will be taken thereon, I like you also to send me a copy of that report. That is basic. Let us not talk of impartial courts in the Philippines unless we can purify the courts of the justices of the peace.

You should do the same regarding the judge of the Court of First Instance. But be careful. Don’t submit reports to me unless you are certain of the facts. I know that you want to work for the good of your administration. I would be greatly disappointed, however, if the provincial governors and city mayors submit reports adverse to justices of the peace or judges of the Court of First Instance for personal or for political reasons, which would embarrass the justices or judges in the performance of their duties. The judges should be completely free from any sense of fear. No judge of the Court of First Instance, no justice of the peace courts, should feel that he is answerable to any one in this government, to the President, to the Department of Justice, to the governor or any other officials. He is answerable only to the law, so long as he decides cases in accordance with his conscience, and is not influenced by any other consideration.

I want to tell you now that I am going to support a judge or justice of the peace even against the insistent demand for his removal by the most powerful leaders or officials of this land. You must give a feeling of security to the judge- make him feel that he is responsible to no man for his decisions, and that he can continue in office so long as he performs his duties in accordance with his conscience.

In regard to the Department of Agriculture: A governor today is not only a governor who should be satisfied with attending meetings of the provincial board and approving or disapproving ordinances passed by the municipal councils, or making a few appointments (for he can appoint only very few persons under the law); a governor today must be a man who is interested in the fives of the people within his province. He must be a man who should study how the people live, how they can live with the little that they earn, what can be done to increase their income, what other products can be produced in the province to increase the economic progress of that province. He must be a crusader. I do not want to set myself as an example. When I was a provincial governor—and I was then 26 years old—very naturally I then had some rather very personal or, as they say, “side issues”. But I still had time to visit the farmers and talk to them about their problems. Everybody talks about producing more, and the question asked is, “What shall we produce?”

Secretary Garchitorena of the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources will tell you what you can produce, and very profitably too, at the present time. You should be propagandists. And the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources is going to set up experimental and demonstration stations all over this country to inform farmers how to improve their crops, how to improve their methods of cultivation, how to raise livestock, and how to produce new crops.

There are three important crops that you can produce now. I shall mention them very briefly. The Department of Agriculture has reported that today there is a great demand for peanuts in the world, just the plain, humble, ordinary peanut that can be produced in this country—in every yard, in every farm, or in any piece of land reached by the sunshine. The last information I have about peanut is that it is sold abroad for $180 or P360 per ton, and the price is rising. A hectare of good land, when properly cultivated, can produce at least one and a half tons of unshelled peanuts. If it produces only one ton of peanuts, the income to the farmer is P360 per hectare. What crop in the Philippines today produces that much per hectare? When you consider the small amount of effort which the farmer must exert to produce a hectare of peanuts, you will realize that it is a profitable crop. And peanuts can be grown as an auxiliary crop in many places where, after the regular harvests, the fields are not too dry. As an auxiliary crop it has also the advantage of enriching the soil.

The peanut plant is very rich in nitrogen; it has some nodules in its roots that retain nitrogen in the earth and preserve its fertility. Propagate the production of peanuts. Some will say, “If we produce peanuts, who is going to buy them?” I know that Pangasinan can produce peanuts after the rice harvest; I know that in Masbate, for example, all those lands that were formerly used for grazing purposes could be planted to peanuts. We can send you a few tractors there and plow several hundred acres of land to peanuts to teach the people how to produce it. Now there are mechanical harvesters and shellers for peanuts in the Cotabato valley, in Negros, and elsewhere. In Negros, when you allow the land to remain fallow (it is the custom among sugar producers to leave one-third of their land fallow every year in order that the land might rest for the next planting season), you could plant peanuts and thereby be able to harvest a profitable crop and at the same time enrich the soil.

The next crop I would like to tell you about is ramie. Ramie planting is more difficult and requires specialized knowledge, not like peanut planting. Everybody in the Philippines knows how to cultivate and produce peanuts, and, after all, it is a four-month crop.

Another crop which we want developed here very rapidly is the humble and almost despised legume—I say almost despised, as a matter of fact despised or ignored by the people in many parts of our country, but of which the provinces of Northern Luzon are so fond and so proud, and justly so—the saluyot You know there is an example in many countries where very modest and humble plants that grow wild and unnoticed, have proved the salvation, the economic salvation of those countries. I am not talking of saluyot for the purpose of producing the leafy legume which constitutes a favorite item in the diet of our brothers, the Ilocanos, and which I also relish. I have in mind the fiber in the stalk of the saluyot. The saluyot belongs to the family of jutes. This year we are going to pay P50,000,000 for jute bags that will be imported into the Philippines—that is, if we can import the amount we need. There is a market for the stalk in the Philippines. We need jute bags for sugar, for rice, for copra and for baling hemp—and prices are very high today.

I do not know how long it takes to grow saluyot, but I understand it does not take more than four or five months, and it can grow almost anywhere. This would interest you. Many provinces which are now very poor economically would become prosperous if they intensely went into the production of this plant. It is known in Mindanao and in the Visayas by other names—I have forgotten them—but I know that many of you have heard of saluyot. In Leyte it is called sumpak, in the Tagalog provinces, pasaor. This plant grows all over the Philippines. It is not hard to cultivate it. We are going to set up weaving machines in order to weave the yarn into cloth. Or, we can start this enterprise as a home industry. We have made sacks out of the saluyot fibers and they are very, very good. In many respects, saluyot fibers make stronger and better bags than jute bags. I would like, before you go home, that you visit the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and ask for information about these things. The greatest service that you can give to your people is to enable them to add something to their income and to increase their purchasing power. When your people produce saluyot there will be more revenues for your provinces, your provinces will be better off, your people will be happier, they will eat better, and their income will be larger. These are the practical problems that governments must face today.

Twenty-five years ago, no government ever concerned itself with the manner in which the people were fed. If there was a shortage of rice, well, the government was sorry. Governments those days concerned themselves only with maintaining peace and order, carrying on international relations, and administering justice. Today governments all over the world act like a great, generous, liberal father of a family, who must concern himself with all the needs and the health of the people under his jurisdiction. And you, provincial governors and mayors, must likewise undertake the responsibility.

I mentioned peace and order. The Secretary of the Interior has made very plain before the country what the policy of this government is with regard to peace and order. I have taken an oath that I will defend the Constitution, do justice to every man, and promote the welfare of the people of this country. Peace and order is the first and most important duty of government, for a government cannot long exist and cannot perform its duties and obligations to the people without peace and order. In most provinces of the Philippines, except in a few areas in Central and Southern Luzon, there is peace and order. I have recently read in the newspapers and also heard the opinion of many men as to the need of liquidating this unwholesome situation in these areas by giving amnesty to the so-called dissident elements and permitting them to live in peace and as ordinary citizens within our communities. The argument is that these people are not rebels. They say that these people are willing to support the government but that they are fighting for certain reforms or concessions that the government is unwilling to yield.

These views and statements come from people who are not properly informed of the kind of men who form these groups and who are not well-informed of the efforts made by the government to make these men understand that the government is willing to support social reforms which are within its power, from time to time, to grant. You will remember that, soon after my election, or during the campaign, I made the statement that if I were elected, I would maintain peace and order in Central Luzon within six months. I will tell you why I said that. I said it because, even before my election, I had conferences with the leaders of this movement, and they made me believe that, if certain reforms were granted by the government, they would not only lay down their arms but also cooperate with the government. I had some more conferences with these men, with all their leaders, in Malacañan after my election, in which I asked them directly what reforms they wanted. I told them that I would answer them Yes or No. I was not going to dilly-dally with them or make promises. I was going to tell them what changes I should do, what the government could do, and at what time such changes would take effect.

They submitted only two requests: first,—that large estates be acquired by the government for occupants of those lands. I told them, “You don’t have to talk to me about that; it was I who suggested, during the Constitutional Convention, that the right of expropriation by the government be extended to the right to acquire private property for the purpose of distribution to actual occupants of those lands.” I said I believed in that social philosophy because I do believe that, as much as possible, every man who cultivates or tills land should be given an opportunity to acquire the land on which his house has been built and wherein his children grew. I said, “You don’t have to argue with me about that.” Then they said, “We are happy.”

The next request was to increase the share of the tenants in the distribution of the rice crop. I said, “You don’t have to talk to me about that either. Before the war, Mr. Feleo who is here present”—and I pointed at him—”knows that under the administration of President Quezon I proposed a better share for the tenants. My proposal was approved by the President; only that, with the coming of the war, it was not executed.” I presented to them the plan that I had submitted to President Quezon, which was the 30-70 apportionment of the rice crop. I asked them, “Do you agree to it?” They said, “We would be happy if we were given 75 per cent instead of 70 per cent.” But we argued about it and I told them how important it was that these reforms be made gradually so as not to produce hate and animosity between tenants and landlords who, after all, should work together for their mutual benefit. They endorsed the program. I sent the program and my recommendations to the Congress. Representatives of these groups appeared before the Congress and endorsed that program, which was approved and immediately enforced.

But now, instead of expressing their gratification for certain concessions which the government had given to them, their leaders sent me a letter defying the government and practically declaring war on the government of the Philippines. I am not a man thirsty for blood; I have seen too much blood during the war not to create in me an irresistible abhorrence to bloodshed. For one year, the Secretary of the Interior had parleyed with these men and those who wanted to intervene in their behalf. The Secretary of the Interior has been receiving promise after promise that they would turn in their arms if we concentrated the civilian guards, so that the civilian guards might also turn in their arms after they had turned in theirs. The government could not disarm private individuals who are law-abiding while these lawless elements were roaming all over the land, kidnapping, murdering, and robbing people, because the government could not give protection to civilians who wanted to live in peace. Many do not understand why the government allows private individuals to carry arms. These men are licensed, just as many people were licensed before the war to bear arms for their own protection, because we cannot place a constabulary or policeman alongside every man, every private citizen, or in every house. Even that would not be sufficient because these dissident bands roam in large numbers.

I have talked to the leaders of these people; I have pleaded with them; I have guaranteed their safety, provided they return within the pale of the law and face the courts. They have killed, they have murdered, they have robbed, and they have kidnapped even women and children. Because of my duty to uphold the dignity of this government and the honor of this country, and because my duty under the law is to look after the enduring welfare of this nation, I can no longer continue with the policy of appeasement or a half-hearted policy to bring these people to justice. If there were fewer men and fewer publications literally glamorizing some of the leaders of this movement, picturing them as great heroes when they are daily plotting against the stability of this government and the security of our private citizens, I am sure that the pacification campaign could progress much faster. No, there shall be no more appeasement. My instructions to the Constabulary are to save every drop of blood that they can spare. Generally, the Constabulary never shoots unless shot at, but members of the police force are killed, mayors are being kidnapped, innocent women are daily being raped or taken to the hills. Whom do they injure? These men claim that they are fighting for the rights and the welfare of the poor men, and of the tenants. It is the tenants and the poor men in these provinces who are suffering most from the activities of these elements. They are forced to leave their barrios and their farms and flock to the towns, leaving everything behind them—their houses, their crops, and their work animals. But why? What is behind this movement?

I have studied and pondered long on the causes that induced these people to lead the life that they are now living. I classify these elements into two groups. First, the fruit of the toil of others, or of the wealth of others. Very often, they are identified as Huks. Conscientiously, I cannot say that in all cases these men are not in contact with Huk leaders; some of them are. We know this because when they are captured, we find identifications and letters which reveal their contact with these leaders.

Those in the second group, and these are composed of barrio folk from Pampanga, some places in Nueva Ecija, some places in Bulacan—very few in Bulacan and very few in Tarlac—are those who are coerced or have been coerced to join these elements after having been kidnapped from their homes and threatened that their families would all be liquidated if they did not join the groups. Some of these people succeeded in escaping once in a while and they report to the Constabulary. That is how this information has been gathered.

But the leaders of this movement are men who do not believe in the ideology that we have adopted in the Constitution. They do not believe in democracy. They do not believe in the right of private property. They do not believe that in our country the individual and not the State is supreme; that the rights of the individual are so powerful that they cannot be overridden by any action of the State. They are Communists; they want to overthrow this government by force. Thank God, this government has the physical strength and power to control this situation. And it will be controlled. ( Applause. )

If these men were really working to ameliorate the condition of the so-called peasants, why don’t they come to me after my having approved some of their petitions and requests, and ask me for other concessions, if they have any to ask? No, they no longer talk except in general terms about “amelioration of the conditions of the masses”. But they now talk about a “democratic peace”. What is a “democratic peace”? They have been asked to define it, and I have yet to see what the definition of a “democratic peace” is. Does a “democratic peace” mean that these roving bands will be allowed to roam freely murdering people, ransacking towns, and burning communities? If that is what they mean by “democratic peace”, I am against it now, and I am going to be against it as long as I live. And I know that the country is against it, for we want peace and law and order. ( Applause. )

We have a democratic peace. In what part of the world, I ask, are individuals more free in the exercise of their individual rights than in the Philippines? We have free press, free religious worship, the right to pursue freely the happiness of each individual. Every man here is equal before the courts and before the government. What do they mean by “democratic peace”? This is a peace under our democratic Constitution. So, I have reached a conclusion that it is no longer possible to appease these groups. No matter what concessions the government might give, so long as they cannot control power and govern this country, they will continue to fight the forces of law. There is only one way of fighting force: that is to fight it with a superior force. ( Applause. ) I have no hates; I am always open to reason. But from now on, I want to tell every governor here present and every municipal or city mayor and, through you, I should like to tell every mayor and policeman in your provinces and cities, what the policy of the government is, and that the government expects all public officials to cooperate with that policy. If you gov­ernors can show to me any other way, with dignity and within the laws of our country, whereby this matter could be solved, I shall be very glad to listen to you and follow your suggestions.

I made a mistake, and I am not ashamed to own it. During the first days of my administration, Secretary Zulueta and I agreed that we were going to carry on a policy of attraction toward these elements, in the belief that they were honest men with honest convictions. We were mistaken. I do not know if I can be excused for my mistake for not having had at that time the vision to foresee their subsequent acts. But, I made that mistake, and I am going to try to see to it that the mistake is corrected. I should like to ask every governor present here, especially those in the affected provinces, to give to us, to the government, all the cooperation that you can give to restore peace, a democratic peace, as I have defined it, in your respective communities; peace that will assure to every man security in his person and in his property and the fullest enjoyment of the fruits of his toil; a peace that will assure every man freedom from being coerced to do anything against his will; and freedom from being threatened with death if he dares to testify on something about the truth in certain matters before the courts.

I ask for your cooperation, and I expect your cooperation. You may find it necessary while exerting your efforts to bring back peace to your provinces, to contact some of these elements. Let me warn you: don’t establish these contacts without the knowledge of the officer who is at the head of the Constabulary in your respective provinces, or without the knowledge of the Secretary of the Interior. The same should be said to every municipal mayor. He should not dare to contact these elements or in any way to aid or abet them in their lawless activities for no reason in the world, without the knowledge of the Constabulary or the Secretary of the Interior. And this warning is given for your benefit. We are watching every man who is in contact with these elements, and we are watching every individual who, in any way, abets or aids these groups whom we believe are determined to overthrow this government by force—overthrow it by either wiping out the armed forces of the government if they can, or assassinating and kidnapping the most important officials of the government. So I want you yourselves to be careful. We will try to have a showdown as quickly as possible. I trust you will believe me when I say that I have arrived at this conclusion because, in my humble opinion and within my limited intelligence, I can find no other solution to this grave problem that besets our nation.

My friends, I have spoken too long, and I have spoken about many subjects. I wish to end this exposition by leaving with you one thought, namely, that you and I are servants of the people. That is not merely an expression of principle. You should feel that it is true in fact, and I assure you that, as far as I am concerned, I do feel it and believe it. We must work together, you and I and those in other departments and agencies of the government, work together in full accord, with one single purpose in view, that is, to serve the best interest of our people, the largest number of our people—together, Nacionalistas and Liberals, irrespective of party. I am confident that by so doing, we will be able to enhance the security and happiness of our fellow citizens. I thank you. ( Prolonged applause. )

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.