Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On behalf of the 1948 Red Cross Fund Drive

“CHARITY IS THE GREATEST OF ALL VIRTUES”

Today the Philippine National Red Cross starts its yearly drive to raise funds to cover its estimated expenditures for the current year. It calls on every inhabitant of the Philippines to give his ardent and whole-hearted support to the humanitarian purposes for which the organization has been established. I am sure that the people in general realize that the Red Cross is giving them invaluable service.

Since its creation as an independent organization, our Red Cross has been able to render succor to the helpless and unfortunate victims of national disasters—thanks to the funds contributed by our people.

During the past year, the Philippines has been lashed by six destructive typhoons, leaving in their wake enormous loss of property and crops. Many lives were lost in these calamities. The Philippine Red Cross, always ready to help the distressed, distributed relief and succor in the form of food, clothing and medicine to a total of 248,674 persons. It also handled the distribution of government relief. In inundated places, as in the several towns of Isabela where 3,000 persons were isolated by the swelling rivers, Red Cross relief workers cooperated with government agents to rescue the victims by using amphibian trucks, landing barges and bancas to remove them to places of safety.

Fire, too, took its heavy toll. Several fires broke out in various parts of the Philippines, the biggest of which were in Cebu City and in Tarlac. In the former, 2,383 persons were immediately given assistance through the Red Cross and in the latter, 2,902 people were aided.

When the Mayon Volcano in Albay erupted in early January, last year, the Red Cross evacuated the people living at the foot of the volcano to places of comparative security and provided them with food and medicines.

But the Philippine National Red Cross does not confine its humanitarian service only to disaster-stricken thousands in times of grave calamity. Even during normal times the Red Cross carried on its mission of relief and assistance to those in need of them. In 1947 it aided no less than 165,000 families belonging to different nationalities in the form of consultation, guidance and information regarding legislation and government benefits: like the actual preparation of claims for government benefits, the procuring of necessary documentary evidences, and assistance in referring persons in need to the proper welfare agencies.

The Military Welfare Service of the National Red Cross, with its representatives in different military camps and hospitals, provided consultation and guidance to those in the service, assisted in filing claims for government benefits for those being discharged, gave hospital and social service to patients, and provided wholesome recreational activities for the sick and the able-bodied. More than 9,000 soldiers and their families were thus aided up to last December. This same branch supplied 2,635 athletic and vocational articles to various army units.

To promote a safer and healthier way of life, the Safety Service department of the organization trained 22,600 men, women and children in first aid, water safety, and accident prevention. Approximately 14,000 men and women were given home nursing instruction by the Nursing Service department, the training consisting chiefly in the care of the sick, the prevention of diseases, and the proper care of mother and child after childbirth. This department enrolled about 2,000 registered nurses.

Because of these continuous acts of humanitarian service, and as a matter of national pride, we should support the National Red Cross. For many years our Red Cross was a mere chapter of the American Red Cross. As such, we were almost entirely dependent on the financial support of the mother organization. Naturally, we did not enjoy the right to control its policies. But now, because of our adherence to the Treaty of Geneva on February 14, 1947, the Philippine National Red Cross has become independent and must carve its own destiny. It must establish its own prestige through its initiative, resourcefulness and painstaking devotion. As a Philippine organization, it deserves our moral and financial support.

Every peso contributed to the Philippine National Red Cross goes to humanitarian service. Let us not forget that food, medicines, supplies and clothes entail large outlays from the funds of the organization. Men and women, self-sacrificing to a fault, must be employed and paid in order that the program of assistance to the victims of inevitable catastrophes may be carried on without interruption whenever and wherever help is needed.

We must, therefore, get together and give the Red Cross as large a contribution as we can afford. We must lend it a helping hand that it may the better carry on its noble functions. We should spare no effort to make of this organization which is truly national in scope and universal in function, an entity worthy of our pride, our honor, and our prestige as a people.

In normal times we do not think so much of the Red Cross. We take its functions for granted. We feel that it is not our concern that it should carry on. But when catastrophes strike, such as the last typhoon or the recent earthquakes which disrupted public utilities and deprived thousands of our people of their homes and gravely affected their means of livelihood, the first thought that occurs to us is, “Notify the Red Cross.” But the Red Cross needs no prodding. The Red Cross is on the job night and day, taking great risks to save lives, to restore property and to spread comfort to as many areas as can possibly be covered under adverse circumstances.

Now that the Red Cross needs our help, we must not let it down. We would be recreant to our civic duties were we to turn a deaf ear to the pleas of the Red Cross. The direction and control of this humanitarian entity is in capable and honest hands. Mrs. Aurora Quezon, the Chairman of the Board, called upon to direct its policies, is zealously and disinterestedly working to expand the service of the Red Cross. The nation owes her a great debt of gratitude. Solicitor General Manuel Lim, Mrs. Pilar Hidalgo-Lim and many others who are assisting in the management and administration of the Red Cross, deserve likewise the full-hearted acknowledgment of the people. They are a constant inspiration to the great unsung number of hardworking doctors, nurses, and operatives that patiently execute the various programs and projects of the Red Cross.

This unselfish organization merits the full confidence of the people. Whatever support we give to this organization will go out in multiplied benefits to the millions of our under-privileged masses who, by the strange irony of fate, always suffer the most when national catastrophes strike us.

I appeal to the entire nation and to every individual to give, and to give unstintedly—so that the Philippine National Red Cross may truly be national in ideal as well as in service. Contribute all you can to this worthy cause. However little it might be, it will help to save a life, or give shelter, food or clothing to the victims of disaster.

Charity is the greatest of all virtues. Here you have an opportunity to exercise that virtue. Give generously to the Red Cross!

NOTE.—The President started the campaign for Red Cross fund with a contribution of P1,000.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.