Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines At the Radio Program of the U. P. Alumni Association on the Eve of its Annual Homecoming

[Delivered on April 19, 1947]

THE ROLE OF THE ALUMNI OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES

Once a year, in this season, members of the increasing family of graduates of our beloved Alma Mater foregather for one big fiesta of fellowship. One such big occasion is due tomorrow afternoon and I would urge all who can, to come and join in the reunion. This is an excellent custom which we do well to preserve to secure and enjoy the periodic renewal of inspiration and faith at our Alma Mater’s bosom.

An alumni reunion is more than a mere opportunity for intimate exchange of affecting memories of personal and common experiences—refreshing and pleasurable as that is. It is more than an opportunity for checking up on the loose threads of our lives, of our associations and friendships, dating from our student days, and tying them together again where we can—touching and profitable as that is.

More important than all these, the alumni homecoming should provide occasion for an annual accounting of our individual and collective stewardship as citizens of our Republic and as members of that other broader association formed by devotees of art, science, and letters. It is a time to take stock of ourselves as individuals and as a group, a time to reckon with the “talents” we were certified to have upon graduation and take measure of how we have used them, what we have done with them, since we took our pledge as graduates to be loyal to our University and to serve our fellowmen. An alumni reunion is also an opportunity to revisit our University and see in what way we can be of service in promoting its welfare and advancement. This latter concern is particularly important at this time when our Alma Mater is struggling so hard to reestablish its facilities and standards and when we are planning to improve and expand its physical plant and curricular activities.

Our University is not the oldest institution of its kind in our country. But because it is the institution of higher learning of the Government, it must assume a special role of cultural leadership in this Republic. It has lived directly on the resources provided by our people; it is the people’s university devoted to the service of the people. It has a continuing tradition of accomplishment set against this special background.

It is important that we bear this in mind as we find occasion to take a critical glance at the individual roles we have played as private citizens. The idea is not so much to find basis for self-congratulation as to determine whether we have measured up to our responsibility and how much more we can exert ourselves to fulfill what is expected of us.

The immediate question before us concerns our specific obligation to our University, to our respective communities, and to our country as a whole; and this must be viewed in the light of the devastation and disorganization visited upon us all by the last war. I realize that we have our individual problems of rehabilitation to think about. Our efforts, however, in this direction acquire significance and distinction according as they are tied up with and related to the rehabilitation of things bigger than each of us individually, things that transcend our individual selves in scope and importance.

Our University is one of these big things. Its present state of disrepair is a stupendous challenge to the breadth and depth of our loyalty, of our creative spirit, of our constructive abilities. What can we, what have we, to offer in organized effort, as a measure of our loyalty, our affection, our sense of obligation—what have we to offer our Alma Mater to help restore her to her accustomed position of beneficent power and prestige as a nursery for national leadership?

This question calls for more than mere systematic articulation at stated times of our love for our University. It calls for more than formal pious resolutions of good intentions. It requires positive and concrete effort on an organized basis of the members and leaders of the U P Alumni Association. It involves sitting down and taking thought of a program of action. It imposes definite knowledge of the problems of our University to determine which are within the scope of our Alumni Association and what definitely we can contribute to solve them. It demands a steadily broadening appreciation of the mission our University plays in the life of our country and the part which pertains to us as loyal alumni to help our Alma Mater discharge that mission.

I should like to see as a result of our periodic reunions the formulation of a schedule of concrete objectives worthy of every alumnus’ militant adherence and participation. I should like such a schedule drawn up in response to the crying needs of our University and as dramatically brought into focus by the devastation it has suffered. I see no better way of enlisting the potentialities for constructive cooperation of our alumni in the service of the great institution which has made us what we are. And nothing can be more effective in fulfilling the basis for alumni solidarity and for lasting satisfaction in the hearts of all alumni who wish to be continually identified with this institution and its noble traditions.

What is expected of us in relation to our Alma Mater conflicts in no way with our obligations to our respective communities. As members of alumni circles and chapters in our respective provinces and municipalities, we constitute a privileged, distinguished group of responsible citizens imbued with certain noble principles and traditions. On occasions such as the present one, let us pause to appraise what we have done to date in our communities to discharge our obligations as individuals and to reflect honor on our great University. Let us ask: What problems—social, economic, or cultural—beset our neighborhood and what leadership have we to contribute towards their solution? What legitimate vision of better things to come do we or can we provide our fellow citizens as a high point around which to rally their interest, enthusiasm and direct cooperation to the end that the promise of the democratic life can be increasingly fulfilled for all our people?

What is true in respect of our immediate neighborhood may be enlarged to comprehend our country at large today. It is a question of expanding the sphere of our thought and action according as we succeed in discharging our responsibility in a limited field.

Our world is moving much too fast to make us happy as mere bystanders and spectators. Either we are active, constructive participants or we are splintered entities that may be crushed by circumstance into impotence and futility. In the state of flux in which our world presently is, we must support the forces that advance and build, and offer our every ounce of energy against the forces that subvert and destroy. We cannot remain watchers too long without forfeiting our hard-won rights and liberties and being destroyed ourselves.

In urging my fellow-alumni to join and act together in a movement to facilitate our country’s reconstruction, I would ask you to get rid of the notion that all you need is a government job to get going. We cannot all be on the government payroll. Many of the constructive forces at work today in this country are outside the Government, and their rewards are often greater. But to whatever responsibility we are called, inside or outside the Government, let us make the most of our opportunities; let us create them where they do not exist, and affirm our capacity to shape our country’s destiny and master our own.

I would not pretend that this privilege is restricted to the alumni of the University of the Philippines. It is the privilege, the opportunity, of every Filipino whatever the institution that has nurtured him. But I must say that greater things are expected of our U. P. alumni because they have been given greater facilities and more opportunities to prepare and qualify them for leadership.

Let me take this occasion to voice my abiding hope that the alumni of the University of the Philippines will continue to acquit themselves most creditably in their stewardship of the light, the inspiration, and the faith which their Alma Mater has given them. They have been given much, and they must give more in return. This way lies the fulfillment of the University’s mission and of the promise of enduring freedom and happiness for all our people.

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.