Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Relinquishment of American Sovereignty over the Island Fortress of Corregidor

[Released on October 12, 1947]

Mr. AMBASSADOR, GENERAL MOORE, Mr. CONGRESSMAN, MY FRIENDS:

We are gathered on hallowed ground, filled with soul-stirring memories and consecrated by the blood and valor of Americans and Filipinos. No man can tread upon this soil without recalling the epic struggle that took place here. No man who loves liberty can think of Corregidor without being moved by a sense of obligation to the gallant soldiers who here laid down their lives that liberty may-be preserved for us and for all mankind. The heroic saga of Corregidor has been recounted wherever freedom is cherished and the noble valor of fighting men is revered.

For almost half a century Corregidor stood sentinel at the entrance of Manila Bay, a symbol of military power. But to the Filipinos it was more than that. To us, it was the citadel of liberty and democracy, for we knew that its powerful guns would never be fired except in defense of freedom. It fulfilled its mission with a heroism unsurpassed in the annals of war. It has become in our eyes a symbol of justice, of liberty, of democracy, to which this Republic is eternally dedicated.

The transfer today of this island fortress to the Republic of the Philippines is the fulfillment of a pledge made by the United States. It is significant that this tiny place of our territory, emblazoned in the memory of millions of Americans and dear to them because of the role it played in our struggles during the last war, should now be graciously returned to us by the free will of the American people. The Philippine Republic appreciates this noble act of renunciation. It strengthens our confidence in America and tightens the bonds of friendship which link this Republic to her.

The simple but impressive ceremony that we witness here this noon is transcendent with meaning. Once before, as General Moore has recounted, the American Flag was lowered on this island. It was lowered in temporary defeat and surrender. Today, how changed! The American Flag has been lowered neither in defeat nor in surrender, it has been lowered in victory, a victory that transcends and surpasses in significance the greatest victory achieved in any battlefield. It is the victory of liberty, of justice, of democracy, and of America’s undying devotion to the cause of peace and liberty all over the world. (Applause.)

The mounds of dust and rubble and the shambling ruins that have met our eyes upon our arrival here are precious to us, so precious that no word can express the priceless legacy that they leave and bequeath to the people of the Philippines. I am prouder to accept the ruins of these once stately buildings than if they were all made of marble and steel, because these buildings speak to us of the heroism and gallantry of the men who fought here. These ruins speak to us of the sacrifices of those who died here. They speak to us of our duty to defend liberty at whatever price and of our undying obligation to defend the cause for which the men who died here had given up their lives.

I was with the staff of General MacArthur when he decided to make a last stand on this island. I was a witness to the dauntless spirit of the officers and men who fought here. I recall the calm but determined leadership of that great soldier who commanded our armies. With little regard for his own personal safety he instilled into all of us the spirit of heroic valor which alone made possible continued resistance to the overwhelming onslaughts of our foe. The men caught the fire of his leadership—and with a gallantry that surprised the world, against overwhelming odds, with rapidly dwindling supplies and ammunition, Corregidor held firmly until the strategic purpose of its resistance was achieved.

I saw beardless boys, the flower of the youth of America and the Philippines, slaughtered on the beaches that surround this island. Philippine Scouts battling side by side with American infantry and marines fought with such passionate courage and skill that they evoked the admiration of even our foes.

I remember that in those tragic days of battle Americans and Filipinos were so fused spiritually in the common effort to resist that it could truthfully be said that here in Corregidor every man forgot the narrow distinctions of nationality and became one solid phalanx of liberty, happy to fight and die that peace and freedom may be preserved for us and for all the peoples of the world.

Among the most gallant soldiers who fought on this sacred soil is the man who was in command of this fortress—Major General George F. Moore. (Applause.) No commander in any battlefield enjoyed the unstinted confidence of his men more than General Moore did on this island. There was not a soldier on this battlefield that did not realize that Corregidor was doomed, that it could not hold on forever. Despite that conviction General Moore’s contingents stood their ground unflinchingly until the order to surrender was given; and when that order was given the fighting men shed tears of grief and disappointment for they were determined to resist to the end even unto death while the battle lasted. And it lasted for five long months. General Moore’s forces fought relentlessly and with full faith in their leader. He shared the privations of the humblest soldier in his lines; he took the same risk to which they exposed themselves; they died blessing his name. Those gallant soldiers fought the harder because they trusted and loved their leader. I am very happy that General Moore has been enabled to participate in these ceremonies because I am sure he must feel supremely proud to turn over this island whose defense was in his charge, now completely liberated, to form part of the territory of a free Philippines.

General Jonathan M. Wainwright, a brave and noble soldier, whose painful duty it was to yield this last bulwark of America and the Philippines to the enemy during the first phase of the war, came to Corregidor upon General MacArthur’s departure. He covered himself with glory in the Battle of Bataan, and when he took command of Corregidor, I met him here—as fine a type of American soldier as ever was. A ceaseless spark of fire shone in his eyes, denoting an eagerness to keep on fighting until the last! He has had the good fortune to survive the atrocities of Japanese prison camps and to receive the honors of a grateful people. And justly so.

To these gallant leaders and to the brave men who fought under them both in Bataan and Corregidor, Americans and Filipinos, goes the eternal gratitude of the people of this Republic. (Applause.) To those who died here we dedicate our sweetest thoughts. We treasure their memory. We will never forget them.

This Republic will prove its gratitude by consecrating itself to the consummation of the noble principles for which they fought and died.

We will work for peace, for an enduring peace, for a just peace, for all peoples, for victors and vanquished alike. We will continue to struggle for liberty to push forward the frontiers of freedom—an expanding dynamic liberty—not only for ourselves but for all men. We will strive to free ourselves and others from want and fear, and to promote the welfare and happiness of every man. We will support the peaceful efforts of all nations, in all climes, to be free and will allow them to set up governments of their choice. We will cooperate with other nations in establishing a world order under which each nation will have an equal opportunity to pursue the happiness and prosperity of its citizens. We will demand in the council of nations the recognition of the principle that world peace is indivisible and that the world cannot remain half-slave and half-free. We will not tolerate a world order which permits the prosperity of some nations to be achieved at the expense or the economic subjugation of others. We will dedicate this Republic to the Christian principle of equality of sovereignty and equal opportunity for all.

Corregidor is the indestructible monument that I wish to pledge to these noble principles. It will serve to remind this and future generations of my fellow countrymen that these are the ideals for which so many gallant soldiers gave their lives. May God give us strength and perseverance in the fulfillment of these principles for the enduring benefit of all mankind. (Long Applause.)

NOTE.—The ceremony returning Corregidor back to the Philippines was held at the foot of the flagpole that had become historic for having borne the Stars and Stripes for half a century, save the short period of 34 months when the Japanese flag took its place.

As soon, however, as Corregidor was reconquered after a six-day campaign, General MacArthur returned to the Fortress on March 2, 1945, and ordered the color guard of the 503 Parachute Infantry Regiment: “Hoist the colors to its peak and let no enemy ever haul them down.” Thus, the bitterness felt when the Stars and Stripes was torn and ripped to shreds and trodden down by the Japanese on May 7, 1942, was fully assuaged.

The American colors were hauled down on October 12, 1947, not by an enemy, but by the American people themselves.

Serving as a background of that historic event were the ruins of the barracks on the Topside parade ground. The Philippine flag was raised after Major General George F. Moore, commander of the defending forces in 1942, had said:

“With it will go the warmest wishes of all Americans, and it is our sincere hope and fair belief that until the end of history no flag other than that of the Republic of the Philippines shall ever fly over the hallowed ground of Corregidor.”

It was exactly 12:15 o’clock past noon when the Stars and Stripes was lowered to the accompaniment of the American national anthem. And three minutes later at 12:18 o’clock, the Philippine emblem was hoisted to the accompaniment of the Philippine national anthem.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.