Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the occasion of the Establishment of an Independent Philippine National Red Cross

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

This glorious day sees the beautiful consummation of a long cherished dream. At long last the Philippine Red Cross is on its own—it has attained its independence from the American Red Cross. It will now chart its own course for the attainment of its great humanitarian aims.

The activities of the Red Cross in the Philippines, heretofore. had been conducted through the Philippine Chapter of the American Red Cross. This local chapter rendered invaluable service to our people in times of both peace and war. The calamities to which the Philippines has been often subjected, such as floods, fires, storms and epidemics, found the Red Cross ever ready to provide assistance to sufferers. It is of record that the answer to the call for mercy and help was always immediate and efficient. To the lasting honor of this great organization, the world can bear witness that it has never been remiss in its humanitarian mission.

This work has been carried out in a spirit of self-sacrifice and heroism. Red Cross workers have been known to brave the winds of a storm, to breast the waves of a surging sea, to meet the terrors of a conflagration, to dare the deadly menace of infection in order to be able to bring relief to the injured and the sick. In this manner suffering has been minimized, comfort has been spread, and the growth of disease has been arrested.

This humanitarian program, which is only a continuation of the labor of love so beautifully and self-effacingly exemplified by Florence Nightingale, and given organized initiation by J. Henry Dunant, should now be carried on here with even greater enterprise and broader popular support by the Philippine Red Cross. Its cooperation can be counted upon to stamp out disease, to raise the standard of public sanitation, to educate the masses in the ways of healthful and useful living, and to contribute in making our country a land of happy citizens.

I trust that it will continue to fulfill its noble program of humanitarian aid in the forms of HOME SERVICE to assist veterans, war widows and orphans, and all those in distress; SAFETY SERVICES to assist the people in training on first aid, life saving, and accident prevention; NURSING SERVICE to instruct the citizenry in the care of the sick members of the family; the JUNIOR RED CROSS to carry on a youth program supplementing the Philippine educational system; and MILITARY WELFARE SERVICE to assist Filipino soldiers in camp and hospital.

The Government has always supported the worthy cause of the Red Cross. We have given all the aid possible to this organization whenever and wherever such aid was requested. The annual campaign for funds has met with the people’s approval: they have always contributed generously. The Philippine Red Cross is an entity to which government and private citizens have never shown indifference. This organization may continue to rely upon the unstinted support of the Government and people of this Republic.

The independence of the Philippine Red Cross does not in any way mean that it shall be divested of international responsibility and prerogatives. We are a signatory to the Geneva International Red Cross Convention and as such we owe certain international obligations. For this reason, while taking justifiable pride in being able to serve the greatest interests of our people in a completely independent status, we should never be oblivious of the fact that we have international commitments to observe and adhere to. Knowledge of these international obligations together with our own natural impulses gives us the necessary urge to participate actively in all activities looking to relieve suffering everywhere. Mercy, like charity, should begin at home but it must spread its blessings whenever possible without regard to national borders.

I cannot stress too strongly the mission and functions of the Philippine National Red Cross in our daily lives. I trust that it shall gather strength and inspiration from the ideals of helpfulness and charity established by the pioneers of the Red Cross movement.

The men and women, therefore, who work for the Red Cross, volunteer workers and regular personnel alike, should be imbued with the spirit of self-abnegation. They must discharge their tasks not for personal and material advantage but for the highly commendable and spiritually enriching motive: service. Their calling is a sublime apostleship which demands unremitting perseverance, heroic patience, unquestioning selflessness.

The Government of the Philippines will continue to rely upon the abiding humanity and peerless service of the Red Cross. I trust that the Philippine Red Cross will, on this date of its independence, resolve to keep this lofty tradition pure, unblemished, and that it will merit, as in the past, the gratitude and blessings of the Filipino people. I have no doubt that under the inspired and heroic leadership of its present chairman, Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon, it will render even greater service to the people of this war-devastated land.

Mother of Mercy, Godspeed!

NOTE.—Republic Act No. 95, approved on March 22, 1947, gave corporate existence to the Red Cross, which is a voluntary organization, officially designating it to assist the Government in discharging the obligations of the Republic toward the Geneva Red Cross Convention to which it adhered on February 14, 1947.

After the passage of the incorporating law, the Philippine National Red Cross applied to the International Red Cross for recognition as an independent society. In the cablegram granting the recognition, the Vice-Chairman of the International Red Cross Committee conveyed the “warmest congratulations of the International Red Cross to the members, volunteers and professionals of the PNRC staff on their joining the family of IRC organizations.”

Mrs. Aurora A. Quezon, the first Chairman, in commenting on this recognition, said: “The independent status of Philcross is, for us, a matter of both personal and national pride.”

Source: Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.