Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines Congratulating the Philippine Scouts

[ November 30, 1946 ]

Today we commemorate our national heroes and I have chosen to come to this camp because of the thousands of them who lie buried here. Here in restful peace lie thou- sands of Americans and tens of thousands of Filipinos who gave their lives in heroic defense of the Filipino and American flags and of the liberty and justice which those two great flags symbolize.

I have come to honor not only the Filipino soldier dead, but also the gallant Americans who shed their blood in our soil so that our nation might live in freedom. They are as much our heroes as they are heroes of America. Our gratitude to them springs from our hearts in equal measure as to the soldiers of our own race. The fact that these Americans and Filipinos fought for the same cause and the same ideals and died in our country will be recorded in our history for our children to read and remember with gratitude.

We fought side by side as comrades, Americans and Filipinos. I trust that we will continue to live as comrades and, if need arises again, act as comrades in defense of the ideals that we have in common.

I am particularly happy today to have witnessed the parade of the Philippine Scouts. This organization is the bearer and beneficiary of a glorious tradition. No soldier anywhere in the world fought in the last war more bravely and gallantly or with more skill than the Philippine Scout. His record is unsurpassed by any soldier in any front.

While I was still in Corregidor in the early part of 1942, I witnessed the performance of the Philippine Scouts under the unmatched leadership of General Moore, now Commanding Officer of the United States forces in the Philippines, to repel the air attacks of the enemy against tremendous odds. Their success was exceptional. Their exploits reverberated to the four corners of the earth and merited the commendation of the Prime Minister of England. During the battle of Bataan I witnessed eleven successive savage attacks made by the enemy against a thinly held line of Philippine Scouts near Balanga. The Japanese came time after time with tanks and heavy artillery and frenzied shouts of “Banzai”, preceded by a heavy air barrage. The Scouts held their lines without available reinforcements and with limited gunpower. They never yielded an inch of ground except momentarily; they always took back, before the sun had set, the ground they had lost. The Philippine Scouts emerged in the last war covered with glory and without a single defeat, a record attributable to their invincible fighting spirit.

I wish to congratulate every man who has been inducted into the Philippine Scouts. It is an honor, a privilege to belong to this organization. While the Philippine Scouts is a part of the United States Army, I am confident that every Filipino who has joined that force has done so because, in serving the United States Army in that capacity, he knows he is serving the interest of his own people and nation. Our special relationship with the United States and the purpose for which the Philippine Scouts has been organized fully justify that conviction.

It is unfortunate that our present laws withdraw the right of citizenship from a Filipino who has joined the United States Army. I am certain that this law was passed without considering the possibility of a situation such as has derived. We have an agreement with the United States permitting her to establish bases here for the mutual defense of our two countries. The Philippine Scouts will be used chiefly to man these bases. In joining the Philippine Scouts the Filipino is only required to take an oath of loyalty to the United States to the extent of his obligations as a member of the United States Army. He does not become an American citizen by that fact. In sentiment and in loyalty he remains a Filipino; he should be allowed by law to remain a Filipino. At the next session of the Congress I propose to recommend an amendment to the citizenship law to permit members of the Philippine Scouts to retain their Philippine citizenship.

I am sustained in this attitude by the fact that the Philippine Scouts has been organized to insure the defense of the Philippines. That mission is not in conflict with the duties of a Filipino citizen. On the contrary, it is the supreme privilege and obligation of a citizen. I am convinced moreover that the use of the Philippine Scouts for this purpose will greatly facilitate the execution of the program for the mutual defense of the United States and this nation. This force will also serve as a great reservoir of trained soldiers for our citizen army, which may be called upon in a crisis to take arms to defend our homeland from attack.

I wish to extend my felicitations to the United States Army for the speed and success with which it has whipped the Scout force into shape. I wish to assure every Filipino in this force of the approval of the Government of his enlistment, and to assure him, further, that he will continue to be looked upon by our people as their brother in flesh and blood.

In wishing you every success, I desire to utter the hope that you will continue to live up to your noble traditions and that you will serve the American Army with the loyalty that you have undertaken by your oaths.

******

NOTE.―This speech was delivered at 10: 00 o’clock a.m. before the 12th Division of the U.S. Army, more popularly known as the Philippine Scouts, following a parade given in honor of the President at Camp O’Donnell, in Capas, Tarlac, which adjoins the National Cemetery.

Under Republic Act No.106 which was approved on June 2, 1947, a Filipino citizen may enlist in the armed forces of a foreign country without losing his Filipino citizenship, provided that (a) the Republic of the Philippines has a defensive pact of alliance with such foreign country, or (b) such foreign country maintains armed forces on Philippine territory. This law was in fulfillment of the assurance given by President Roxas in the foregoing speech that the Philippine Scout should not lose his Philippine citizenship for enlisting in the U.S. Armed Forces.