Commencement Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines At the University of the Philippines

A CALL FOR MORAL REGENERATION

Mr. PRESIDENT, REV. FATHER RECTOR MAGNIFICUS, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTIES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES AND OTHER UNIVERSITIES, MEMBERS OF THE GRADUATING CLASSES, SENATORS AND CONGRESSMEN, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

The holding of Commencement Day of this University in the midst of this ruin is eloquent testimony of the deathless character of human knowledge; it is eloquent testimony of the irrepressible urge that inspires the young men and young women of this country to achieve learning and higher education; it is eloquent testimony of the truth of what the Gospel said that “the iron heels of a tyrant may never stamp out the life that is contained in a seed when it falls on fertile ground.”

Thirty-five years ago today, on a day like this, without the attendance of relatives and friends such as are gathered here this afternoon, I graduated from this University. I received my diploma with a thrill which I am sure every graduate must feel, but my emotion was probably more intense, because I had no one with whom to share it. The fact, however, that I was so alone gave me the opportunity to ponder the significance of life and the course I should follow. I clearly remember the hundred and one noble thoughts that eagerly scrambled with one another to gain primacy in my mind on that unforgettable occasion. After the ceremony I walked home alone in silence, in deep meditation. I recalled Shelley’s beautiful lines:

“. . . I was a billow in the crowd of Common Men, that stream without a shore, That ocean which at once is deaf and loud.”

Somewhere on the way I determined to devote my life to the achievement of liberty for our country and to the promotion of the welfare and happiness of our countrymen.

I have never swerved from that course. I am still engaged in the task of securing the greatest good for our people. In its performance I had to face quite often the bitterest struggles and the keenest tests of heart and soul. I have reaped neither riches nor material gain, but as I look back to the years that I have lived, I feel happy that I have throughout been loyal to my purpose and have not deviated in the least from the high resolves I had formed on graduation day.

It has taken me fully 35 years to achieve a very natural ambition—that of being considered by my dear Alma Mater as deserving of the honor that has now been bestowed upon me. For that I am proud. For that I am grateful.

Commencement Day should be a day of dedication. This is the day when you, graduates, still fired by the noblest impulses, still free from the shackles of Mammon or the exigencies of a materialistic world, should lay out the course of your lives and determine irrevocably to follow that course. If your purpose is noble and your aim high, you may not gain wealth or influence, or power, but I am certain that you will achieve in the end an inner happiness which no wealth, influence or power can buy.

I urge you to consecrate your lives to your country and to the service of your fellowmen. But whatever you may do, you must never forget certain imperatives: Your resolutions are nothing, unless they are implemented by patience, self-sacrificing and intelligent toil; your resolutions are nothing, unless your conduct and your every act are characterized by prudence, reasonableness, probity and justice; your resolutions are nothing and your achievements will be worse than naught, unless your whole life is firmly anchored upon those moral and ethical principles which are the foundation of civilized society.

Turn a deaf ear to the allurements of ease and comfort. Never be guilty of any ignoble act. Even in the heat of the hardest conflicts, or in the face of danger to yourselves, to your fortune or the security of your family, fight fairly at all times. Never strike your opponents while they are down. Lift them up and give them every opportunity to fight back. Never take undue advantage of the generosity of others or bite the hand that sustained you when you were fallen and needed support. Be good, be patient and charitable always, even toward those who are unfair or unkind to you.

I should like on this occasion to speak upon the need for revitalizing our moral and ethical principles, not only because they seem to have been forgotten by some of our people as a result of our contact with the enemy during the occupation, but also because only by the strict observance of those principles can we enhance the well-being of our people and help insure the peace of the world.

Many centuries ago the great Confucianists proclaimed that one of the important functions of the State was to promote the “education in virtue which was essential to social order and the national welfare”. They insisted on the virtues of simplicity, thrift, hardihood and the proper relations among men based on filial piety. This education in virtue, so clearly understood in the past and practiced by our parents in our homes, in the schools and in the churches, must be revived and intensified if we are to fulfill our hopes for the enduring happiness of our people.

When I was a young boy, my mother used to speak to me frequently about moral and ethical principles. She was acquainted with the teachings of Christianity. She spoke to me of the basic principle of the Torah, which we now know as the Golden Rule: “Do not unto others that which thou wouldst not have done unto thee.” This was the basis of her philosophy, and she assured me that the practice of this principle would create in me a love of peace, kindness, patience, charity, honesty, and justice. What she taught me has definitely influenced my whole life. I shall never be able to repay her enough for it. I was still very young when she uttered this injunction to me: “Work hard,” she said, “to achieve a worthy ambition; be fair and just to every man; never do anything which will make your mother or those you love blush or shed a tear in shame.”

I made this principle the lamp for my footsteps throughout my life. I commend it to all of you. I found it an excellent touchstone to determine the wisdom or justice of all my actions. It conforms strictly to the requirements of the moral law which underlies our social order and our legal institutions. It could be made the moral creed of all our citizens.

Some years before the war I came across a book, an unpretentious little volume. I do not remember who had written it. Its title was something like this: “The Promises By Which We Live.” I found in this book a rationalization of the principles which my mother had taught me as they are applied to dealings among men in the ordinary course of life. The author cogently expounded the thesis that human relations are governed by promises, express and implied, and that human conduct develops by the manner in which these promises are performed. In a way this concept is also applicable to the relations between individuals and the State, as well as the relations between nations. It is a remarkable philosophy which can reduce to a simple practical formula the application of the abstract moral and ethical principles that should govern the course of men and nations.

I recall some illustrations given by the author to support his thesis. When a man issues a check he promises that the check will be honored and paid upon presentation to the proper bank. When a man sells a piece of property, he promises to hold the purchaser safe against claims adverse to his title and guarantees that the property is in the condition that he represented it to be. When a person accepts employment, he promises that he will serve loyally and render the service he contracted to perform to the best of his ability. The old Jewish philosophers expressed this obligation in this injunction: “Earn your wage.” These are, of course, contractual obligations the performance of which is prescribed and regulated by law.

But there are many other relations among men that must rely on the moral principles of the individual for the performance of the implied promises involved. When a man is appointed to public office, for example, he promises to be honest in the performance of his duties. He also promises to execute those duties in accordance with law, not for his personal benefit but for the benefit of the people at large. When a man enters a house, he promises to conduct himself politely and in accordance with his duties as a guest. When a man is invited to a feast, he promises not only to be civil but also to deport himself in such a way that he will not abuse the courtesy of the host and create embarrassments for him. When a school or a university accepts a student, it promises to give him the necessary training in accordance with the representations it has made concerning the excellence of instruction. When a man becomes a citizen of a nation, ne promises that he will be loyal to the government and its institutions and that he will pay his taxes, that he will render military and other services required of him that he will obey the laws and regulations, and that he will perform such other duties as are imposed upon him by law.

Innumerable other examples of everyday application may also be cited: When a lawyer accepts a case, he promises to be honest with his client, that he will truthfully advise him as to his rights, that he will defend his case to the best of his ability. When a physician accepts a patient, he promises to study his illness thoroughly, diagnose his disease and prescribe for his cure, and that he will advise consultation with other physicians if he should consider himself not fully prepared to handle the case. When a pharmacist agrees to fill a medical prescription, he promises to use the precise ingredients in their stated proportions and not to substitute them with less costly substances. When a man acquires a farm, he promises that he will put it into production and he will pay his laborers or tenants fair wages. When a man owns a building, he promises that he will use it not only for his profit but also for the good of the community; he also promises that he will not require exorbitant rentals from those who may lease it. When a man acquires large wealth, he promises that he will use it not only for his personal enjoyment but also for the welfare of the community where he lives. These promises result from the recognition that wealth, property, education, political or social influence or power impose upon those who have them certain definite social responsibilities clearly definable under the moral law.

In international relations the conduct of nations is governed by promises much in the same way as in the case of individuals. When a nation enters into friendly relations with another, they both promise that they will respect the freedom and the laws as well as the territorial integrity of each other. When an immigrant is admitted into our country, he promises that he will not violate our laws that he will not conspire to overthrow our institutions and that he will always conduct himself in a manner that will justify the privilege granted to him.

You may examine the whole field of human and international relations and you will find that it is true that all of them are subject to the fulfillment of certain promises which are either defined in law or controlled by ethical and moral principles accepted by civilized society. Even in the relations between parents and children we find this to be the case. When a child is born and raised by his parents, he promises under the natural law to obey his parents, to honor them, to serve them, to repay them at least in the form of satisfaction and happiness born of the success which he may achieve in life.

This world would really be a much better place to live in, and it would be a happier and a more peaceful world were the promises involved in human and international relations duly performed. The Ten Commandments are indeed a synthesis of the important moral precepts which should govern men in their conduct towards each other and in their relations to God. These Commandments should be made a part of our being, and they really are, if we could just listen to the small and still but stern voice that speaks from within ourselves, and which we call conscience.

It is sometimes very difficult to teach abstract moral and ethical principles. Confucius tried to expound them in their application to the relations between father and son, master and servant, and the government and the people. But his studies covered a limited field and some of his principles, which he rationalized in relation to the conditions prevailing at his time and for the purpose of sustaining a feudalistic system, can no longer be wholly accepted in these days of freedom and democracy and in the face of the principles of Christian morality which we have embraced. But Confucius has shown the way to bring home to every individual and every nation the need for a continued regard and respect for moral and ethical principles governing every case. Many of the most intricate international questions of today could be solved by the mere application of the Golden Rule. We could insure the peace and progress of the world if every citizen and every nation would simply comply with the promises they have made.

The concept of justice as we understand it—justice based on moral principles and revealed by the conscience of every man—is the only secure foundation for civilized society. And justice requires that individuals and nations perform the promises they have made. Many generations before Christ the Jewish prophet Ezra said that rigorous observance of the law was the sole rule for righteous living. If he meant not only the written law but also the moral law which is likewise written in the hearts of men, he must be regarded as having enunciated a principle which is of inestimable value to mankind. It was left for Christ to clearly establish this principle. In His priceless philosophy He enjoined mankind to obey the laws of Caesar; and as for the Mosaic Law, He was most persuasive when He taught the duty to obey not so much the letter of that law, as the spirit of it, which is no other than the moral law, written upon the tablets of conscience at a summit higher than Mount Sinai—the pinnacle of the human spirit. Thus, He taught the observance of the fundamental virtues of justice, kindness, and mercy, and the respect for the rights of others.

I have often wondered how beautiful this world would be were every man and nation to practice the sublime virtues preached by Christ. I have often wondered how much easier would be the progress of all nations and all men towards the millenium, were everyone to embrace the principles of freedom and democracy which He taught and made the rule of our lives. I have often wondered how much happier all men would be, how much more fairly they, rich and poor alike, would share in the fruits of toil and in the wealth of the land, in accordance with their just deserts, if all were to apply and follow the moral principles that Jesus preached.

The chaotic conditions prevailing all over the world today are largely due to the abandonment of these principles, to the lack of faith in them, to the selfish purposes of men and nations who forget the promises they have made.

In our country, we must return to these first principles; we must go back to the home, to the school, to the churches for aid in the solution of many of our basic problems. Democracy is made of men and it cannot be stronger than the men who compose it. This Republic will not long endure unless we purify and strengthen the character of our people and imbue them with a better understanding not only of their rights but particularly of their obligations to their fellowmen and to the State. And this has to be done now. It has to be done now because we need it urgently to check the prevailing lawlessness and dishonesty which, like a cancerous growth, is eating up the substance and destroying the soul of our people.

Sojourners who view the ruins of our buildings are shocked at the extent of devastation suffered by our country during the last war. Well may they indeed feel sympathy toward our people for the material destruction such as few countries have undergone. But little do they imagine the moral havoc wrought upon many of our people. The war brought about a moral breakdown upon a large portion of our population, what with the peculiar war psychology and the injunctions merely to survive, regardless of the means, which we heard during the occupation, even at the sacrifice of the moral law. When we think, therefore, of rehabilitation, let us not forget that it has two aspects: material and moral. I am very much afraid that moral rehabilitation will take a much longer time and a much greater effort than material, because moral regeneration has to deal with the imponderables of the heart and of the soul. This moral revival cannot be achieved by mutual denunciations and recriminations, but by a frank recognition of the origins of the evil which sprang during the war, and by an intelligent study and application of the proper remedies.

I call upon all our countrymen to put their shoulders to this common patriotic task. I call upon parents, teachers, and the priests and ministers of every church, to help in this epochal undertaking. I call upon them to participate actively in a national crusade for the moral regeneration of our people. Let us do it for our country and for the world. Let us do it for our peace and happiness. Let us do it for the glory of this Republic we love so much. Let us do it for ourselves and for our children. Let us raise and educate men and women who can be depended upon to perform strictly the promises by which we live.

NOTE.—In these commencement, exercises the President was awarded the degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa , which was the second conferred on him in one month.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.