Commencement Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines At the University of Santo Tomas

[Delivered on March 20, 1948]

THE UNIVERSITY OF SANTO TOMAS MOLDED THE ETHICAL FOUNDATIONS OF OUR LIFE

VERY REVEREND FATHER VICE CHANCELLOR, VERY REVEREND FATHER RECTOR MAGNIFICUS, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY AND OF THE STUDENT BODY OF THIS UNIVERSITY:

It is a high distinction to be honored by the University of Santo Tomas—this ancient and illustrious institution that has fashioned the character and the thoughts of all but a few of the greatest thinkers and patriots of our race. While it would be difficult to appraise accurately the important role which this University has played in the cultural growth of the Philippines, it could be said truthfully that if this University had not existed, it is doubtful whether we could have attained our present level of civilization or even the liberty that we now enjoy.

The basic ethical foundations of our society were molded within the walls of the University of Santo Tomas. The philosophy of freedom as well as the priceless knowledge culled from a study of the humanities, science and mechanical inventions which are the possession of the masses of our people have largely flowed from within its portals. Rizal, Arellano, Quezon, Del Rosario, Guerrero, and many others could not have risen to the glory which they achieved, nor would they have been able to impress upon this nation their ideals and character, had this University not sown the seeds of their greatness in their hearts and minds. Our nation owes much to this three-century old institution. Santo Tomas richly deserves the everlasting gratitude of the Filipino people.

I have received quite a few honors in my life. I regard the honor bestowed upon me today as one of the most precious. I shall carry it always with humble pride, ever striving to merit it more and more as long as I live.

The graduates of this University, particularly those who have graduated today, have the responsibility of upholding the noble ideals which this institution represents. That is more imperative now than ever before. We are living in a confused and almost chaotic world, a world in which the cross-currents of national interests and ideologies are clashing continuously, with unrestrained force. Although men and women everywhere are in quest of the same goals, nevertheless deep conflicts arise among nations and within nations which are well-nigh irrepressible.

We shall look in vain for explanations of the present state of world affairs outside of ourselves. The cause is in the minds and hearts of men. Divisive nationalism springs from misinformation and unreasoning fear. Religious clashes are the result of bigotry and intolerance. Racial wars are caused by prejudice and vicious intransigeance, patent demonstration of man’s inhumanity to man. Class conflicts are the result of differences in the concepts of justice and the failure to apply the Golden Rule, although quite often they are instigated by selfish men serving other masters. The gigantic clash of ideologies which we witness today and which many fear is fast leading the world to a new holocaust more terrible and destructive than any in the past, is basically due to the failure of man finally to reconcile in all lands the principles of liberty with the principles of order, and to effect a balance of economic opportunities and benefits among different classes and groups of society. This conflict has now emerged as a struggle between democracy and this totalitarianism, between freedom and this military despotism. It is actually threatening the peace of the world.

It is the mission of universities and all institutions of learning everywhere to teach men to follow ideas, not shibboleths; to be reasonable and not dogmatic; to reject half-truths and accept the sincerity of those who hold opposite views. This world, despite its sad experience, will never enjoy an enduring peace, not even internal peace in each nation, until men learn to apply the rule of reason and tolerance and justice in the solution of social and political conflicts. But justice, of course, is not a mathematical formula. It is merely the expression of what at a given moment is accepted by the majority or by those who wield power to be in accord with the ethical and moral principles applicable to a given controversy. And here is where reasonableness comes in. There must be a readiness on the part of those who are adversely affected by the decision to accept it in good grace, much in the same way that we accept the results of a popular election or the decree of a competent court.

Today the world situation is critical indeed. Three years have passed since the fighting of the Second World War ceased and yet the peace has not been concluded. Former allies in the last war who fought to preserve liberty are now engaged in conflicts which might result in the extinction of liberty throughout the earth. The measures recently taken by different nations are giving rise to fears that another war may not be avoided.

The United Nations, established to prevent future wars, has been powerless to avert the possibility of the coming struggle. Russia, through her veto of measures intended to implement the peace, has destroyed the effectiveness of that world organization. The result is the creation of conditions which are the prelude to war. Two weeks ago the American Secretary of State declared that the world situation was “very, very serious.” President Truman confirmed this appraisal three days ago. There is a religious war in Palestine which all the moral force of the United Nations has not been able to stop. Religious clashes between Hindus and Moslems threaten to engulf the new states of Pakistan and India into fratricidal strife. In Greece, Democracy and Communism are locked in a death struggle for dominance. In Italy, so recently liberated from oppression, the champions of liberty are in danger of being submerged by the tide of Communism. Last week Democracy in Czechoslovakia was cold-bloodedly liquidated. In China an internecine war that has raged unabated for two decades between totalitarian socialism and republic government has tied that great and noble nation to the millstone of impotence. Brave Finland is now in the throes of agony, with little hope of avoiding her being dragged behind the Iron Curtain. Sweden and Norway and Denmark are in fear of the same fate. Lithuania, Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Albania, Czechoslovakia, parts of Austria and Northeastern Germany are already under Russian control.

These events are not the natural aftermath of war. Nor have they occurred through the use of active military force. The new weapon has been coercion and the use of a well-organized, closely-knit political fifth column operating in practically every country, instigated by a world-wide propaganda directed to the workers of every nation to destroy industrial potential, create chaos and discontent, and finally tear down Democracy and set up Communism. We have in the Philippines our own share of the effects of this program. The objective is domination of the whole world and the control, through communistic dictatorships subservient to Russia, of the lives and destinies of all the peoples of the earth.

Having awakened to the danger, the democratic nations under the leadership of the United States and Great Britain have at long last taken definite steps to defend the bulwarks of freedom and the way of life we have chosen. They have come to realize that the First World War and the Second World War could have been averted if the democracies had shown in time their willingness and readiness to resist the projected aggressions.

Wilhelm II of Germany would not have invaded Belgium had he known that not only England but America would have come to her rescue. Hitler would not have decided to rape Poland if England had been ready for war and the United States had made her intention known that she would fight to maintain democracy and the peace of the world.

And so today, taking stock of their experience, the United States, England and France, as well as the other democracies of Europe, have recently adopted measures indicating unequivocally that if Russia should pursue her present course and attempt to subjugate Europe and other parts of the world, she would be resisted by the combined power of all the liberty-loving peoples of the earth. This decision to use force against force is being rapidly implemented. Five nations of Western Europe—England, France, Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg—have concluded a defensive pact for fifty years. Logically, this pact may be considered to include the three zones of Germany presently occupied by the United States, England and France. It is also presumed that the other nations which have accepted the Marshall European Recovery Plan, including Spain, will collaborate with the “Stop Communism” program. Every democratic nation is, of course, expected to take action within its borders to prevent the effectiveness of the Communist fifth column which may exist therein. This is being done in the Philippines now. It will be intensified in the future. The first step I took was to outlaw the Hukbalahap and the PKM organizations, which are communist affiliates. There will be no let-up in this program. We must prevent them by every means within our power from stabbing us in the back or weakening our power of resistance while we are facing a threat to our security. I trust that those among us who sympathize with subversive elements, will now realize that they are allowing themselves to be used as unconscious tools for the liquidation of the very institutions of freedom and democracy which they so earnestly claim to protect and defend.

National isolationism is now a forgotten creed among nations. The atomic bomb, the guided missile, the jet plane, bacteriological warfare and other recent scientific discoveries, have made the territory of every nation practically contiguous to the firing line. In the last war most nations desired to remain neutral, but subsequently they found to their discomfiture and misfortune that neutrality was impossible in a total war and they had to participate in the conflict at a time when they were least prepared to do so. However far we may be situated from the expected battlefields, however reluctant we may be to join the conflict, we must not fail to take interest in these world events and prepare ourselves as best we can for future eventualities. We must now disabuse our minds of the thought that, if war should come, the decision would affect only the nations actively participating in the conflict. Modern wars are total in scope, total in their destruction, total in their effects and consequences. Even if a nation were to remain neutral, its fate would be determined by the result of the struggle.

How tragic it is that even as the world is wrestling with the problems of reconstruction, and before the termination of the last conflict through a treaty of peace, the victors should now be engaged in active preparations for a war against each other. How discouraging it seems to all of us to find that while we are rebuilding on the ashes of the last war and before we have completely swept away the dust and rubble of the devastation we suffered, we are being threatened with another Armageddon which might again sow death and ruin over this land of ours. That is the stark and cold fact staring us in the face. We can neither evade nor ignore it.

The only chance which the world has to prevent this conflict, I believe, is for the peace-loving nations to continue cooperating with the United Nations in its efforts to maintain the peace, and for those who love peace to follow the example of the United States of America by girding themselves for the conflict to the limit of their capacity, that the aggressor may know that any attempt on his part to squelch the free existence of any nation, however small, will be resisted by all. ( Applause .) To hesitate or even to show lukewarmness in the determination to defend freedom and the way of life that we treasure will prove fatal to mankind. While the grim and angry specter of war is already stalking the plains of Europe, the conflict may yet be avoided. Appeasement will only postpone the strife until it is certain to become more widespread and destructive. But the attitude of the democracies must be earnest, must be determined. They must show their readiness and willingness to fight for right and for justice. ( Applause.)

I know, and you know, that the democracies do not crave for war. They want peace, enduring peace, not only for themselves but for all nations and for all men. They want justice and security for all. We all fervently pray that through reason and common accord the danger may be averted. The dialectics of the leaders of opposing ideologies seeking to impose absolute formulas will merely accentuate the conflict. Reasonableness in attitudes and in the behavior of men and nations must be brought to bear upon the controversy. Time was when religious wars were fought because men maintained that Christianity and Paganism, or Catholicism and Protestantism could not co-exist. But the world has discovered that with tolerance they not only can co-exist but can act together to supply the spiritual needs of human existence.

We must learn today that socialism and free enterprise can also stand together as instruments in the promotion of the welfare of every community. It is necessary that the people be free to exercise their judgment in the choice of the means which can best assure their well-being. It is admitted that the ultimate economic formula which could probably effectively promote the welfare of the individual and of nations as a whole is somewhere between these two systems, to be found gradually according to the circumstances at every given time. This is the process which democracies, including the Philippines, are pursuing.

Where there would seem to be no possibility of avoiding a direct clash is when liberty is denied and totalitarianism is enthroned as the only means of solving economic, social and political problems. And this is the vital defect of Communism. For Communism, though seeking to serve the individual members of society, cannot be maintained except through the forcible subservience of the individual to the state.

Communism means the complete dominance of government over liberty, the dominance of force over the will of the people, the dominance of the state over the individual. That is why freedom-loving nations resist the menace of being forced into a system which will wipe out their liberties and place their people under the heels of a class or a military despotism. Communism offers social justice and well-being but all that at the cost of the loss of liberty. Democracy, on the other hand, offers to secure the same benefits and more but through freedom and the processes of free discussion and common consent. Democracy has examples to offer that this form of society must be accomplished, requiring, only, from time to time certain adjustments that may be needed to further enlarge the welfare of the individual. Communism, on the other hand, has yet to prove that a nation may be happy under such a regime, or that it can ever continue to exist as the free expression of the will of the people over which it reigns.

How much better it would be for Russia to throw her doors wide open for all the world to see the results of her experiments, rather than hide conditions in that country behind the Iron Curtain and stifle the voice of the people who live and work there. She has chosen to do otherwise, because Communism has no virtues when measured in terms of freedom and human happiness. We who have made our choice and have set up this Republic upon the principles of liberty and justice, shall persevere in our efforts, through the processes of democracy, to build up a social system which will secure the greatest happiness and the widest independence to all our citizens.

To achieve this aim, it is essential that we learn more and more to adapt our attitudes and behavior to the ways of democracy, to eschew dogmatism and accept “reasonableness” as the rule in the settlement of questions to be determined by popular discussion and consent. To inflame a passionate sense of right or duty in a man who is unable to understand and much less to judge the merits of an issue is to court danger and risk injustice.

We must educate our youth for democracy. We must enthrone reason and justice as the guiding principles for the solution of public differences. We must banish the use of force in the achievement of desired changes. We must ever be ready to accept the decisions of the majority freely expressed.

While man has mastered the mechanics of industry, he has yet failed to discover reliable techniques for the efficient functioning of human forces which are moved by impulses, emotions and passions. Education alone can do this. We must inculcate a keener sense of public responsibility among the people. We must develop effective stimuli to intellectual and emotional discipline. We must teach the need of upholding the integral interests of the nation rather than those of its parts—the greatest good to the greatest number.

With the dark and heavy clouds now hanging over the horizon, it behooves us all to maintain ourselves united and in complete harmony in the defense of the liberties that we cherish and the interests that are vital to the Republic. I call upon the people of the Philippines of whatever political or religious faith to close ranks and prepare this nation for the worst eventuality. We have suffered too terribly in the last war to permit personal or partisan motives to obstruct the unity of this nation in these days of stress. I call upon all the elements that are loyal to our Constitution and to the cause of freedom and world peace to join us in our efforts to cooperate with other freedom-loving peoples to forestall another war. Let us humbly pray that this scourge may not again be visited upon us; but if God in His wisdom should will it that man should further prove his worthiness before He ushers in the millennium on earth,—let His will be done! (Prolonged applause .)

NOTE.—In these commencement exercises the President was awarded the degree of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, by the University.

This institution began as the Conventual-School of Santo Domingo in 1587 in which lectures on theology and philosophy were given for the benefit of religious and lay persons who wished to pursue college studies. But the need was soon felt of giving to those who aimed to become priests more solid training than mere Christian Doctrine and the principal mysteries of the Catholic Faith; so it was determined to found the College of Santo Tomas where Grammar and Art also could be learned. Father Miguel de Benavidez was the principal promoter and is now regarded as the founder of this higher institution.

Through donations, among which was the library of Father Benavidez, the College was formally established on April 8, 1611, under the direction of Father Gonzales as Rector. The protection and approval of the King was secured in 1623, but as early as 1619 it was officially considered as a “University” and was granted the power of conferring superior degrees. Its official title as “university” was finally secured in 1648.

In 1870 the Government in Madrid issued a decree taking away the University from the Dominicans and placing it under the direction of a professor to be appointed by the Government, and providing that it was to change its name to that of Universidad de Filipinas. Dr. Jose Rizal received a diploma issued under this name. The decree was, of course, vigorously opposed by the Dominicans who said that the institution could not be taken away from them without compensation; and the conflict was kept alive until 1877 when with the reestablishment of the monarchy in Spain it was decided that the University was essentially an ecclesiastical establishment independent of the State.

The University of Santo Tomas has grown continuously in its physical plant, and its role in the development of the country has been one of the good social forces in our civilization.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.