Last Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines

MAJOR GENERAL EUBANK, OFFICERS OF THIS AIR BASE:

It is very gratifying for me and for the members of the Congress and other ranking officials of the Philippine Republic to visit this military base of the United States in the Philippines. The rapid progress in the development of this base attests not only to the friendship, the enduring friendship, that exists between Americans and Filipinos, but likewise it attests to the indestructible faith that Americans and Filipinos have for one another. I wish to congratulate General Eubank and the officers and men of this command for the progress, the extraordinary progress, that is being made in building this base as one of the most important outposts of liberty in the world. The establishment of American bases in the Philippines was the result of the voluntary and free choice of Americans and Filipinos. The purpose of this base is not to wage a war of aggression. It is a base established for the purpose of insuring the mutual security of America and the Philippines. I may also add that while its most important purpose is to insure the permanence of peace in the world during these hectic days when rumors of war are being spread throughout the earth, it is very gratifying to be able to see this field that is being rapidly built up so that it may be one of the strongest bastions of freedom and world peace in our part of the world.

President Roosevelt, on May 16, 1940, when he delivered that memorable message to Congress that preceded the entry of the United States in the last war, said. “Effective national defense requires the ability to stop and push back the aggressor while en route.” When he mentioned the phrase “en route” he did not refer merely to geographical distance; I believe he also referred to the operational movements in accordance with plans laid out to accomplish certain definite objectives.

World peace cannot be maintained if each nation acting separately should merely wait for the aggressor at its border. There must be a complete and final agreement on the part of peace- and liberty-loving peoples of the world to stop, and if necessary to fight any aggressor that may want to tramp upon the liberties of other peoples or to interfere in the free exercise of their sovereignties. The pattern of this day’s aggressors is well-known. One country after another is being occupied and subjugated. First the small countries—then the larger ones. When the whole stage is ready and prepared, the aggressor is ready and strong. He strikes! That is the possibility that confronts today the peace-loving nations of the world. What happened during the second world war is being repeated today. The difference merely lies in procedure. During the beginning of the second world war, the tactics used by aggressors were military force applied to small sovereignties in order to insure their subjection and cooperation. Today, activities are taking place—not in few countries—not in the small countries alone but all over the world—not one at a time, but all the world at the same time. Communist fifth columns are well-known everywhere. They have been able to maintain a civil war in China for almost seventeen years. Czechoslovakia was recently murdered. Her liberty was destroyed by the same method. The last one probably will be Austria. The struggling Greece has lasted now for almost a year and their liberty is in agony. In Italy, we will have a test in the next few days but no matter what the result of the test may be, the world will have to face the consequences. The struggle, the political struggle, in Italy today is no longer disguised. It is no longer between Communist parties or parties believing in democracy. It is being presented publicly and openly as a struggle between the United States on the one hand and supported by the liberty-loving people of that country and Russia on the other supported by those who believe in totalitarian government. If Greece should fall, if Italy should be smothered, if Turkey should also be subjugated, the Mediterranean will be lost to the freedom-loving peoples of the world and France will probably be the next objective. But as I said before, the pattern. the new pattern, of the present-day aggressors is to attack many countries at the same time, and thus only since last week we have seen the ugly head of this monster that is trying to destroy the peace of the world cropping up in South America. The incident that happened at Bogota is but a symptom that may be repeated in the other countries of that great continent.

The democracies of the world have to take a stand and they must make that stand unitedly. Conversations and every effort should certainly be made to avoid war. The freedom-loving peoples of the world do not want war. I know the United States hates war and I know the United States does not want war now or ever. The freedom-loving peoples of the world despite the abhorrence of war will take a stand and will fight when the situation reaches a point where they will have to fight or lose their liberties and the rights of the way of life that they cherish.

I am very happy that the President of the United States, supported by the American Congress, has at last shown an indication that it is going to prepare for war, that America is going to make a stand and say to the aggressor that “you can go this far but no further or we will fight.” That attitude of the United States of America, the greatest, the noblest and the most altruistic nation in the world today, has inspired all the people of the earth with a new faith, with a new confidence that war may be averted. But if war should come, if God in His supreme wisdom shall will it that the scourge of war again visit the bewildered peoples of this earth, I am certain of one thing—probably the only thing about which I can be certain—and it is this, that in case of a new war waged by the aggressor against the forces of freedom and liberty, American and Filipino soldiers will again fight side by side in the same trenches or in the air in the defense of justice, of freedom and the other principles which we both love and cherish. In that event, I am sure that the American Air Force will again cover itself with glory as in the last war. In that event, I am sure that the officers and men of the American Air Force will fight as heroically and as gallantly as in the last war.

NOTE.—The key idea of the President in this last address is: “IF WAR SHOULD COME . . . . AMERICAN AND FILIPINO SOLDIERS WILL AGAIN EIGHT SIDE BY SIDE”. The topic was very apt and appropriately selected considering the circumstances of the occasion.

Since a few months before the delivery of this address, President Roxas was being already bothered by his high blood pressure, and his physicians ordered him to relax from his strenuous labours. But due to some important measures that he was anxious to place before the Congress, he slipped back since January into exceptional activity. During the last few days of his life, he led a specially strenuous program: on the 13th, he delivered with head uncovered and in a resonant voice a stirring address in the 34th commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines all the while that a strong drizzle was falling; on the 14th during the day, he received social guests who greeted him and Mrs. Roxas on the occasion of their 27th wedding anniversary; and in the evening he tendered a state reception in honor of Ambassador and Mrs. O’Neal.

But the following morning, as he boarded the train that brought the Presidential party to the Clark Air Force Base, he looked fit and full of vigor; and during the trip he visited several sections of the train and talked with members of the party. Upon arrival at Clark Field, he was given a 21-gun salute after which he was taken on a tour of inspection. He was particularly impressed with the housing accommodations built for the army and civilian personnel.

At 2:00 o’clock p.m. at the Collin Kelly Theatre, he delivered the above, his last address, “speaking with more emphasis and emotion than the usual Roxas style”, as the Manila Daily Bulletin reporter recorded. The Officers and men of the Base gave him a prolonged ovation. After the address, General Eubank, commander of the Base, took the President to his quarters to retire while the parade in his honor was being prepared.

The following details of the fast succeeding events were related by the President’s senior aide:

“When we reached General Eubank’s quarters, the President went to the men’s room. He was there for 10 minutes and when he came out I noticed he was very pale. He was also sweating. That was about 3:20 p.m. He said to me, «I am feeling dizzy». He called for Senate President Avelino and asked General Eubank to have Avelino take his place in the reviewing stand. Then he told me: «Corvera, call a doctor».

“I got hold of the first American army doctor I met and brought him to the President. . . We kept rubbing him, the doctor and I. His feet were getting cold. . . In the meantime he kept conversing with us. He said he was feeling a little pain in the chest, otherwise he was aLRight. Meanwhile we dispatched a special plane to bring in Dr. Antonio G. Sison and sent word to Mrs. Roxas about the President being stricken ill.

“The President found some difficulty breathing about 4 o’clock and an oxygen tank was brought in. . . About 6:10 Mrs. Roxas and the President’s mother arrived by car. He seemed to be recovering. At about 8 p.m. the President was resting and getting some sleep.

“After dinner, Dr. Sison went to the porch and Mrs. Roxas went to the other end of the porch. It was about 9:20 when the army nurse must have noticed something was wrong with the President. She ran to Dr. Sison and immediately Dr. Sison came in.

“Dr. Ojeda also came in and started to prepare an oxygen tank. The President was gasping for breath . . . he had extreme difficulty breathing. He started choking with hiccups and at 9:25 at the sudden end of his hiccuping, Dr. Antonio Sison, who kept feeling the President’s pulse, pronounced him dead.

“Mrs. Roxas came in at about 9:35. . . She kept praying and refused to believe the President was dead.”

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.