Remarks on The Occasion of the Acceptance of P50,000,000 in payment of America’s Obligations to The Philippines for Wartime Assistance

MR. AMBASSADOR:

It is with deep satisfaction that I receive this Treasury draft for P50,000,000. I express the gratitude of the Philippine Government and people. We are accustomed these days to thinking in terms of millions and hundreds of thousands. It is because the world has gotten to be familiar with destruction and devastation by the millions; it is because the world poured out money and substance by the millions and billions during the recent conflict. The $25,000,000, or P50,000,000, is a huge amount of cash representing the taxes and the labor of many of your countrymen, Mr. Ambassador. You have referred to the fact that this is in discharge of an obligation and not a gift. That is true. Yet I cannot refrain from mentioning the fact that this is in discharge of a kind of obligation which the United States alone seems to be acknowledging.

This money will permit us to move with dispatch for the redemption of outstanding guerrilla currency and for the evaluation of that currency so that a proper redemption can be made. It is my intention to recommend that at least $15,000,000 of this money be earmarked for that purpose; $5,000,000, of course, is for the retirement of emergency notes issued to support the war effort during the early part of the conflict. I will ask Congress to consider at the earliest possible time this matter of guerrilla currency and to take the necessary steps to evaluate and redeem it. The formula for that redemption will be difficult and will vary in accordance with the circumstances. I have been thinking a great deal about that matter, as have the leaders of Congress. We will have something to say in that connection at the proper time.

Today, Mr. Ambassador, I wish merely to express my gratitude and the hope that the entire surplus property arrangement will continue to work out in the best interest of economic development in the Philippines. I think the American people will feel recompensed in the sure knowledge that all the transfers that have been made will be carefully husbanded and used to the best of our abilities to provide-happiness and work for our people.

I well recall the exhaustive negotiations, which led up to the Surplus Property Agreement. I cannot but pay my high tribute to my associates in the Government and, of course, to you, Mr. Ambassador, and to all those you have named for the unselfish interest and unlimited devotion which was showed to our people. We are far from ungrateful, as you know, at this and other demonstrations of the continuing interest of the United States in our welfare. I intend to see to it that this and other benefits received from the United States are used as tools for national rehabilitation. As you have said, Mr. Ambassador, the greatest monument to Philippine―American friendship will be a successful and prosperous Philippine Republic. This $25,000,000 will be another stone in that structure.