Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the observance of the Role of Science

[Delivered at the Far Eastern University, Manila on February 1, 1947]

“THE ROLE OF SCIENCE IS THE PRESENT CONCERN OF MANKIND”

I am happy to participate in this observance at Far Eastern University, this great institution which is endeavoring to quench the growing thirst of our youth for higher education. The atmosphere of a university always invites serious and constructive thought. For that reason I have chosen for my subject what I consider the most dynamic fact of the post-war world and the present age . . . “The Role of Science is the Present Concern of Mankind.” In the course of my remarks today I shall wander into many fields. I will attempt to analyze our world situation, and to probe into the center of the problems which all men face together today. I hope that you, and all who hear my words, will consider this a university seminar in which we are discussing truth, without regard for consequences.

The past century has witnessed three great revolutions, worldwide in scope. The first revolution was political and resulted in the recognition of the people’s right to rule their own national affairs. Today, it is everywhere acknowledged, even where in fact it is temporarily denied, that the ultimate sovereignty of every nation resides in the people of that nation. The doctrine of the divinity of rulers has been dethroned.

The second revolution was the industrial revolution which established the machine and thereby the factory and the mill as the economic foundation of modern civilization. With the development of the machine and of industry, new social concepts have grown in the minds of men, and the first organized movements for the welfare of the people have occurred. But these developments have lagged far behind the swift strides of economic changes.

The third revolution, and the most recent, has exalted science and technology as the movers and arbiters not only of economy but of international welfare and politics. To a large part of the world, including our country, this latest development has not yet been fully recognized. By and large, we have not yet oriented our thinking and our concepts to this tremendous upheaval which has occurred without our truly realizing it. Yet it is perhaps more significant and dynamic than either of the two previous revolutions, and in fact encompasses the elements of both previous developments.

I am happy to be able to discuss this subject with you, with the youth of the Philippines. It is you who either stand to profit the most from this cataclysmic change, or be destroyed by it.

It took centuries and ages to demonstrate that implements and weapons of iron were superior to those of stone; more centuries for steel to replace iron; and for gun powder to show that a tiny bit of metal, propelled at high velocity, could pierce the finest armor a man could wear. It took long centuries to develop rifles, pistols, machine guns, mortars and bombs to replace swords and arrows.

The cave as a dwelling place gave way to the structure of wood, or stone and finally of reinforced concrete and steel. The Taj Mahal and the pyramids are wonders of beauty; but they are ancient art, compared to the miracle of the skyscraper, towering a mile into the air.

Man learned that more energy could be gotten out of coal fire than out of wood, and then learned to master the rivers, the waterfalls, and the rain to produce power for his machines. He learned to store electrical energy in great condensers and then to transport that energy across hundreds of miles by power lines to do work, to give light, and to provide conveniences. Man learned to unlock the latent energy in steam, in gasoline, then in crude oil, in gas and in super-heated steam.

All these discoveries by the unceasing search of science have lightened the burdens of mankind and made the earth capable of feeding and bringing prosperity to a population many times what could have been supported even three centuries ago. Men have populated regions once thought to be uninhabitable and have conquered diseases thought to be incurable. Men have built great cities more populous than entire nations. Heavy back-breaking labors have been eliminated and machines have been contrived to do the work of many hands. In these and many other ways, men have mastered the elemental environments in which the human species lives.

All these were accomplished by the advances and applications of science. Men also learned, although much more slowly, that government should be required to insure a fair and adequate distribution of the newly available good things of life. This realization led to the fuller acceptance by government of the responsibility for the people’s welfare.

But lately science has unlocked what seems to be the final secret―the secret of the atom. This latest bit of knowledge seems to cap the arch of man’s capacity to master his environment, to master matter, and to make matter serve him. But this discovery holds also the possibility of completely destroying mankind, of wiping humanity off the face of the earth and of returning it again to its primeval chaos. We have discovered how to unleash the energy which millions of ages have locked in the elements of matter. This vast energy which, according to scientific theory, once permeated the earth when it was a blazing and molten sphere of gas, was gradually imprisoned in the formation of the complex elements of substances, and thus was rendered capable of supporting life.

Now, at last, the way has been found to turn back the ages and to unleash that energy, that fearsome, consuming energy, whose sum total would make this planet equivalent to a flaming ball of fire.

The final question given us now is this: Will we use this energy to enrich ourselves or to destroy ourselves? Have we achieved the revolution which will make us at last masters of all the latent powers of the earth? Or have we unleashed the monster which will destroy mankind and the work and sacrifices of the ages?

The world faces this predicament because our social and political skills and concepts have not kept pace with our developments in the physical sciences.

While we live in the age of jet planes, of the atom bomb, the ultra high frequency radio wave, and the photo electric cell, most of us still think, when it comes to political and international concepts, in terms of the hand-plow and the wheel-cart. We think in the same political terms and harbor the same international prejudices that our forefathers did in the days of the galleon and the chariot. Yet the fact of science, the fact of speed and power, of speed in communications, and of the vast power in production and destruction, has made most of our ancient political concepts as outworn as our carromata. When I say “we”, I do not refer primarily to the Philippines; I am referring to the entire modern world. In all nations, the press and even the leaders of government are prone to use out-dated symbols and concepts of a by-gone past in the consideration of our present pressing problems.

We still think in terms of “balance of power”, of “lines of communication”, of “spheres of influence”, of “buffer states”, of “economic satellites”, of “neutrality” and of “alliances”. We still compare this nation’s army with that nation’s navy, the number of troops and arms, the number of ships, the number of airplanes. We still measure distances in terms of miles and calculate defenses in terms of men. We still weigh the resources of one country against those of another. We listen gravely to generals, admirals, and colonels speak of a quick war or sudden attack. We think in terms of armies marching with banners flying, of ships steaming across the seas, of air fleets filling the sky with glory and destruction.

But we live in a world in which an airplane can travel from Manila to the United States in less than a day. A rocket, speeding at the rate of 2,400 miles an hour, can be launched in Tokyo and fall in Manila 30 minutes later. We live in a world in which one kilo of matter can yield energy of 25,000,000 kilowatt hours. One pound of fissionable uranium can be made to yield the equivalent in energy of 3,080,000 pounds of coal, an energy multiplied three million times over the most commonly used source of energy. These are not theories or dreams; these are facts. These are things that men have done and men have measured.

During the last part of the war, the German V-2 rocket, against which no defenses were ever devised, rose 60 miles in the air and covered a ground distance of 200 miles in five minutes and deposited one ton of TNT in London. Forty-six feet long and powered by 7,500 pounds of alcohol fuel and 11,000 pounds of liquid oxygen, the V-2 bomb wreaked horrible destruction in England. But if instead of one ton of TNT, that rocket had carried a few pounds of destructive atomic energy, London would have been no more, London would have ceased to exist.

Scientists tell us that destruction should now be measured by the square mile. With the atomic bomb, it will cost less than $500,000 to completely devastate a square mile of enemy territory. It is the cheapest form of wholesale destruction ever invented.

Why should men still think of “balance of power” and weigh nation against nation when we have devised such instruments of terror as these? Should atomic war come to the world, industrialized nations could, with ease, wipe out in a day all the leading cities of their enemies. There is no defense, no barrier, known to man today, which could be put up. Each nation could destroy the other. The destruction of one could not prevent the destruction of the other.

What use is it then to cling to the old concepts whose inevitable conclusion is this? Is man so stupid and so blind as to be unable to see that he has created the instruments of self-obliteration? Is it impossible for mankind, which has been able to unlock the innermost secrets of nature, likewise to discover the formula for peace and well-being?

It seems obvious to me that we must start our thinking all over again. We must start with the simple and obvious determination that there must be no war, that there must never again be war. Contests and differences between men must be settled by other methods. They must not be settled by war. That should be the basis for all world thought on the subject.

Having decided that much, we must evaluate all of our other concepts, institutions, organizations, thought patterns, and inclinations from that point of view. If nationalism leads to war, then all nations must eschew nationalism. If trade barriers lead to war, then trade barriers must be removed. If totalitarianism leads to war, totalitarianism must be throttled wherever it springs up. If differences in culture and national outlook lead to war, then differences in culture and national outlook must be reconciled. I am not saying that all of these lead to war. I am saying that we must find out if they do, and if they do, we must act accordingly. But one thing is clear. Humanity cannot outlive or survive another world war.

In the past, one nation or another sought from time to time to increase its wealth, its power, or its resources at the expense of weaker peoples. Science and the improvement in the means of destruction enabled some nations to dominate and threaten smaller ones. Spheres of influence were established, and great military powers sought, successfully to control major portions of the earth. But today we know that such developments do not confine themselves merely to the peoples involved. Every people demands its right to equality. Efforts of domination by one power over another lead inevitably to world war, and now to holocaust.

Let us look at the constructive side of the picture. The miracles of science have uncovered the vast possibility of achieving a complete mastery of nature. Through this mastery, man should, within our lifetime, be able to supply all the needs of the world’s population for complete comfort and security. There will be more than enough for all; but we must consider as a common heritage of mankind all the world’s resources and bring to bear upon these resources all the implements that science has devised for developing and exploiting that common property. I know that this may appear to be a dream and a Utopia, but today, with science as our servant, this dream can be realized if the peoples of the world and their governments will it.

These are the possibilities open to the world. But they are more than possibilities, they are imperatives. There is no other way. For six thousand years men and nations have lived according to the same patterns. One nation, and then another, has seized world power and then lost to a still stronger, more vigorous nation. Always there have been wars, with greater or less frequency, according to the tempo of the times. Why do we hope now, if we continue to follow the same paths, that we will avoid war? Scientific reasoning tells us that if we use the same values, and make the same additions, we will get the same answer time and time again. So, if we use the same concepts, the same fallacies, and hold the same passions, the same greed, and the same prejudices, we will again have war.

This should require us now to discard our old conceptions and theories and start over again, in a scientific way, to build up a system of local, national and international society which will answer the vital needs of our times.

To this high task the world must bring its greatest talents, its deepest wisdom, its unceasing devotion. To this task mankind must bring to bear the best techniques of thought and reason. Men must banish from their minds outworn symbols and fallacious logic. We cannot solve the problems of peace and war by syllogism. We must not accept as truths assumptions which in the past have led to war. Yet that, exactly, is the fallacy in the world’s thinking on political and international subjects. We accept too many assumptions and axioms which have accumulated through the years. One such axiom is this: “All people are divided into nations, and between nations there are inevitable conflicts of interest.” That is the assumption most of the statesmen of the world are acting under, though not professing, today. It is an assumption which underlies some of the procedures of even the United Nations, such as the veto power.

Yet that assumption cannot bear critical and exhaustive scientific analysis. If it were subjected to such a test through empiric reasoning, we would find that the fundamental interests of all peoples are complementary rather than competitive and conflicting.

Even science revises its assumptions. Once men thought that the four elements of matter were water, earth, fire and sky. If we still held to those axioms, there would have been little progress in the physical sciences. But men studied, experimented and analyzed. They found that all substances found in nature were chemical combinations of many elements, of hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, sulphur, phosphorus, copper, nitrogen, and many others. But having discovered these elements, scientists went further. In fairly recent times, it had been the assumption that the element was the smallest possible division of basic matter and the atom was the smallest possible particle of the element. But this, too, was made subject to further investigation and analysis. Soon it was found that the atom is composed of parts, of a nucleus and of electrons. And later still it became possible to analyze the electrons, and the nucleus of atoms. In the nucleus there were found smaller particles, the proton and the neutron. And finally, a method was discovered for splitting the atom, for breaking up the nucleus, for changing the arrangement of electrons, and so to change one element into another element, a development which scientists had once thought impossible.

We must bring this same method of inquiry to bear upon our present world problems. While the scientific method has been used in investigations of things and substances, we have failed to use this method in matters which involve the very existence of mankind.

Our present generation may find it hard to change entirely its habits of thought, developed over the centuries. That is why I am speaking of these things to you, the students and the youth of my country. You are the hope of the Philippines and, together with the young men and women of other nations, the hope of the world. In your eager minds there are, as yet, few passions, prejudices or preconceptions which you are not willing to change. Your energies, still unexpended, carry the embryos of tomorrow. You and the millions of your age will shape the destiny of mankind. Yet the time allotted is short. Atomic scientists tell us that a full-scale development of atomic weapons is but five to ten years off. That is so little time. We have that time to accomplish the miracle of an enduring peace. You have the supreme urgency to join, even to lead in achieving it.

The furious advances of scientific knowledge mean two things to us in the Philippines. It means, first, that we must devote all our energies and our statecraft to strengthen the world movements for peace. We would be among the first sacrificial victims of any war. Whoever would win, the people would lose. This is the situation we face today. Therefore we cannot abandon our emphasis on security, our defense arrangements or other provisions for the preservation of our Republic. We must strengthen them. Until the world acts radically and constructively against the enormity of the danger confronting mankind, we must take all possible measures to insure the strength and power of the progressive and righteous forces in world affairs. We cannot stand alone. Nor can we place our trust in international chivalry, nor in the vague hope that in a war between great powers, we would be spared.

The second thing we must do is to place unlimited emphasis upon science and scientific methods in our economic endeavors. Our entire youth must become science-minded. Technological training must receive the emphasis which, in past days, was given to the professions and the arts. We must produce a generation of scientists, engineers and technical men. They will be the heroes of tomorrow. I call upon our universities and colleges to furnish the facilities for this training and equipment of our youth. There is no greater national necessity. This nation must take its place among the technologically- advanced countries of the earth, or we will be condemned to perpetual backwardness. There is no time to lose.

I have discussed the scientific advances of mankind today because of my desire to impress upon you and upon our people the need for catching up with the swift pace of progress in other lands. We must borrow all the assistance necessary, at whatever cost, for this purpose. Our people will be the beneficiaries of this move. We must try to obtain in our time, for our generation, as many of the facilities of scientific progress as we can. Only in this way can prosperity and plenty be brought to the great masses of our people. Partly for this reason I have advocated the approval of the parity amendment, to bring science, scientists and scientific methods to the Philippines. With them we can become a strong and prosperous free Republic. Without them, we face the dark prospects of economic and social stagnation.

Should we fail, we will fail our country. The crusade I have described especially beckons and demands you, the young men and women of the Philippines. This nation can and should become a land of overflowing plenty, where all our people may dream and achieve their dreams and where well-being, plenty and security will be the inalienable prerogatives of all. Yours is a mission of emancipation. Yours is a task of freeing your countrymen from want and insecurity.  I bid you Godspeed in your holy task.