Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines For Support of the United Nations Appeal for Children (UNAC)

HEALTHY CHILDREN TODAY MEANS HAPPY CITIZENRY TOMORROW

I am happy and proud to participate in the world-wide effort to relieve the suffering of the world’s needy children. On February 26, last, I signed a proclamation declaring February 29, 1948, as “United Nations Appeal for Children Day” in the Philippines, in response to the announcement of the Secretary-General of the United Nations setting aside that date as UNAC Day all over the world. In my proclamation I also declared the period from March 5 to March 20, this year, as the period for active solicitation of voluntary contributions in the Philippines, on behalf of suffering children everywhere.

In taking part in today’s global observance of UNAC Day we rededicate ourselves to the high ideals of One World. We make a fresh resolve to do our utmost to contribute to the winning of peace, security and abundance for humanity’s suffering millions—for the victims of the ravages of war, especially the children who are hungry, destitute, or undernourished these many years.

We conceive it to be our primordial duty to spare no effort to retrieve the next generation which has passed, and is passing, through such a tragic childhood from hunger, disease, bitterness and loss of faith. It is only by the health of today’s children, both in body and mind, that we can be assured of a sound and happy citizenry for all the nations a decade or two from now. The great Theodore Roosevelt once said that “a people without children would face a hopeless future.” We may say today, in the face of almost 100,000,000 suffering and destitute children in Europe and Asia, and the Far East, that about one million undernourished, poverty-stricken children face a hopeless future, indeed.

The United Nations Appeal for Children is the first concrete opportunity for everyone of us in the Philippines to perform an act of world citizenship. Every person who is in a position to do so, should contribute his utmost to this epochal task. A peso, or even a fraction of a peso, a cupful of sugar, or a loaf of bread given to the UNAC may tip the balance between death and survival for some hungry or ailing child in India, or China, or France, or Poland, or right here in our own country. The funds and commodities that might be raised in the course of the UNAC campaign here will be pooled, together with the contributions of other countries, in the UNAC Fund at Lake Success, and then from that pool allocations will be made in the form of relief to the different countries, based upon urgency and extent of need. The United Nations has assured the world that, in the distribution of the UNAC Fund, there shall be no discrimination on account of race, creed, nationality status, or political belief.

The Philippines will receive its rightful allocation based on the needs of our ailing, undernourished, destitute children. A census to determine the number of such children is now being undertaken so that we can submit the necessary data to the UNAC headquarters as soon as it is called for. It is possible that we might be granted a greater allocation of funds than the total amount we contributed to the total UNAC pool, depending upon the extent and urgency of our requirement.

The size of the allocation that we shall get, however, should be the least consideration in determining our response to the UNAC Campaign. Although the Philippines has been one of the worst war-devastated among the countries, it has been fortunate enough to have achieved a measure of recovery at a faster pace than some other countries. Moreover, we have been favored in receiving substantial assistance and relief from international organizations, such as the UNRRA and the International Emergency Fund for Children, which have given our own children, among other things, milk, cocoa, cod liver oil, vitamins, and other necessities which were so immediate just after our liberation from the enemy.

For this invaluable help extended to us by the United Nations and other international organizations, we are profoundly grateful. We learned from them, by direct actual experience, a lesson which it would be well for us to remember always—the lesson that, in the world we are now living in, the survival and happiness of a nation is the true concern of the peoples of the other nations of the world and is a matter which deserves their goodwill and cooperation. We have been beneficiaries of the growing sense of global responsibility; out of gratitude, if for no other reason, we should now demonstrate our capacity to assume our share in that responsibility.

We can demonstrate that capacity best by supporting and contributing to the United Nations Appeal for Children enthusiastically and in generous measure. The theme of the Appeal is “Give One Day”, which is derived from the very reasonable thought that all of us, here and in other countries, who are in health and with means, can well afford to give one day’s income, or one day’s commodity produce, for the health, happiness and survival of the next generation.

I appeal to the entire nation, and to every individual, to give to the United Nations Appeal for Children Fund gladly and unstintedly, making each contribution a token of our gratitude for every help we have received from abroad, and a token, too, of our faith in the future peace, happiness and security of all nations.

To the members of the Philippine National Committee of UNAC, who have voluntarily organized themselves to carry out this campaign, to Mr. Gil Puyat, to Mrs. Trinidad F. Legarda, to Colonel Rufino, to Mrs. Martinez, and the others in their committee, I extend every encouragement and the wish for unqualified success in their self-sacrificing effort. I trust our people will respond to this appeal with the same spirit and generosity with which they have always responded to every worthy cause.

Note.—The campaign for voluntary contribution was given an official impetus not only by this radio appeal but also by Proclamation No. 60 which designated the period of the campaign from March 5 to the 20th. The sum of one million pesos was set as the goal of the Philippine Committee.

The Philippines adhered to the UNAC on February 18, 1948, at Lake Success.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 2). Manila : Bureau of Printing.