Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines To the American People

[Released on April 28, 1946]

AN APPEAL FOR UNDERSTANDING AND COOPERATION

My election to the presidency of the Philippines was virtually conceded by my opponents late this afternoon. The nation gave me and the candidates of my party an overwhelming majority. Our full senatorial ticket and a large majority of our congressional candidates have won. We received a clear mandate to strengthen democracy and constitutional government, uphold individual rights, maintain peace and order, promote the welfare of the common masses, and bring about as rapidly as possible the social and economic rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Philippines. With the cooperation and material assistance of America, I am confident that my administration will successfully discharge the responsibility which I have assumed with my victory at the polls.

Some of my opponents have charged me with having collaborated with the enemy during the Japanese occupation. These charges have been completely and unequivocally repudiated by the Filipino people who were here and in the best position to know the significance of my actions. I, therefore, consider myself completely cleared of all taint of collaboration. My loyalty to my country and to the United States is today fully vindicated by the highest and fairest tribunal that can pass upon such matters. Had there been any semblance of truth to these charges, the Filipino people would have completely rejected us.

Now the boards are clear. I will assume office on the 28th day of May and, beginning on that day, the Filipino people will roll up their sleeves and go to work. We will “set our house in order” in preparation for the proclamation of our independence which will take place on July 4 of this year.

My party is the Liberal Party in the Philippines. It believes in genuine liberalism, proclaiming individual liberty and the welfare of the common masses as a primary objective of government. It abhors privilege and will promote equal opportunities for all.

During the campaign I openly advocated close and intimate cooperation with the foreign policy of the United States in the Orient. I shall abide by this commitment to the letter because I am convinced of the sincerity of the United States in the promotion of world peace and of the freedom and economic security of all the nations of the world.

Realizing the need of the Philippines for the promotion of productive and other economic enterprises as soon as possible, I shall welcome the assistance of American capital for the development of our resources. My administration will maintain stable political and economic conditions to safeguard investments. I believe that the reconstruction of the Philippine economy, so urgently necessary in order to provide employment to millions of our people and to raise their standards of living, can only be more rapidly accomplished in this manner. I am confident that American capital jointly with Filipino capital will find attractive opportunities in the Philippines.

Our problems are great and difficult. Our time is short. The Philippine experiment is of tremendous importance to the fate of nations struggling for freedom. It must not fail. America cannot afford to allow it to fail. I appeal for American understanding of our difficulties and for the willing and sustained cooperation of the American Government.

Source : Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 1). Manila : Bureau of Public Libraries.