Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines To the Filipino People

“WE MUST GET BACK TO WORK AND WORK HARD”

MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS:

Now that the elections are over, I am very happy for this opportunity to have a brief chat with you. I am, of course, very much gratified over the result of the elections. The Liberal Party has won a decisive victory. I have been elected President by a majority of over two hundred thousand votes. Senator Quirino has also won the Vice-Presidency by around one hundred thousand majority.

While the total votes for senators have not as yet been completely tabulated, I believe that we have carried our whole senatorial ticket and a large majority of our candidates for the House of Representatives. In the new Congress there will be about four senators and a little over thirty representatives constituting the opposition. I must confess that I am sorry some of our candidates for Congress have been defeated. This result, however, will prove beneficial to the country because it will create a substantial opposition party in the Congress.

We are not going to assume office until the 28th of May. Meantime, I shall devote my efforts to the formation of my Cabinet and the formulation of a program of action dealing with the most urgent and vital problems facing our nation.

We have just recently emerged from a bitter and destructive war. You know as well as I do that our country has been seriously devastated. Tens of thousands of homes have been laid waste; our system of production and distribution has been disrupted.

Our social and economic problems are tremendous. We must create jobs and opportunities for work in order that the masses of our population might have sufficient income for a decent livelihood. We must rebuild our industries, activate our farms, establish new factories and, in every way, increase production of goods to coyer our domestic requirements and our exports to pay for the things that we need from abroad.

The work of rehabilitation and reconstruction will be started without delay. I shall even now try to reach an agreement with the United States Government concerning the Rehabilitation Acts recently passed by the United States Congress. I shall immediately take up with the Office of the United States High Commissioner the details of agreements and other requirements provided by these laws so that I may be ready as soon as I am inaugurated and the new Congress convenes, to expedite official action on such measures.

But you must not have the impression that our economic and social rehabilitation can be achieved merely by the approval of the Rehabilitation Acts or by the inauguration of my administration. The assistance derived from America will merely give us the means or part of the means which we need to effectuate our economic reconstruction.

The actual work must be done by ourselves. You cannot expect everything from the Government; the Government alone cannot create the wealth needed for the sustenance of the whole nation. This duty devolves upon all our people for their individual welfare and our national prosperity.

In this task we need patience and forbearance; we need foresight and readiness to undergo sacrifices for the common aim. We must obviate as much as possible unnecessary social conflicts and sincerely endeavor to bring about a settlement of differences in a manner that may not be harmful to the progress of the work that is to be done. Labor, including farm tenants, will find a friend and a champion in my administration—their just and reasonable claims will be upheld; justice will be done to them.

On the other hand, we must recognize that capital is essential to economic enterprise. Without investments labor could not be employed. I offer to capital every assurance of fair and just treatment, political stability and the security guaranteed by our Constitution and our laws. We must give to new investments every reasonable encouragement and assistance. Our tax laws will be revised. My administration will not indulge in punitive measures against successful enterprise.

I realize that the war and its aftermath since our liberation has upset many of our standards and even our ways of life. Many of our people are expecting that the Government will solve their individual problems for them without themselves making any effort in their own behalf. That is a mistake. All that I could do is to guarantee to every individual an economic opportunity and provide him with reasonably satisfactory conditions under which he can pursue his own welfare and happiness.

We must get back to work and work hard. That is essential. Every individual must strive to earn a living and thus acquire purchasing power. On my part I shall endeavor to minimize the effects of inflation and lower living costs. As we proceed on this program we shall gradually readjust salaries and wages so as to secure for all those who work an income sufficient for a decent livelihood.

We will meet difficulties at the beginning because while individual income remains low, we have to meet the problem of a high cost of living. I will do my best to remedy this problem without unnecessary delay. The most effective way of lowering prices is to increase production. This will depend mainly upon your willingness to work. Do not expect doles or continued distribution of relief from the Government. Such remedies are merely palliatives and temporary. They will not cure our ailment. Besides, your Government will not have the funds needed for such large outlays. The only effective and permanent remedy is work, productive work.

In order to carry out this program of rehabilitation and social improvement, it is necessary that the Government succeed in strengthening the confidence of the people in the rectitude of their Government and infusing in their hearts and minds a wholesome respect for law and the constituted authorities. We must restore peace and order in every community and guarantee the security of person and property. Without such conditions, social progress is impossible.

The Constitution imposes upon the Chief Executive the responsibility of maintaining a reign of law. I shall discharge that responsibility promptly and effectively. I shall do it with sympathetic understanding and in the kindliest way possible. I shall proceed slowly. I shall plead for sanity and willing submission to law and government authority. I will try to persuade those who are in error to abandon subversive practices. I shall patiently hear every complaint against the existing social order and earnestly bend my every effort in eradicating injustice and in bringing about an improvement of conditions among the socially submerged groups of our population. I shall convince everyone who may have just grievances that I am his best friend and that he can rely upon my administration to help him obtain a quick and effective redress of such grievances.

I hope and pray that my efforts in this respect will arouse a sense of popular self-discipline and social responsibility among all our people. I hope and pray that I may be spared the need of using the full authority of the Government to bring recalcitrant elements within the folds of the law and justice.

Although the election campaign has been hard and, in many respects, bitter, I assure you that I hold no grudge against any party, group or individual. When I assume office I shall regard myself not as the head of a party but as the Chief Executive of the whole nation duty-bound to safeguard and promote the well-being of all my countrymen.

There will be no vindictiveness in my policies or actions. No public official or private individual need have any misgivings as to my attitude towards them, whether they were for me or against me in the last campaign. Whether they were for me or against me is now of no importance, provided they acted in accordance with the law and in the free exercise of their individual freedom.

There will be no purges of any sort. Officials and employees who performed their duties efficiently and in conformity with the law will be retained in office. Those who violated their trust, whether they were for me or against me, will be dealt with in accordance with our laws. I request all officials and employees to carry on, discharge their duties honestly, without fear that they will be punished because of their political affiliations. Those who have been dishonest, the grafters and profiteers, will be called upon to answer for their actions before the proper authorities. I feel great reluctance to do this for I would like to forget all such unhappy incidents, but my oath to the Constitution and my duty to maintain the supremacy of our laws will give me no choice. I am sure that you expect no less from your Government.

I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to express my deep appreciation to every man and woman who have helped me win the elections. I shall repay them by carrying out our commitments in the Platform of the Liberal Party, and by maintaining an honest, efficient and truly democratic administration.

—

NOTE.—This address, which was in effect his first on the state of the nation made directly to the people, jolted us back into the realization that the condition in which the last war left us could be improved only by labor, our own labor. Up to that time, many of us did not think of doing anything; many were waiting for backpay and other hand-out benefits,; while others, lulled by the promises and generalities of campaign speeches, were expecting that the Government was to take care of everything.

Source : Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 1). Manila : Bureau of Public Libraries.