Radio Address of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines To the American People on the Eve of Philippine Independence

[July 2, 1946]

“We have One Source of Comfort and Assurance our Deep and Undying Friendship with the United States”

MY FRIENDS OF THE AMERICAN RADIO AUDIENCE:

It is but two days until the moment when I take my oath as President of the Republic of the Philippines. I look forward with joyful anticipation to that great climax of our history. We have struggled and striven long to achieve that day. We have fought a great and desperate war on the side of the United States, under the American flag, to arrive at last at the glorious occasion, which awaits us now. It is the goal we have dreamed and worked to reach for centuries. Mere words cannot express my feelings or the feelings of my countrymen at that realization.

But our feelings are not unmixed. We do not leave the comforting security of our long political association with the United States without some sadness. Under American leadership and direction we have progressed far. We have come to an understanding and devotion to great ideals and principles which are common now to both the American and the Filipino people. We have taken for our own the American system of government, the American language and, in many respects, American habits of thought. We are not much different, essentially, from America itself. And so in leaving the safe haven of American sovereignty, we look back on our years under the American flag with a gratitude and warmth of feeling which beggars all description. We have grown to be American in many ways. And we love the purposes and principles of freedom, equality and democracy that we have learned from you.

We will not change in that devotion now that we are about, so very soon, to become an independent Republic. We will not falter in our support of the deathless principles which inspired Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, Thomas Paine, and the others of the Founding Fathers. We have claimed those principles for the Filipino people.

But we do not base our love of America merely on a common subscription to the ideals of past heroes. There are new and vital causes in the world today. There are still ideological conflicts among men. Five years ago one of the greatest of those conflicts was fought out on the world’s battlefields. The evil doctrines of fascism and the cancerous growth of national militarism came to death grips with the principles of Christianity, of democratic freedom, of humanitarianism. With unexampled carnage and destruction of all the world’s goods, the forces of evil were defeated. Our cause emerged victorious.

But the battle of freedom is never ended. The implements of struggle for the cause of righteousness may be the implements of peace, but the struggle goes on nevertheless. There is such a conflict going on in the world today. There are evil forces gathering in many areas of the earth. Evil may be defeated but it is never completely conquered. In this struggle, we throw ourselves unreservedly on the side of right, on the side of justice, on the side of the four freedoms. It was for those convictions that we contested in the recent war. We have not changed our minds or our hearts.

The recent conflict was a tragedy for the Philippines. Our land became one of the prime battlegrounds. For the sake of those principles, as well as because of an intrinsic loyalty to America, our people sacrificed themselves, their treasures and their entire land in the conflagration of war. We were happy in liberation and in victory. Our faith in America had been justified. America returned to this land and drove the hosts of savagery and barbarism from the ruler’s seat.

Now America is about to bestow this land upon the Filipino people. A broken and war-wasted territory will arrive upon the stage of nations. We are not despondent. We are not discouraged. As masters of our own destiny, we will conquer our difficulties. Of that I am sure. Of that my 18,000,000 countrymen are thoroughly convinced. We are prepared for the sacrifices, we have already begun the toil which is called for. The motto of this nation for the next space of time will be work, struggle and sacrifice. I have told my countrymen of the grim prospects ahead. They have embraced those prospects and have gone to work with a will. They feel the exaltation of their new sovereignty. They are willing to move mountains to preserve and maintain it.

In facing our difficult prospects, we have one source of comfort and assurance, and that is our deep and undying friendship with the United States. The community of interests we have with America overshadows all our obstacles and inspires all our purposes. We have received many grants of aid from America. They have been gratefully received by the Filipino people. America will always be our beacon and our guide.

As we turn to build the foundations of our Republic and establish economic and diplomatic relations with all the other free nations of the earth, we are pledged and will remain pledged to the maintenance of friendly ties with America as the cornerstone of our foreign policy. We will discharge all our obligations as a member of the United Nations. We will uphold the cause of liberty and democracy wherever our voice will be heard and wherever our strength will be felt. In support of these principles, we will join with all peoples of like mind and like purpose.