Remarks of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the Occasion of the Presentation by the French Minister To the Philippines, Gaston Willoquet, of his letter of credence

[ February 7, 1947 ]

MR. MINISTER:

I take pleasure in welcoming you to the Philippines in your capacity as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the Republic of France.

The Filipino people, together with men of all nations who love liberty, owe a great and enduring debt of gratitude to France; but our people have a special obligation to the great pioneers of liberty of the French nation. The early Filipino patriots who inspired our national efforts for freedom and liberation during the last century, drank deep of the great wisdom of the French revolution. Some of our early patriots learned to feel the mighty pulse of freedom in your own City of Light, Paris. In more recent years, your people and mine have together defended, in two world wars, the same principles and ideals. Both our countries have, in the recent war, been the victims of wanton aggression. Now we must work together to build the new world of peace and security which is the goal of mankind.

It is my fervent hope and that of my country to see the French nation lead again toward the attainment of liberty equality, and fraternity for all humanity. Both French and Filipino blood, in unlimited amounts, has been shed in that sacred cause.

Please convey, Mr. Minister, to your honored President, to your Government and people the wish of my countrymen for the prosperity and glory of France. I hope the friendship between our two countries, based on our common principles, will grow stronger with the years.

Mr. Minister, your Government could not have chosen a representative more deserving of our confidence and affection. You are one who has shared with us our sufferings. By your record of gallant resistance during the enemy occupation, you proved yourself a good and true friend. You have my best wishes for success in all your efforts, and the sincere goodwill of the Government and people of the Philippines for the Government and people of France.