Remarks of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the Occasion of the presentation by the British Minister To the Philippines, Harry Linton Fould, of His Letter of Credence

[ October 30, 1946 ]

MR. MINISTER:

On behalf of the Republic of the Philippines, I am happy to receive you as the first Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of His Britannic Majesty to the Republic of the Philippines. I am particularly happy that you who have spent many years among our people have been chosen to represent His Majesty’s Government in this Country. To reciprocate the mutually beneficial aims sought by your Government in setting up diplomatic representation here, it is my hope that we may soon be able to establish a legation in your country.

Our two countries are linked by historical, economic and cultural ties. As early as the 18th century, our two peoples engaged in commercial intercourse. Today British business houses established in the Philippines are an important factor in our commercial life. The same language spoken in your country is spoken throughout the length and breadth of the Philippines. Your philosophy of government came to us as a precious legacy from the great Republic of the United States of America, herself an heir to the Anglo-Saxon principles of liberty and justice. It is my sincerest desire that the ties that bind our two countries may become stronger with every passing year.

Throughout our long struggle for freedom, our leaders have drawn unfailing inspiration from the ideals and principles enunciated by Anglo-Saxon political thinkers. The Magna Charta, your immortal contribution to the cause of human freedom, is deeply imbedded in the Filipino soul and its principles form the mainstay of our political faith.

We admire your people for their indomitable courage and tenacity. The Battle of Britain during the recent conflict is recalled by us, as by all free men everywhere, as having been waged by you in defense of human liberty. Britain played her part nobly and well. It is hoped that the great struggles of the last war in which we were allies in fact will bind us closer than ever before and that our two countries will cooperate towards the promotion of peace and understanding among all the nations of the earth.

In directing your constant endeavors to maintain and strengthen the ties of friendship which have so happily been established between this Republic and the British Commonwealth, you can count on the full support of my Government.

You have my best wishes, Mr. Minister, for a pleasant sojourn with us. I feel sure that your mission will be fruitful and bring mutual benefit and advantage to our two peoples.