Speech of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the occasion of the 50th Anniversary of the Death of Dr. Jose Rizal

[Delivered at Luneta, December 30, 1946]

On this hallowed spot, scene of tragedy and glory, we hail the immortal spirit of Jose Rizal. Fifty years ago today this patriot sage joined the ranks of liberty’s martyrs. Fifty years ago, the brilliant flame of his life was violently snuffed out by imperial minions who did not comprehend the truth that men may be killed, but ideas are indestructible.

On this same spot, six months ago, our nation became a free Republic. That monumental event Rizal foresaw. It was fitting that the symbolic ceremonial of independence should have been performed on the ground consecrated by the blood of the great leader and prophet.

It is not without significance that Rizal, peering into the inscrutable mists of the future, predicted that one day the American Republic, in his time still untested as a world power, would play a major rôle in the history of his homeland. True to his prophesy, it was America who bestowed the boon of freedom, Rizal’s greatest dream, upon the people and land he loved so well.

In the half century since his death, Rizal has dominated our national consciousness more completely than any other figure of our history. We pay our tributes to a long and swelling rank of heroes from Gat Pulintang to Bonifacio to Abad Santos and Quezon, but Rizal towers over them all, as he inspired all who came after him.

Distilled from a turbulent ever-searching spirit, Rizal’s writings whether in prose or in verse, are lyric truths, sounding every note of our national character, our national dreams, our national needs. He did not neglect to touch, nor to examine the frailties and faults of his countrymen. Who among us will not still wince at some of the truths which shine forth undimmed from the immortal pages of Noli Me Tangere? Who will not still quail and blush at his diatribes against the proneness of some of our people to place conceit and dignity above our nation’s good?

In a major measure, his words are as true today when they were written. They express a basic fault of our national character and underlie many of our vexing problems. Yet Rizal understood with crystal clarity, and exalted in immemorable prose and verse, our national glories, the shining virtues of our race . . . the courage, the loyalty, the patience, the tenacity and endurance . . . the love of music and the love of noble glory, the sensitivity and the innate graciousness of our people.

His philosophic understanding of the problems of his day, and of the problems of the generations that were to come after him are profound and prophetic. He examined, with fierce and pitiless disinterest, all the axioms and assumptions of his time. Those he found false in the glaring light of fact and experience he rejected and stripped of sanctity. With equal fervor he embraced the great ethical concepts of Liberalism and Humanity, the concepts of Mankind’s Greatest Martyr, Jesus Christ. Human dignity and individual worth . . . human equality before God and Government . . . those were the revolutionary banners carried by Jose Rizal.

The proposition of racial superiority Rizal abhorred and confounded. The corollary that some men are made to rule and Others to be enslaved he denounced with acidic irony. As to the gross apology of the Spanish rulers, who claimed superior rights over Filipinos because the latter were brown skinned and wide of nostril, Rizal thundered, “Law knows no color of skin, nor does reason differentiate between nostrils.” That was blasphemy in his day. Rizal dared to blaspheme. He feared neither King nor clergy. He was first to acknowledge the reasonable authority of government; but he would neither bend the knee nor bow his head to what he called “the false pretensions and petty persecutions of sham gods.” He sharply attacked the shibboleths of “prestige” and of “face.” “The prestige of a nation,” Rizal wrote, “is preferable to that of a few individuals.”

Heroically he demanded a free press, and assaulted every reason put forward against it. With his mind and heart full of the liberal traditions of the western world, Rizal clamored for a removal of the iron restraints on freedom of thought and expression imposed by petty tyrants who greatly feared the light of truth and knowledge. Solemnly, he warned the colonial rulers . . . “History shows that uprising and revolutions have always occurred in countries where tyranny rules, in countries where human thought and the human heart have been forced to remain silent.” It is in his tradition, which is also the tradition of Voltaire and Peter Zenger and Thomas Paine, that we maintain today and will defend with all our vigor full freedom of mind and speech. That is the essential distinction, the touchestone which Rizal well knew, spelling the difference between dictatorship and democracy, between freedom and slavery. Where men are free to speak their minds, to air their dreams, to petition their government, to assemble peacefully, to discuss their grievances, fancied or real . . . there true freedom dwells. Where these rights are not implicit, and are not guaranteed to the people, that is not freedom’s realm, whatever the name, whatever the form.

Jose Rizal was not an advocate of revolution nor of violence. Yet in the absence of essential reforms, he clearly saw the inevitability of revolution and uprising. Because he understood this alternative and stated his belief without subterfuge or evasion, he was pilloried, exiled, persecuted, tortured, and then destroyed. This great mind recognized that education and peaceful progress toward the lofty goals of freedom are preferable to strife, death, and bloodshed. But when the light of truth was arrogantly challenged, when men were refused the right to worship God in a manner of their own choosing, when his countrymen were denied the opportunity to learn and to be taught, when official injustice and cruelty went unchecked and unpunished, when he perceived the gathering storms of hate and fury in the hearts of his people, he issued a clear and certain warning, documented by history, that liberty would prevail in the end against tyranny.

Rizal found his country prostrated, exploited and oppressed, its mind and soul smothered by polical intolerance and religious bigotry. He endeavored to lift up the spirit of the common man and make him aware of his dignity. He taught his countrymen their rights as well as their obligations. He tore from their eyes the veil of impotence, and showed them, with measured logic, that a people united against oppression, is irresistible; and that there is no punitive power sufficiently great to keep forever chained an aroused nation armed with a love of liberty and justice.

Rizal struck the shackles from the people’s minds; he led them to the realms of unfettered thought. Freedom and justice were depicted by Rizal as the noblest aspiration of a nation. With skilled and steady hands, unshaken by fear of reprisal, Jose Rizal forged the solidarity of our people. He scourged with bitter invective the petty divisions of province against province which permitted the masters to rule by setting one group against another. Not his province, but his country, “gem of the Orient Sea,” he said, was inhabited by one people, one nation, a nation which he acclaimed as indestructible by tyranny or terror.

“Dream of my life, my living and burning desire, All hail,” he cried. “And sweet it is, for thee to expire, “To die for thy sake, that thou may’st aspire.”

Those flaming words fused the soul of the Filipino people. By their passion and beauty, Rizal’s farewell verses became a seal of brotherhood by which the Filipinos recognized their affinity, one with another; the land from an archipelago, became a nation.

This poet, statesman, dreamer-seer held high the torch of freedom when the night was darkest. When some despaired of liberation, confronted with the entrenched power and might of Imperial Spain, Rizal fastened his smiling hopes upon his nation’s youth, turning to those who still today hold the promise of our future glories.

“Hold high the brow serene, O youth Where now you stand. Let the bright sheen Of your grace be seen, Fair hope of my fatherland.”

A youth himself, he died, his golden pen laid to rest, his restless intellect destroyed, his brilliant talents suspended at their full. But they killed only Rizal’s body. They found out too late that his unvanquished spirit led his people on.

The poet Cecilio Apostol, spoke thus to the martyred Rizal:

“Your brain was stilled by a bullet’s thrust, But your spirit soars o’er an empire’s dust.”

Jose Rizal sealed with his young life our compact with destiny.

Whatever our difficulties today, however impoverished we are by war, we are rich in our heritage of Rizal’s patriotism and wisdom. It is a constant spur to our national endeavors to merit, in our daily lives, our claim to his sacrifice.

There are no better guides to national glory and worth than the precepts which this great soul set forth for our people. He distilled them from his deep knowledge of our past and his bright hopes for our future. We would do well to steep ourselves in the wisdom he taught us. I am not one of those who would mortgage the living future to the claims of the dead past. Yet in Rizal, we have a man whose wisdom was universal, whose thoughts were true not only for his time, but for ours. There are few geniuses of any age of whom that can be truly said.

William Tell, hero of Switzerland, died a soldier’s death, but he left no living truths to guide his country across the future years. Napoleon was a winner of battles and even a giver of laws, but he did not give lasting inspiration to his country, nor was he a prophet of peace. Savonarola died for his beliefs, but his was a martyrdom of faith rather than of patriotism. England has had her great statesmen and soldiers, but no single one of them combined the vaulting love of his people with the transcendental wisdom which gives Rizal his eternal fame. The only parallel of history who comes immediately to mind is that patient, brooding spirit, Abraham Lincoln, like Rizal, a martyr to human freedom.

Today we need men of Rizal’s mold. The cause of liberty cries for new recruits. The heavy hand of oppression casts its shadow over much of the earth. A new philosophy opposes our own, one which would substitute the promise of bread for the reality of freedom. While proposing to free men from economic thralldom, it imposes upon them a mental serfdom, an intellectual regimentation which denies selection and inquiry.

Economic injustice and oppression are hateful and destructive of the individual. Freedom from want and freedom from economic slavery must be achieved. We must never rest until we have established the opportunity of all men to live in comfort and security. But must we, to gain our ends, place our necks in the yoke of dictatorship, whatever its excuses? Must we accept the tablets of law and wisdom from self-anointed leaders claiming to represent a single economic class and imprison our minds and our children’s minds in hoops of sacrosanct doctrine? That is too heavy a price for the promise of economic equality. Power is too intoxicating a wine to be entrusted, without the people’s check, to a single party or oligarchy, or despot.

No, we will work in the pervading light of day, and expose our intellectual wares in the free market-place of democracy, and let the people choose. When they have chosen, we will use the powers of constitutional government, with unstinted vigor, to lead the people to security and prosperity. But the people must be free to approve or reject their leaders, after the constitutional term of stewardship, and to express their views, through the press and other media, to compel officials of high or low rank to answer for their deeds in the public plaza of free sentiment, freely expressed.

That is our credo, that is our basic principle. That is the teaching of Jose Rizal. He was no absolutist. He did not fight and die to substitute a Filipino master for the Spaniard. He was full of trust in the basic wisdom of his people. A people have the government that they deserve, he said. Through education and the spread of knowledge, through full and free inquiry into ideologies and beliefs, through public discussion and debate, truth is established; men are made free. He hated tyranny. But tyranny he knew, is possible for any length of time only when there are men who will accept tyranny. “There can be no tyrants without slaves,” was his injunction to his people. And today in the Philippines, there can be no tyrants, because there are none who would accept slavery or oppression.

As long as we love freedom, we shall honor Rizal. When this nation turns its back upon liberty, and chooses the degrading road of dictatorship, we shall have to exalt another hero, certainly not Rizal, the Apostle of liberty’s sacred creed.

How happy and proud we can be as we say to him today: Your faith has been vindicated; your dreams have come true. The seeds of liberty you showed flower everywhere in your native land. Here democracy rules. Here the voice of the people prevails. Here freedom reigns. And it will ever be so. Here freedom will abide, protected and defended by your countrymen who, in unshakeable loyalty to your memory, cannot conceive of life without liberty.

How can we be sufficiently grateful to the immortal soul of the man who passed on to us this noble heritage? How can we pay him adequate tribute, or do him proper honor? We can only say, as it was said of another deathless champion of his country:

“Your nation’s heart, your grave will be, Your monument, a nation free.”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). At the memorial services held at the Luneta in the morning of December 30, 1946, on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the death of Dr. Jose Rizal, President Roxas delivered the following speech. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(12) , 3252-3257.