APPENDIX II

Speech of Honorable Manuel Roxas Senate President of the Philippines At the Joint Session of the Congress of the Philippines

[Released on June 9, 1945]

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Congress:

I rise to speak in favor of the pending resolution. It is fitting and proper that the first action of this Congress concerns itself with expressing our deep gratitude to the United States of America, to the people and Government of the United States, for the reconquest and liberation of the Philippines. The Filipinos who have lived here for three long bitter years know the meaning of liberation. We, who have shared the sufferings, the privations, the tortures, and the brutalities of the hated enemy—we know what liberation means. ( Long and loud applause.) Words cannot express, human language is inadequate, to describe the sentiments such as those of eighteen million Filipinos hold for the United States of America, her government, and her people. But more particularly the gratitude that we feel for the thousands of American soldiers whose bodies lie below our soil and whose dusts will soon be mingled with the dusts of our fields.

Men join armed forces to fight in defense of their native land. Men take their guns and face the enemy to defend rights and justice. But the Americans have taken up arms, have come to our country, to defend what? not only the great and enduring principles for which the United States is waging this war, but Mr. President and Mr. Speaker, American soldiers had come here to take part in the defense of the Philippines that this beautiful land of ours may be freed from the clutches of our sworn enemy. And we owe them gratitude. Our lands are hallowed by the memories of these men. They poured their blood generously into the same furrows where flowed the blood of Filipino soldiers, and they fought and they bled and they died under the blended shadow of those two beautiful and glorious flags, the American and the Filipino Rags, (Applause.)

It was a sunny morning, Monday, when the first news reached Manila that Japanese treachery had delivered a brutal and staggering blow against the American Fleet then stationed at Hawaii. I remember distinctly, Mr. President, the reaction in the Philippines to that news. There was no sign of despair. There was no sign of regret or hopelessness. People responded with enthusiasm and immediately joined the colors. I, too, Mr. President, volunteered for service, and many others did the same, and the only ones who have regretted, the only ones who were disappointed, were those who, because of shortage of arms, could not find a place in our armed forces. And they went to the battlefields, to the front lines, happy. At last this great menace to the peace of the Pacific and to the independence of the Philippines, this menance that is militaristic Japan showed its ugly face, and our people rallied to the opportunity that they had to crush that venomous foe. We fought a hopeless fight; our forces were pushed back from Lingayen to the plains of Central Luzon, and finally into Bataan. I was there. I have witnessed the heroism and gallantry of the Filipino soldiers. I have witnessed the bravery with which the soldiers of America took part in that fight. And many of our men died, but I venture to say, Mr. Speaker and Mr. President, that for every man, American or Filipino, that succumbed in Bataan, we exacted a tremendous toll on the enemy, so much so that the Japanese in Manila as may be witnessed to by those who were here at that time were really deterred by the fierce resistance of our armed forces, and many Japanese soldiers deserted the Japanese Army merely not to go to the front lines in Bataan. And the resistance continued, despite sickness, despite the greatest handicaps, despite the fact that at the first encounter our air force was practically annihilated. Only once in a while and at very few intervals, those who fought in Bataan could see the flight of an American plane. On the other hand, Japanese planes flew daily—morning, noon, and night— to bomb our positions, trying to force our men out of their trenches in Bataan. But General MacArthur, that great soldier, that gallant and inspired leader, ordered the men in Bataan to hold their lines, to hold and to hold—and they did hold. They held so long as there was food to eat and ammunition to fire; they held so long as they could stand on their feet, unafflicted by the terrible diseases which attacked about 75 per cent of the officers and men in Bataan. Rations in Bataan went down as low as 4 ounces a day for the men in the front. Four ounces a day, Mr. President, barely sufficient to feed the youngest child once a day; but the men held; the men held not only because they wanted to defend every inch of this, their native land, but they held because they wanted to prove to the United States that, just as much as the American soldier could fight and did fight to defend the Philippines, the Filipino soldier was willing to fight and willing to die in defense of the great principle for which America was fighting and in order to gain precious time to allow General MacArthur to establish defenses in Australia, establish a line at which United Nations were going to stop the advance of Japan. And General MacArthur left, called to that sector. I know that his heart bled when he bade good-by to us at Corregidor; but he left because he was ordered to leave, because he was given an opportunity to organize a force in Australia that would ultimately roll back the Japanese armies and bring General MacArthur and his men to the Philippines again.

He traveled almost 5,000 miles to reach Melbourne, but when he reached Melbourne he did not stop; he immediately turned back and started to fight; and he stopped the Japanese; he stopped them at Milne Bay. Before the Japanese were ready, he struck at Buna and Salamawa, at Hollandia, at Morotai, while the American Navy was concurrently mobilizing or neutralizing Japanese forces in the one and thousand islands scattered all over the Pacific that they had built into a veritable force as their first line of defense against the Japanese Empire.

And what did the Filipinos do in the meantime? Did the Filipinos acquiesce? Much less, did the Filipinos accept Japanese occupation or Japanese sovereignty? Did the Filipinos cooperate or collaborate with the invaders? We, who have been here, we, who have watched every attempt of the enemy not only to conquer Filipino resistance by force of arms but by using every possible machination to cajole us into subservience, we know that the Filipino people remained loyal; they remained true; they remained absolutely faithful not only to the Philippines but to the people of the United States. (Applause.)

Mr. President and Mr. Speaker, if there were traitors in those days, the people know who they are. (Laughter and applause.) If there were men who were disloyal during those days, the people know their names and if they do not know, even if it is the last thing I shall do in my life, I shall tell the people who they are. (Applause and acclamation.) I ask neither forgiveness nor mercy for those. I ask that those men be accused before a tribunal of the people, that they be tried and convicted if found guilty and I would demand for them the severest punishment. (Applause.) But the people generally, especially the common people, the farmer, the humble government employee (laughter and applause) not only in the National Government but also in the provinces and municipalities, those men were not puppets of the Japanese. I have been in contact with all the guerrillas in Luzon and with practically all those in the Visayas and I can get their testimony to prove that, in the majority of cases, their mayors were not puppets of the Japanese, but were the puppets of the guerrillas. (Applause and acclamation.)

Mr. President and Mr. Speaker, everyone in the Philippines knows, everyone knows, that if there were really puppets of the Japanese in the towns or in the barrios, they are not living today. (Applause.) And at every turn, they showed their loyalty and faithfulness to the United States. There are many ways of showing a man’s patriotism, and there are many ways of doing acts of treason, and I trust that very soon this whole question of collaboration, which is preoccupying so many citizens of this country, will be solved and solved fairly and justly; it will be solved in accordance with the principles declared by President Osmeña himself. I want to say formally that I have no criticism to make of the declaration of President Osmeña in relation to the collaborators, so called, made in his speech delivered in Leyte. And I heard with a great deal of pleasure in his message read this afternoon a reiteration of the principles there enunciated by him. Likewise, I was very much encouraged and gratified when he announced that he believes it to be just, not only to adopt those rules with regard to civil service officials, but also with regard to elective officials, because he believes that it is our duty to give effectiveness to the popular will that the government of this country may truly be in form and in fact a democracy.

So, Mr. President and Mr. Speaker, when the American armies were advancing to our shores, the resistance went on here. Great credit is due to the guerrillas. They fought and suffered: Ferguson in Mindanao; Peralta and his division in Panay; Abcede in Negros; Kangleon in Leyte; Consing in Cebu; Governor Escudero in Sorsogon; Taliman Tagle and his ROTC in south Luzon, Cavite and Batangas; Vera in Tayabas; Fil-Americans, right here in the heart of Manila, first it was organized by Colonel Straughn, but when Straughn met his unhappy death, it was led by no other than General Lim, under the battle name of Colonel Earsiotil, and when Lim was caught, that force was not disorganized, but it kept on fighting, under General De Jesus, first, and then under a group of leaders, among them General Villanueva, Colonel Dikit, Colonel Aguilar and others. Further north, we have Brunswick and his brave group of fighters with his staff composed of some of the ablest young men in the army; Captain Santos in Bulacan, Colonel Anderson in the Sierra Madre and Major Lapham and Major Mackensie leading the guerrillas in Nueva Ecija and Pangasinan; Captain Hunt in Pangasinan, and Captain Marcos of the Maharlica guerrillas which he organized together with our friend and colleague here (indicating) Representative Ramos from Pangasinan and which made a good fight. And Colonel Boatman in the North; Governor Ablan in Ilocos Norte,—and I hope to God he is still alive,—and Governor Adduru and his men in Cagayan. I could mention many others, Mr. President, and I trust that those men, whose names should have been mentioned here but which for lack of time I cannot mention for it is a long list, those men deserved the recognition and the gratitude of the Filipino people especially the Americans who led those guerrillas. These men, many of them, like Colonel Tort and Colonel Strong, paid with their lives for the defense of our country; Colonel Nocum and Colonel Enriquez in the North, are men I have not mentioned. These men have not been mentioned here this afternoon because it seems that the temper of the people today, or at least of our Government, gives place to the doubt-wheeler. We are not forgetting those who have died during the critical days of the Japanese occupation, and here in Manila, Mr. President, men like Senator-elect Jose Ozamis than whom no other has shown greater courage and patriotism, Senator Ozamiz who was caught by the Japanese and he could have saved his life if he had confessed the part that I had taken or was taking in this activity, he would be alive today and I probably dead. (Applause.) Enrique Palagono, Juan Elizalde, General Natividad, Colonel Martelino, Major Santa Maria, Colonel Moran, General De Jesus, and hundreds and hundreds of other loyal Filipinos, we must not forget them. God will forget our country if we forget those who died that we may live. (Long and loud applause.)

Mr. President and Mr. Speaker, may I call attention to one outstanding fact, that the Philippines is the only dependent nation in the history of this war or in the annals of the world prior to this one, that has taken up arms and fought side by side with the Mother Country. That is significant. That happened merely because the Filipinos loved America; that happened because the Filipinos have confidence in the rectitude of America’s purposes; that happened because the Filipinos knew that America was fighting the same enemy that has always been looked upon as a menace to this country. And we made our determination then at the beginning of this war and we have never swerved from that determination, and that is the determination of the Filipino people today to keep on fighting side by side with the United States, fighting with everything we have, fighting with our manpower, fighting with our resources, fighting if you please, Mr. President and Mr. Speaker, with our daily prayers to Almighty God that the United Nations may be victorious in this war and that the war be ended speedily with the total destruction of the military power of Japan until Japan unconditionally surrenders. There will never be peace in this part of the world until the instruments of aggression of Japan are destroyed. I know not how long this war will last. No one will venture to prophesy. It may last for a few months, it may last for a year, it may last long, but there is one thing certain and the Filipinos should know it; we are going to take part in this fight, because no one is more interested in the destruction of Japan than the Philippines and the Filipinos, no one should take a greater interest in the utter destruction of the military power of that country than the Filipinos not only because it is natural,—a natural human sentiment to avenge past wrong’s—it would be only natural for the Filipinos to try to draw for every drop of blood that the Japanese have drawn from the Filipinos and Americans in this country through cruelty, through brutality, through murder, for every drop of blood that they have drawn, they may be made to pay a thousand fold in the hands of the people they have wronged. We should all be very happy and congratulate President Osmeña for offering one Filipino division to fight alongside the American forces in the invasion of Japan. I am glad that that offer was made. But I propose this resolution to prevent anyone believing that one division is the measure and the limit of what the Filipino people are willing to do in this fight, because that is not the truth. That division has been offered because we would like to organize that division promptly that it may take part at the beginning of the action. But the real sentiments of the Filipino people appear in that resolution. We spare nothing, we are willing to give everything. We will raise a one-million-men army, one million men in the Philippines if that army were needed for the subjugation of Japan. We could go hungry, Mr. President, we will work the limit of our physical endurance to produce what America may need in this war in support of her war program. There is nothing that we will spare. It is for America, for General MacArthur, to say in what respects the Filipinos might help and I am sure that our Government and our people will respond with enthusiasm.

President Osmeña has mentioned his project of erecting a monument here in honor of President Quezon and President Roosevelt. I am happy to have heard from his lips the announcement of that project because I believe we should build such a monument, but not merely to perpetuate our gratitude and admiration for these two men, that the monument be rather of our love and faith in America, the champion of world peace and freedom for all peoples. I would like a monument erected in some appropriate place that will be so grand and so admirable that it will not fail to attract the attention not only of foreigners but even of the youngest child of our nation. Let that monument be the written history of our relationship with the United States. Let the history of the war be carved on the walls of that monument. Let President Roosevelt’s effigy appear on that monument as well as that of President Quezon and let there be reserved a place for that great military leader, statesman and idealist, the great friend and defender of the Filipinos, General Douglas MacArthur. and in that monument let there be a place, too, for the American soldier and officer who fought with our guerrillas and for the guerrilleros who fought in our hills and for the humble civilian or official of the Government who was the victim of Japanese cruelty and executed by them because they refused to submit to their sovereignty, and as a picture that will inspire future generations of Filipinos, over and above these figures, let there be floating in the breeze the American flag and the Filipino flag, because the destiny of this nation is to become an independent country under the protection of the United States (applause) so that the Philippines may live and grow and prosper in peace and happiness again, I repeat, under the blended shadow of the American and Filipino flags. I ask that the resolution be approved. ( Applause .)

(After Senator Cuenco’s speech)

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker: On August 1, 1944, early in the morning, I heard over the radio the announcement that the President of the Philippines, the father of his country, the greatest living Filipino, was dead. That morning I was attending the funeral of a dear friend, and as I walked the streets of Manila, I saw men, women and children shed tears of grief silently bearing their deep sorrow. And they were crying because President Quezon was dead. An able and fearless leader who had guided the Ship of State for more than 25 years with a firm hand and a marless vision, he led our country and our people through great perils and crises and vouchsafed to us a true legacy—the great boon of liberty.

Sad, indeed, is the dictate of Fate that has removed President Quezon from our midst only shortly before the liberation of his country for which he struggled and suffered and, in the achievement of which, he gave his life. For President Quezon, just as much as a soldier who died in the battlefields, was a casualty of this war, just as much a hero of this war who died in the defense of his country. President Quezon should be regarded by us as a hero and thus a martyr. Confronted as we are with such tremendous problems, we would have been fortunate if we have, to guide and assist us, his clear vision, his proven statesmanship, his steady patriotism. How much we miss him, Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, how much the people miss him, how much we regret his loss!

Source: National Library of the Philippines

Roxas, M. (1947). Important speeches messages and other pronouncements of President Manuel Roxas . Manila : Bureau of Printing.