Speech of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines At the Luncheon given in his Honor by the members of the Philippine Bar Association

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, October 12, 1946]

FELLOW LAWYERS:

I am always glad when I can start a speech with the word “fellow.” It establishes a feeling of intimacy, a community of interest. To say “fellow lawyers,” is to say much more than “fellow students” or “fellow stamp collectors.” Law is not only a profession, it is a ministry; it is almost a way of life. It is certainly a way of thinking. I have not spent much time in the active practice of law, but I have never stopped studying law. I have participated in the writing of a good deal of law; and I have administered a good deal more. Law has been my hobby as well as my profession. I have given much study and thought, as you all have, both to the philosophy and to the practice of law. Today I shall speak to you a little concerning theory but more extensively concerning the application of law in our courts and in the practice of our profession.

But first, let me address a few frank and pointed words to you as an organization. The practice of law is one of the oldest organized professions in the world. Lawyers, being more perceptive than most people, saw the necessity of organizing their own numbers long before there was such a thing as a labor union, a chamber of commerce, or even a medical association. Lawyers have long recognized and recognize today the necessity of having a responsible body to maintain, elevate, and protect the ethics of their profession. It is essential to have a lawyers’ association, because the practice of law is in a sense a vital public utility, and the public must certainly be protected against fraud, deception and malpractice. Lawyers, knowing this, have undertaken from the very earliest days of their profession, to police themselves through the medium of bar associations. Because lawyers are officers of the court, a bar association can and should become a useful and organic adjunct to the judicial system. It should represent the combined conscience of the legal profession and indirectly, of the courts as well.

It is for this reason that I view with some regret the present situation in the Philippines where there are not one, but five lawyers’ associations. I feel strongly that there should be but one—a strong, democratic and vigilant organization. I now call upon the members of the bar to bring about a union of their organizations. As many of you remember, there have been submitted, from time to time proposals for an integrated bar which would accomplish, by legislative edict, the consolidation of lawyers’ associations. I have not at all made up my own mind about this proposal, but I can hardly imagine that lawyers should have to be required by law to take a step which is so obviously desirable—a step that should be taken voluntarily and without delay.

A bar association has many functions which are well known to you. One concerns me very directly. I should like to be able to consult the bar association on appointments to the judiciary. It has been my purpose from the very start of my administration to make the judiciary an independent, non-political body, completely removed from partisanship or from any consideration or taint of politics. I hope most of you will agree that my judicial appointments have reflected a desire to achieve this goal. It is not always easy, unaided by a public-spirited, representative and high-minded bar association. I should like to inaugurate a regular practice of consulting on judicial appointments not only the Secretary of Justice, but also the Chief Justice and members of the Supreme Court and the bar association. But it is necessary that there be one association and not five. Should I request five bar associations to recommend appointments, or submit to five bar associations proposals for appointments, the result would be such a hodge-podge that it would be less than useful.

In referring to judicial appointments, I have mentioned only one of the many important and desirable functions which a unified bar association can usefully discharge. I might also mention, first the exercise of influence to bring about an elevation of the standards of legal education, and, second, the raising of the standards of the legal profession itself through self-discipline.

But the maintenance of a noble judiciary should be, as I know it is, the most vital concern of the members of the bar. It is an undertaking of transcendental and imperative national need. To my mind the judiciary is the keystone of the national structure, furnishing also the mortar which joins the legislative and the executive branches into the arch of government.

The classic definition of the function of government is to establish law and order among men, to administer justice and to promote the welfare of the people. The judiciary bears a vital responsibility in all three of these major fields. I need not repeat to you how strongly I feel about the reëstablishment of law and order in our country. As it stands first in the classic definition, so it stands first in our own particular needs. And for this purpose, the courts must learn to act both swiftly and surely. This involves, in our particular case, tedious and unremittent labors on the part of court officials. Lost court records must be reconstituted. Backlogs of cases must be cleared up. Yet speedy trial is the keenest edge of the sword of justice. Centuries of experience have taught us that the chief deterrent to crime is not so much the stringency of punishment as the certainty and swiftness of punishment. Thus crime and outlawry were much more rampant in ancient days, when trial by ordeal was practiced, when there were scores of misdemeanors and felonies for which death was the penalty, and when simple theft was a hanging offense. But in those days justice was as slow and uncertain as it was cruel and unreasonable. In the recent move by our Government to stamp out crime in the metropolitan area, I urged the courts to speed up their handling of cases and to make punishment sure as well as stringent under the law. The delays which the law provides to protect the rights of the innocent must not be used to shield the hardened criminal nor to obstruct the path of justice.

In addition to punishing the violators of law, the courts have what I deem an even higher function. That function is the defense of the people’s rights. In the modern structure of the state, with the gathering of greater and greater powers into the hands of government affecting every aspect of communal, social and economic life, the protection of those basic rights set forth in our Constitution has come to be one of the most imperative missions of the Judiciary. The distinguishing feature of the democratic way of life and of the democratic system—the aspect which gives democracy its vitality and its survival value—is its emphasis upon the rights of the individual, upon his dignity and worth. Those rights are protected by constitutional limits upon the powers of both the executive and legislative branches of the government. In the non-democratic areas of the world, the people’s rights, the rights of individuals, are at the mercy and at the pleasure of Government. Whatever freedoms are possessed by the non-democratic peoples of the earth are enjoyed by grant of government. We reject that concept and that system. To us the rights of the people are inherent and inalienable, sacred rights and freedoms bestowed by our Creator and subject only to such conditions and qualifications as are absolutely necessary for social existence. This is the major point of cleavage between our philosophy and the philosophies of the totalitarian and semi-totalitarian states today. That is our banner; that banner we must never lower. The courts are the vanguard of the forces which must uphold that banner, which must defend those precious rights. They must be defended zealously, vigilantly, and endlessly, against denial or abuse. The battle for liberty is never over.

The third prong of the trident of government is the protection and promotion of the welfare of the people. In this, too, the courts are called upon to play a vital rôle. In our Constitution, the promotion of social justice and of the welfare of the people is set forth as a basic function of government. The courts must exercise what I would like to call “judicial statesmanship” in extending the protecting cloak of that constitutional mandate over such acts of government as are clearly designed to carry out that objective. The welfare of the great masses of the people must be a concern of the courts coördinately with the rights and freedoms of the individual. To chart the sometimes narrow course between these two guide-posts requires the utmost exercise of judicial statesmanship. I trust that our courts, in examining the boundaries and limits fixed by the Constitution, will find in their wisdom that the enlargement of the area of individual freedom and, at the same time, of the powers of government to promote the social welfare are not inconsistent, but are rather complementary. By doing this the courts will give effect to the liberal philosophy underlying our Constitution.

I have described in broad terms the rôle of the judiciary in our national life. To meet those tremendous responsibilities, men of great learning, unimpeachable integrity and sober wisdom are called for.

I should like to see our judiciary manned by those giants of intellectual and moral character who at one time were the objects of our national awe and respect. I recall such men as our Chief Justices Cayetano Arellano, Victorino Mapa and Manuel Araullo, whose every breath and move while in the public view was as measured as the simple but resounding prose in which they wrote their decisions, whose public and private acts alike were beyond reproach. Those men infused the breath of life into the law and gave to justice the sacred and majestic mien which compels worship and respect from all. I do not think I am stretching or belaboring the point when I say that it is my aim and aspiration to maintain in our courts the majesty and dignity that makes of our judiciary a priesthood and the practice of our profession a noble dedication to righteousness and justice.

Last May, when I was in Washington, I had occasion to pass the huge and imposing building which houses the Department of Justice. The architecture of that building is of the Greek school, known as ionic, with many wings and a magnificent frieze surrounding the top portion of the building, depicting the growth of the modern concepts of justice. Over the main entrance, there is a sentence which remains today in my memory: “The place of justice is a hallowed place.” I can think of no nobler sentiment. I should like to think of that sentiment enshrined over the entire Philippine Islands, a place of justice. I hope our courts may be the repository of a true national reverence for justice. I hope that the Filipino people may come to look upon the courts not as a seat of punishment but as a temple of righteousness where the evil-doer and the malefactor will find his just desserts, and where the righteous man may look for the defense and justification of his righteousness. I can think of no finer nor higher goal for the nation. I can think of no better dedication for the legal profession in the Philippines. As far as I am concerned everything I can do to speed the movement in that direction will be done.

It is certainly redundant for me to refer again at this point to my firm intention of keeping the courts out of politics, and of making appointments without regard to political affiliation. I think the leaders of my own party understand why I must frequently disappoint them with my selections of judges, and why I must prefer a good man to a good Liberal. So much for the courts.

The function of the legal profession is not alone in connection with the courts; lawyers also have an important duty to discharge in connection with the general national welfare.

You have the inherent duty of interpreting to the people in the plain language of the law and of common sense the problems and questions which arise in connection with law and government. A lawyer is obligated not only to know the law but also to translate the law into values and terms which are meaningful to the ordinary citizen.

There is a great deal of misunderstanding concerning the problems and issues that we face. I judge much of that misunderstanding to exist because the people have not been given an adequate interpretation of the concepts involved in those issues and problems.

Phrases and words are being lavishly used without much concern for their basic meaning. Appeals are being made to the emotions and, what is more, to the passions through the erroneous use of certain words and phrases. We hear, for instance, the word “sovereignty” being invoked with almost mystic incantation to curse some of the policies and program being undertaken by the Government. Yet I doubt whether very many of the persons who use the word “sovereignty” have an accurate comprehension of the term. The dictionary defines “sovereignty” as a state of being absolute and unlimited in power, authority, or independence. The ancient sovereign had those prerogatives. But the whole concept of sovereignty is in a state of flux today. Once sovereignty reposed in the person of the monarch or ruler. Later it was considered to be the possession of the government. But in more recent years sovereignty has come to be recognized in greater and greater areas of the earth as reposing in the people—in all the people. That is the first principle of democracy. Democratic sovereignty is a fundamental authority residing in the people.

The exercise of that authority, however, is a function of judgment and wisdom. In external affairs, it must be exercised within the framework of national advantage and the realities of geographic and political position. Today every nation is in some sense dependent upon others. Although our goal is one world in practice, as it is already in fact, we recognize the existence of gravitational groups within the one world . Thus the western hemisphere nations accept their security as against Europe and Asia, from the United States. The United States in turn is in many ways dependent upon her sister Republics, both politically and economically. The nations of the Mediterranean and of the Middle East are largely dependent upon British power. Governments of Central Europe are subject to the exercise of Russian influence.

The Great Powers offset each other, and yet are dependent upon one another; it is only collective equilibrium that today permits the maintenance of an uneasy status quo . In such a system of balanced forces, the only security for small nations is within the orbit of greater ones: a gravitational arrangement in which the smaller nations exert an influence on the larger, as well as vice-versa. This is the system of regional collective security which we have in the world today. In such a world system true “sovereignty” is freedom of choice, in an empiric sense, in the ordering of a nation’s internal and external affairs including the selection of its political attractions in the international field.

In that sense, we in the Philippines have sovereignty in a much fuller sense than most other nations in the world. Certainly, we have more complete freedom than the nations in the Middle Europe, or in Northern Europe, or in the Middle East, or in Asia. We have the right to dispose of our internal affairs as we see fit. We might even decide in the exercise of our full freedom of choice in foreign affairs, to sever our intimate connections with the United States. Whether such a move is compatible with our national security or with our economic requirements is certainly a matter for our decision. But we have long ago made that decision. We made it most dramatically in the recent war. Our government-in-exile operated under that presumption. The preceding administration continued to carry on that policy without interruption. Both political parties in the recent national election promised the people to adhere without qualification to that program. Because I was and am convinced that such a policy reflects our basic national aspiration and is also the undeniable will of the vast majority of our people, I have continued and will continue that policy with abiding faith in its correctness.

But let us for the moment examine the alternative. Should we cut our ties with the United States, we would rapidly, almost immediately, find that even our area of choice and selection in arranging our internal affairs would be much more restricted than it is today. This would result both from the force of economic circumstances and from the fact that other great nations in our vicinity might be far less scrupulous in the exercise of their interest in our internal affairs than is the United States.

Our general program of economic aid to our own citizens is a national policy supported by our people. We undertake such a program in the certain conviction that our purpose is fair and wise. But our friendship with the United States is an assurance that we can pursue our course without fear of intimidation.

Yes we are free, completely free, even to withhold the grant of equal rights to American citizens in the development of our natural resources. Should we desire to withhold that grant, neither military nor political pressure would be applied against us; yet I would judge such a course extremely unwise. Certainly our judgment on the matter is free; but if our judgment partakes at all of wisdom, it must be guided by considerations of what is best for the country and for the people. I believe that it is best for our people to extend these rights to American citizens for the duration of the Trade Agreement. We will be free at any time to denounce the Agreement and thereby cancel those special rights. But precisely because we have that power, we need not fear the phantoms of disaster which partisanship and prejudice have raised before our eyes. To refuse to comply with this condition of the Trade Act would cripple our program of rehabilitation. But we have the power to do so. We are free to do so. That is the ultimate test of our sovereignty.

We have the perfect right to determine for ourselves our system of national defense and security. But you will recall that a little more than a year ago, the Philippine Congress by unanimous vote approved the commitment entered into by President Quezon and President Osmeña and sanctioned by the American Congress, for the establishment of military bases here for mutual defense. We have thus made our choice in this matter. Still the United States would not insist on the retention of bases here if we did not desire them to be retained. Recently, the Government of Iceland declined to permit the United States to continue maintaining bases in that country. The United States forthwith agreed to the abandonment of her Icelandic bases. I do not think the United States would deal with us less scrupulously than she has done with Iceland. America has nowhere shown her intention to exact privileges by force of arms or by economic sanctions. But were we to withdraw from the base arrangement with the United States, we would be sacrificing our national security on the altar of a mistaken sense of dignity. We would then be faced by the problem of assuming alone the maintenance of our national security.

National security is an imperative need of all nations. No nation can prosper in an atmosphere of fear. In the troubled condition of the world today, no nation is secure of itself. In whatever direction we lock, we see nations in arms. The abandonment by any nation in the Far East of security measures would create a military vacuum which could easily be fatal.

The strength and authority of the United Nations is based completely on the precarious balance of strength and power between the great nations. Any reduction in the military strength of any single power without a concomitant reduction in the power of the others, would upset that balance.

All the peoples of the world look forward with hope and yearning to a progressive international disarmament, to the day when the United Nations as an international organization will possess unquestioned military authority for the enforcement of law among nations. But that day is still far in the future. The organic structure of the United Nations is not yet such as to permit an independent military authority to exist. And so the security which we in the Philippines have as a result of the presence of American forces and bases here is a security in which we should feel fortunate. The establishment and maintenance in the Philippines of American bases, despite their disadvantages—and unquestionably there are disadvantages—are of much greater advantage to us in an immediate sense than to the United States, whose interests in the Orient, as in Europe, are remote rather than immediate. Our best and wisest course is to minimize these disadvantages in so far as practicable without impairing the effectiveness of the security provided us.

Our objective in these defense arrangements is first to insure our own security and sovereignty and second, to aid as best we can in strengthening collective security in this part of the world. The specific agreement we are making is designed to meet these requirements.

It is my considered judgment that by retaining our military ties with the United States, we are serving first of all the interests of the Philippines. If I did not hold that view, I would not lay down that basis of our foreign policy. I wish to assure you, as I have assured the country on numerous occasions, that I have only one basic and guiding rule for our foreign policy as well as for our domestic policy—and that is the enduring interests of the Filipino people. There is no other consideration which has any weight in my mind. I am moved by a single devotion; that devotion is to my own country. I do not believe there is any inconsistency in coupling that devotion with a devotion to the cause of world peace, security, prosperity and freedom for all men. To maintain this policy and to uphold these interests, I have pledged my administration.

I have not intended here today to make an exhaustive or even general analysis of the broad and complex subjects of our foreign relations, our national security, or of the equal rights amendment to our Constitution. I have dealt with these subjects merely to indicate the responsibility of interpretation which you as lawyers bear to the general public and to the nation.

I invite you and all the members of our profession to set aside personal and political considerations, to raise our eyes from the immediate goals and to fix your sights on that distant horizon where lies the future of this great nation. Let us set our course to a high goal, fearlessly and with supreme confidence in our ability to achieve it. We have a tremendous responsibility to our posterity. Let them not say of us that we lacked the strength to carry the load, or shirked the duty to take steps which at the time might have seemed unpopular in some quarters. Unless leadership today is capable of the highest statesmanship in dealing with our vital problems—irrespective of immediate popular reactions inspired by suspicion and prejudice—that leadership has no right to continue. The duty of leadership today is to insure the permanence of this Republic and to safeguard the freedom and welfare of the people at whatever cost. I am not interested, for myself personally or for my party, to remain in power, merely for the sake of power; I am interested only in serving this nation and its people, and I assure the country that I will pursue that course, come what may.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). Speech delivered by President Manuel Roxas at the luncheon given in his honor by the members of the Philippine Bar Association. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(10) , 2551-2560 .