Speech of Honorable Manuel Roxas Senate President of the Philippine Senate Before the Congress of the Philippines on introducing General of the Army Douglas MacArthur

APPENDIX VI

Gentlemen of the Congress:

We meet in joint session to pay tribute to one of the greatest soldiers of all time, to a fearless and devoted leader, to a man who at the inception of this war, against tremendous odds, led our nation to resist the treacherous invasion of our homeland. Under him, the Filipinos fought gallantly, inspired by his courage and confidence in ultimate victory. When the fortunes of war made it imperative that he should leave our shores to organize the forces of liberation on another land, he left reluctantly but full of determination to return to free our beloved country.

He travelled 5,000 miles to reach the place where he could deploy the gathering forces of freedom; then he turned back and launched an offensive which for sheer daring and brilliancy in strategy has aroused the admiration of the whole world. He stopped the Japanese when they attempted to invade Australia and he pushed them back when they sought to subdue New Guinea. He hurled his forces to defend Port Moresby and to reconquer Salamaua, Hollandia and Morotai and, from there, he drove his way back to the Philippines. He has liberated our native land. His next objective is Tokyo, and I repeat, his next objective is Tokyo, and he will get there, for he has tamed victory and it is permanently perched on his banners.

During the three and a half years of Japanese occupation of our country, this man was the symbol of our faith and the source of strength of our resistance. The trust and confidence of the Filipino people in him and in the bravery of the forces which he led gave us the fortitude to withstand the repressions and brutalities of the enemy without counting the cost in blood, tears or suffering, and gave us the firmness to maintain to the end our loyalty to the United States and to the great ideals of liberty, justice and democracy for which we are fighting in this war.

This occasion marks not only the formal recognition of the liberation of the Philippines but also the culmination of our faith in this great man and in the United States of America. We honor him because he has redeemed his pledge. His memorable phrase “I shall return” will become a living thought in every Filipino home and will be repeated by the youth of this land for generations to come. We honor him because of his abiding and sustained friendship for our people and for his deep interest in our freedom and welfare. We honor him for his gallantry and heroism as a soldier and his wisdom as a statesman. We honor him for his unparalleled victories, but even more for his indomitable courage in those days of gloom and adversity when it seemed that nothing could stop the enemy from subduing this part of the globe. And we honor him because to us he embodies the power, glory and magnanimity of the United States. ( Applause. ) Such is our confidence in him and our gratitude to the nation he represents and our determination to give our lives and our all, that we shall spare no effort, no sacrifice, no wealth, no blood to help him until Japanese military power is completely crushed. ( Applause. )

Gentlemen of the Congress, I take great pride in presenting to you the idol of the Filipinos, the Defender and Liberator of the Filipino people, General of the Army Douglas MacArthur.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Roxas, M. (1947). Important speeches messages and other pronouncements of President Manuel Roxas . Manila : Bureau of Printing.