Speech of Honorable Manuel Roxas Senate President of the Philippines Accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines

THE CANDIDATE ACCEPTS THE NOMINATION FOR THE PRESIDENCY

CHAIRMAN, DELEGATES OF THE CONVENTION, MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS:

I greet each and every member of this Convention as a soldier in a new crusade, a crusade for human endeavor, a crusade for democracy, a crusade for justice and a crusade to lift our country from its present state of prostration and with it to lift up the common people so that after their sufferings, privations and tribulations during the war, they may in peace rise up to the level which dignity, patriotism and the traditions of our country demand, so that every man, woman and child will be able to live in peace and enjoy the blessings of democracy and liberty.

I wish to thank the different delegations who, despite the sacrifice, have come to attend this convention from the remotest parts of our country. Your presence here attests to the fact that you are convinced that this crusade has been launched not only by political considerations or a desire for political preferment but chiefly because we are called upon to perform a sacred duty to ourselves and to our country. We are not fighting for power. We are not appealing to the people for the sake of capturing the reins of power in this government. That is not our aim. If we seek the confidence of our people it is merely because, with that confidence, with that faith, with that trust, we may, if we control the reins of government, do for our people what we want to do for them, and that is to realize, to bring into actuality, the great principles and the great causes for which we fought during the last war. We won the war. We fought for certain principles to be sure that, afterwards, in these times of peace, we may be able to prove to our people that we have won what we fought for in time of war. ( Applause. )

We fought for constitutional government. We are fighting now for constitutional government. The present administration has trampled upon our Constitution. It has destroyed the independence of the judiciary. It has set to naught the explicit provision of the Constitution requiring that all appointments of the Chief Executive be submitted to the Commission on Appointments for confirmation.

We fought for justice, equal justice. We fought for a government that will serve the interests of the people. The present administration has a new concept—the present administration believes that the government is the master of the people. We believe that the government is the servant of the people, that the people are the master of the government. ( Applause. )

We are fighting against corruption. We are fighting for a clean government. We are fighting for a government that would be just and fair to the lowest and lowliest citizen of this land. The present administration is not only incapable of preventing corruption in public office but it is incapable of punishing those who are guilty of corruption. ( Applause. ) The present administration is closing its eyes to the sufferings and the needs of our suffering masses. The generous people of America sent relief material to the Philippines for distribution to those who are needy, for distribution to those who are hungry, to those who are homeless, and yet the present administration with the eye single only to the next election, has used this relief material, not for relieving their distress but for the purpose of winning votes in the coming election. ( Applause. )

The present administration has destroyed the Civil Service. Men who have rendered loyal and valuable services to the government for many years have not been reappointed to office for partisan motives. Our Civil Service law requires that government appointments should be governed strictly by the merit system. That system has now been forgotten, if not discarded. Appointments and promotions to public office today are governed solely by the principle of political expediency. We protest against the use of power for the purpose of placing in the government service men who have no other qualifications to hold public office except that they are the henchmen or the leaders of the administration. I protest emphatically against the practice of using public funds to employ men and women, not for the purpose of rendering service to the government and to the people, but for the purpose of winning votes for the administration.

The present administration has destroyed completely the independence of the judiciary. The judiciary is the bulwark established by the Constitution to safeguard individual freedom. If you have a corrupt and inept judiciary or a judicial system that is not independent but subservient to the whims and caprices of the appointing power, individual freedom and liberty becomes a farce. The bill of rights has been established in the Constitution not for the purpose of defining these rights but for the purpose of safeguarding them not only as between one citizen and another, but for the purpose of safeguarding these rights against the abuses and usurpation of the government itself. And the Constitution has given to the courts of justice the mission of safeguarding these rights. The courts are the citadel of this freedom. The courts stand to defend this liberty against invasion by the government itself. But the present administration, forgetting this sacred mission of the courts, has indulged in the practice of making appointments of judges in an “acting” capacity. This novel method, unprecedented in the long history of our judiciary, destroys its independence because the judiciary can only be independent if, as provided by the Constitution, judges are appointed for life or during good behavior. A court can only be independent if the judge may not be subjected to the fear that, because of his decision, he might displease the administration and thus give cause to the administration for ousting him from his office. That is the situation today. The majority of the judges of courts of first instance and justices of the peace have been given appointments in an acting capacity so that any judge who may render decisions which might displease the appointing power or any of his henchmen may immediately be removed. If a judge, as I know of several cases, makes statements that might be interpreted to mean that he is against the administration, or if his relatives are found to be leaning towards the party opposed to the administration, somebody else is immediately appointed to take his place in the bench. What is the net result of this situation? The net result of the situation is that judges in the Philippines today who have been given appointments in an acting capacity are not free agents, they are subject to the wishes of the administration. They are no longer independent, and instead of being the guardians of individual freedom, they become the tools of the Executive in order to destroy or to usurp or to abuse individual liberty. ( Applause. )

We are committed in our platform to change all these. On another occasion, I shall have an opportunity to explain the principles of our party and to speak on the issues of our campaign. The issues of the campaign are simple and clear. First, the establishment of a constitutional government; second, the restoration of democratic processes; third, honesty in the government; fourth, peace and order.

The present administration has utterly failed to maintain peace and order in our country; banditry is rampant in many localities. Men and women who have participated in the resistance movement are shot down like dogs. Even in the streets of Manila and in many communities, there is no security of life and property. A government, my friends, that cannot maintain peace and order, a government that cannot protect life and property, is not worthy of the name. ( Applause. )

If the people give us the power, if the people support our party at the polls, we shall establish in the Philippines a truly democratic government. We abhor Fascism. I wish to make that clear. I am the enemy not only of Fascism but of every attempt to introduce in our government fascistic tendencies. I am opposed to any procedure that is not sanctioned by our Constitution or not in accord with our democratic processes. We want a clean government, a government free from corruption. We are in favor of clean elections. A democracy cannot function properly unless the people have an opportunity to vote freely in its elections. A free ballot should be guaranteed in order to maintain democracy. Democracy becomes a farce when the people are deprived of the opportunity of expressing themselves at the polls and are subject to coercion, bribery or other frauds which sometimes are committed in order to win votes.

We are in favor, my friends, of action—quick, decisive, intelligent action. Almost one year has passed and the present administration has not done anything not only to relieve distress but even to initiate a program for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of this country. Many of our countrymen are homeless, many of our countrymen are threatened with starvation; the cost of living is rising every day. While wages are relatively low, there is no proportion between the scale of wages and the cost of living. The purchasing power of the farmer is very low, because, while the government attempts to control prices of goods, the government exerts no effort at all to control the production, supply or distribution of the goods and commodities which the farmers consume. We are committed in our platform to relieve social distress and suffering specially in the agrarian areas. We are committed to solve the problem of unemployment. In the formulation of our plans for the economic rehabilitation and reconstruction of this country, our main objective will not be merely to erect large factories or to increase production as an end in itself but we figure on the industrialization and intensification of every activity to raise the standard of living of our people and to grant to every man and woman who desire to work for a living an opportunity to work for a decent livelihood. If we win, I promise that I shall do my best—and I believe I will succeed—in guaranteeing to every man or woman in the Philippines who desires it, an opportunity to find a job for the support of his family.

To the representatives of labor who are here, I wish to assure them that this party is deeply interested in the welfare of the laborers. There can be no successful economic enterprise unless labor is fairly treated, justly paid and relatively compensated. There can be no successful development of our economy unless there is intimate cooperation between those representing capital and those representing labor. My vision of our economic future is this: I should like to establish in the Philippines a real economic democracy, an economy wherein labor and capital may work hand in hand in order that this country may flourish, and labor and capital may receive an equal proportion in the benefits so that fair remuneration and reward may be assured to all concerned.

It has been said that some of our friends are very busy circulating rumors to the effect that the country should not vote for us or for me in the coming elections because, they say, if I am elected, America will not grant to the Philippines the assistance that we expect for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of our country. I want to bring to the open this malicious whispering campaign. I want to force them to come out and launch such declaration. I defy them to prove that that is true. I would not dare to seek office if I had the least suspicion that these rumors had any truth in them. America cannot adopt such an attitude. It is unfair to America to believe that in spite of the fact that she is the champion of democracy, she would want to dictate to our people whom to choose during the coming elections. The present administration was zealous in postponing the national elections here. As a matter of fact, the present administration was very happy when the end of the term of the last Congress was approaching and Congress had not yet succeeded in passing an Election Law. But it was the President and Congress of the United States that decided that there could be no justification for postponing the elections in the Philippines. China is going to have an election. Even Japan is going to have an election this month or next month. The United States Congress believes that we who have fought for democracy, we who have fought for constitutional government, have the right at the very first opportunity after the war, to be given the privilege to select our officials to run our government in accordance with the provisions of our own Constitution. And so it was America and the American Government that forced us to have this election despite the opposition of the present administration, because the truth is that the present administration tried to do everything in its power to oppose the passage of the Congressional Resolution providing for the holding of an election in the Philippines.

America is going to pass laws appropriating money to assist us in our economic rehabilitation in the future. America will appropriate this money. Why? Is it because the officials of the United States Government are friends of the present administration in the Philippines? Are they going to appropriate almost one billion pesos just as a gift or as a token of friendship for any particular individual or individuals in the Philippines? I think not. America is going to make this great sacrifice, America out of her generosity is going to appropriate this money, because America is grateful to the Filipino people for their loyalty and devotion to her cause to win this war, and America is going to appropriate this money because she appreciates your sacrifice, our sacrifice, the sacrifices of our heroic soldiers and our guerrilla forces, because she mourns the death of hundreds of thousands of Filipinos who fought under the shadow of the American flag in our country, not only to defend our own flag, but to defend the great flag, the glorious flag of the United States of America. America is going to appropriate this money out of respect for a great historical truth: that the Philippines is the only nation subject to the sovereignty of another nation that in this war fought, not on the side of the enemy against their Mother Country, but on the side of the Mother Country against an enemy who used threats, intimidations and duress in order to win our hearts and souls against the United States. The Philippines, I repeat, is the only country that in the last war fought alongside the Mother Country and despite all the promises, all the assurances which Japan made to us, we had remained faithful and loyal, mixing the blood of our people with the blood of the American soldiers that fought in this country to liberate this land of ours. Whether we win this time or whether the administration wins this time or whether any other element in the country may exert influence in the result of this election to win in this fight, the feelings of the American people toward our country and people will not change, because these feelings are dictated, I repeat, by their great appreciation for the loyalty of the Filipinos, the loyalty of those who like you and me remained here, suffered here and suffered long. ( Applause. )

And so we are going to oppose the present administration on the 23rd of April of this year. I believe the country is with us. As our distinguished candidate for Vice-President has just said, it is evident that the nation wants a change. The people have lost confidence in the present administration. They have lost confidence because the present administration has done nothing to prove to the people that it is capable of giving the nation an efficient, honest, benevolent and wise administration. The present administration is incapable of taking decisive action on any important matter. The present administration lacks the courage to act. It is incapable of saying “yes” or “no” to anything of importance. ( Laughter and applause. ) A great nation cannot continue in a state of doubts and misgivings. The present administration must free itself from its attitude of vacillation, of procrastination, of ineptitude. It cannot act. We want action. We want quick, intelligent, decisive action, and that is what we are going to promise to achieve. The watchword of this campaign is: We will give our country an honest deal. We will prove to the nation that we can act. We will show to the people of this country and to the whole world that we can maintain a system of government here which will be truly democratic in accordance with our Constitution and that we shall be able to lift the masses of this country to higher levels of comfort, happiness, and wholesome living.

My friends, we should be proud of this party, for it is a party that has risen spontaneously. As if from the bottom of the earth, delegations from all over the country have come to us to pledge their support. But we can be proud specially of one thing—this party is not only the people’s party; it is the party of those who, during the occupation and during the war, fought and risked their lives and spilled their blood in order that our country might live. It is the party of those who fought in the resistance movement. It is the party of the guerrillas of the Philippines. It is the party of the young men and young women of this country. It is the party of all those who want a clean, decent and democratic government. It is the party of the people who want justice, good-will and improved social conditions. We have the support of the nation. I appeal to you to organize our forces so that this scattered support may be properly led through proper channels and made effective. Sometimes it is difficult for a youthful organization to win an election not because it lacks vote or support but because it has too many votes and too little support. That is the only danger to face in the coming elections. I appeal to you for unselfish sacrifice. I appeal to you for self-effacement. I appeal to you to approach your teniente del barrio , your councilor, your provincial leaders, for the benefit of our party when you return home. I ask you to sacrifice yourselves, to sacrifice your personal interests for the benefit of the party and the country.

I pledge myself to carry on an active campaign. I shall try to visit every province of this country during this campaign. I do not want you to forget the young men and the young women who are supporting us. I want the support of the young men and the young women because in these times and in this age, with the problems that we have confronting us, with the great tasks that are ahead, we need the assistance and the support of the youths of this country. And I can assure the young men and the young women of the Philippines that if I am favored with the confidence of the people, under my administration the young men and the young women of the Philippines will have a definite opportunity to keep positions of responsibility and influence so that they can directly serve the people.

I made several pledges to the members of our armed forces, specially to the guerrillas, during my southern trip. I promised that during my administration we will do everything in our power to aid them. But above all, we shall not forget the widows and orphans of our nation. And one of the first measures that the new Congress will be called upon to pass will be the Filipino GI Bill of Rights which was approved by the Senate in the last Congress.

And now, my friends, I wish to thank you for the confidence that you have given to me in selecting me as the standard bearer of this party. We are still members of the Nacionalista Party. We belong to the Liberal Wing. We are not deserting that party. We are fighting the “unipersonalista” way of that party. The same men who in 1922 stood behind the leader who is now in Malacañan, who championed the one-man rule system in the Philippines—they are the same men who are powerful in Malacañan today. The same issues that provoked President Quezon twice against the leadership of our party are chiefly the same issues that have provoked the schism in our party today. With this difference—that whereas in 1922 the leader who desired to establish the one-man rule system of leadership exercised this power, today there is the difference that because of certain personal circumstances affecting the present Chief Executive, he no longer wields that power. The men in the past who were then termed as the Old Guards of the Nacionalista Party and who were overthrown with their leader in 1922 are the same men who today are wielding power in Malacañan. But they are men who are wielding power behind the scenes. They are men whose conduct and actuations are not subject to the scrutiny of the law. They are men who are not responsible to the people, and the same leaders of the present administration are the men who are not disposed to be known by the people. ( Applause. )

We want to save the Nacionalista Party which is the party that for more than thirty-five years had served the country with absolute loyalty, which is the party that almost all of you have served and supported for many, many years. We want to save that party because we believe that it is the best instrument of stability and safety for this country in the days to come. It is the party that can best bring about the unity of the nation. Despite all things, we shall be loyal to the traditions, principles and policies of the Nacionalista Party. One of these principles and traditions is “independence”. We are unequivocally and definitely and unalterably for the independence of the Philippines on July 4, 1946. We are opposed to any reexamination of the question of independence. We want the declaration of Philippine independence to take place exactly at noon on July 4, 1946.

Now, I wish to say a few words on the question of collaboration. Collaboration may be, although I am not sure it will be, an issue in this campaign, but our attitude is clear. We are the sworn enemies of collaboration. We condemn collaboration. But we do not believe that a man, merely because he occupied a public office during the Japanese occupation, is necessarily a collaborator or a traitor. We consider a collaborator the man who can be proven to have voluntarily given aid, comfort or sustenance to the enemy, and we stand four square on the proposition that any man who can be shown to have voluntarily given aid, comfort or sustenance to the enemy should be condemned by the courts to the severest punishment, and many of them should be hanged. We want to remove the question of collaboration from politics. The place where this question should be decided is in the courts. We must permit the courts to decide this question without interference from any source. We want to permit the judges to have the opportunity to consider the evidence and to decide the cases without being influenced except by what they believe is a correct interpretation of the law in accordance with their conscience. I say that I do not believe that collaboration will be an issue, because whereas the present administration first raised a cry against collaborators accusing as traitors every man and woman who occupied positions in the government during the occupation and tried even to throw from the ranks of the army men who have been decorated for bravery and gallantry in action during the war, that same administration later on, without explanation, has been drawing into its bosom some well-known collaborators who occupied very high positions in the government during the Japanese occupation. I believe that the present administration realizes that its views on collaboration, as explained by some members of his cabinet soon after liberation, did not meet with the approval of this country. But if they insist on making collaboration the issue of this campaign, we shall meet them with determination and with confidence on our ground. We have nothing to hide; we have nothing to fear. O, yes, the great leaders, political leaders of the administration, had been making insinuations that they are going to win this election because one or two things may happen, either Roxas may disappear and not be found on election day or Roxas will be imprisoned, before election. Well, they know where they can find me; they know where I can be found. I took risks during the war. I fought in the front line. God saved my life. I believe God will spare me too during these days. ( Applause. ) And if the worse comes to the worst and I should fall on the wayside, my legacy to you is, don’t forget the great cause for which we are waging this fight; don’t forget your own people; don’t forget specially that man who in derision is called the “tao”, that man who needs your protection, your help, your guidance; don’t forget the masses of our countrymen and carry on the fight, carry it on until the forces of evil shall have been destroyed, until the administration that forgets the welfare of the masses is overthrown from power, until the great principles of democracy are recognized and the people become finally the masters of the government and not the government the master over the people. ( Applause. )

Before you go back to your homes, I hope anyone who wishes to confer with me about his problems will feel completely free to come and talk to me. I want to talk to each and everyone of you. I shall be ready to receive you at your pleasure. You can find me either in my home or in my office beginning tomorrow and during every day of this week. And in closing, I wish to say that I wish to thank you for your help, for your confidence and faith, and I assure you that I will try not to betray that confidence. I wish to thank particularly the women who attended this convention, the women leaders who come from so many places, these women who are so enthusiastic, and I wish to warn the men, members of our party, that the vote of the women is just as valuable as the vote of the men, but you cannot win the vote of the women, except by convincing them that this party is really the party that would bring glory and happiness to the people of the Philippines. ( Applause. ) Once again, I wish to thank you and I greet you as the men and women who are the soldiers and officers of this new crusade; and if we win, as today I am certain, with your support, we will win, the glory and the responsibility will be yours and mine. ( Loud and long applause. )

NOTE.—The Presidential election was held on April 23, 1946, and on May 25, 1946, the Second Congress of the Philippines in joint session proclaimed the election of Manuel Roxas. He was credited with 1,333,392 votes or 203,396 more than what President Sergio Osmeña received.

See President Osmeña’s message of congratulation and President Roxas’ response .

That same day at 9:30 p.m., he made a radio broadcast to the American people over the National Broadcasting System (See No. 2), his statement having been published by the newspapers the next day.

Source : Quezon Family Collections

Roxas, M. (1954). Papers, addresses and other writings of Manuel Roxas (Vol. 1). Manila : Bureau of Public Libraries.