Speech of Honorable Manuel Roxas Senate President of the Philippines At the University Oratorical Contest sponsored by the Philippine Cultural Society

[Delivered at the United Church in Manila, July 14, 1945

APPENDIX III

MR. PRESIDENT, BOARD OF JUDGES, AND MY FRIENDS:

I think it did us some good to stand up when I was introduced. In the United States when you attend the ball game, after the seventh inning, everybody stands up to stretch his legs. ( Laughter. ) After the sumptuous fare of oratory and elocution which we have just had, it is worthwhile to stand up and stretch our legs before you listen. ( Laughter. )

I am going to tell you a secret. I came here with a written speech, in the preparation of which I had spent hours of deep thought. But, as I listened to the magnificent orations delivered this evening, I was wondering whether one or several of the contestants had gotten an advance copy of my speech, for it seems that I was listening to the speech that I had written; and so I am at a disadvantage tonight. ( Laughter .) Certainly, it would not be fair either to you or to me were I to content myself with repeating what these gentlemen have just expressed to you.

But I am very happy to be here not only because of my deep and abiding interest in everything that the young men and the young women do but also because of my great interest in finding out what the young men and the young women in this country are thinking today.

These are crucial times, and whatever weal or woe is the fate of this country will depend largely on what the young men and young women determine to do. You are the men and the women who have shouldered the greater part of the suffering, privation and struggle during the past three years of Japanese occupation, and it is not only right but just that you who had done your utmost for our country in her hour of need, should have a large part in determining the policies that you wish to establish for our homeland. I should like to see the young men and the young women of this country, as in the days prior to the occupation of the Philippines by our hated enemy, organize themselves into a militant group to ponder and study the grave problems that now confront us, and to determine the objectives that our people must attain.

As I said, I was happy to be here tonight, because I find from these representative young men that there seems to be a growing unanimity of sentiment and opinion among the young people of this country. The young people of this country stand for justice as we heard from the speakers here tonight—not mercy, but justice, justice for friend or foe alike ( applause ) , justice for those who are with us, as well as justice for those who are against us. The young men and young women of this country stand for law and order, respect for the constituted authorities, abolition of lawlessness, the liquidation of banditry. They stand for the establishment in this country of a regime of law, of respect for our constitution and certainly for the free exercise of the liberties that are guaranteed in that charter of our freedom. ( Applause .)

And next, we stand for constitutional processes. No man should be convicted without due process of law; no man should be branded or spurned, to his dishonor and the dishonor of his family forever, without giving him an opportunity to stand up and defend himself. Why are we to permit the attainment of the purposes of certain men who. for a time and by accident, wielded a tremendous influence in this government, and may still continue to wield that influence; people who are wont to condemn anyone without trial, and to persecute others who, at least, may be as patriotic, as any of them or all of them together, if not more patriotic? ( Applause. ) This is not only smacking of dictatorship; it is perpetuating the will of the government that has crushed this country and brought tears and terror to our mothers and to all of us—a government reminiscent, of the Japanese Military police.

I am fighting against that, irrespective of the consequences to myself. I believe it is my duty to fight against that, and I appeal to you, the young men and the young women of this country, because I know that your sentiments are high. your purposes are noble, and that you are just and fair. I want you to help me not for any political purpose or ambition, to help me win this fight for this principle; if I am a candidate, vote against me if you will, but help my principles win. ( Applause. )

It is indeed regrettable that we should have these questions to divide our people during these times of stress and trouble. There is a war still going on, and we are committed not only by our honor and our pledged word to the United States and to the whole world but also by our deep conviction, to take part in that war. The war will go on until the unconditional surrender of Japan is attained, and I trust that all the young men and young women would hold themselves in readiness to do their share in waging that war. Don’t ask questions, if necessary, to find out in what capacity you are called upon to serve. During these times we should show our patriotism and loyalty to the United States and to our country by serving in whatever capacity our services may be needed. You, young men and young women, are trained in the schools established for us by the people of the United States; many of you have learned the A, B, C’s on the knees of the first American soldiers who came to our country. Not only because of loyalty, but also because of our deep feelings of gratitude for the great things that America has done for our country and the benefits which we have received, should we show to America that we are willing to labor and sacrifice beside her in this war, that we are willing to share the danger and the perils and to pay the cost in blood and in wealth until the war is won, We should do that not only because it is the proper thing to do but because it is our duty to perform it for more practical purposes—for our country’s economic prosperity.

I have pondered and tried to appraise the economic losses of our country as a result of the war, and I have reached the conclusion that, comparatively speaking, the economic condition of the Philippines today is worse than it was when the Americans first landed in our country on August 13, 1898, after the battle of Manila Bay.

I said “comparatively”, because on paper our economy looks stronger today than it was then. Whereas wages today are P1.50, in 1898 they were from 15 centavos to 20 centavos a day; in 1898, you could buy as much as four or five gantas of rice with 15 centavos or 20 centavos, while today you cannot buy one-third of a ganta of rice with P1.50. In 1898, a student in Manila lived comfortably—and I have been told that he could even afford to enjoy the luxury of having a calesa or a rig—with P20 a month; I venture to say that no student in Manila today can live on P100 a month.

From the standpoint of national economy, this country is weaker today than it was in 1898, because in 1898 our farms were not disorganized or destroyed; we had cattle and work animals in the field, and we could feed our people, as we did not have to import rice to prevent hunger and starvation. Today that is not the case; large portions of our farms have been disorganized, our work animals have been liquidated by the enemy, there is no peace and order in many farm communities, and there are no farm implements.

I venture to say that the rice production, next year, will be less than 40 per cent of the normal rice production of this country. I also venture to state that, unless we can import some rice or other substitutes before September of this year, and certainly in October, rice prices in Manila will go much higher than they are today. That is a practical and urgent problem.

I have brought this matter to your attention, because one important member of our Cabinet in the Government jeered at me when I said that the food situation in the Philippines was a problem of administration and not of legislation. ( Applause. ) And I repeat that it is not a problem of legislation with which I can deal, or the Congress can deal. It is a problem of administration because the food administrator today has practically dictatorial powers on foodstuffs in the Philippines, not only in the matter of procurement and distribution, but also in transportation and in the fixing of prices for all commodities. What else can the Legislature do, except to grant these powers and to provide funds to support the administrative agencies of the Government that will administer this task?

The problem is proper and reasonable regulation and law and order enforcement. The Government should not lose its prestige by promulgating laws and regulations which can not be enforced, or which the authors did not even intend to enforce. ( Applause. ) That destroys not only the respect, but the confidence of the people in the Government. I am told that the rice price fixed in Manila is 32 centavos per ganta, when everybody knows that right in the provinces where rice is produced you cannot obtain rice at less than P2.50 a ganta. Is it then reasonable to fix the price of rice in Manila at 32 centavos per ganta? ( Laughter .) That is why I said that that regulation was not intended to be enforced. I am told that the price of eggs in Manila, the official price is 3 centavos per egg, which may be why the hens in the Philippines do not want to bother laying eggs. ( Laughter. ) But the prices in the provinces where eggs come from are no less than 40 centavos a piece, because it costs a lot of money to feed a hen; and yet our laws fix 3 centavos an egg, and they want the police to enforce this regulation. ( Laughter . ) And what would happen if the police enforce the regulation? ( Laughter. ) We will have no rice, no eggs, no meat, no vegetables to feed the people in Manila. In that situation why not revise the prices and make them reasonable?

You, young men and young women, know that no law can be enforced—don’t forget this—that no law can be enforced which is not reasonable and is against the conscience of the people. ( Applause. ) As I said, you cannot enforce any law that is unfair and unjust, and for that reason I told my colleague, President Pro-tempore of the Senate, Senator Qui-rino, that I am going to fight for these principles; for justice, for respect for law and order, for the restoration of constitutional processes, for the maintenance of individual rights, for the return of elected officials to their former posts, for the independence and integrity of the judiciary. ( Applause. )

When I first brought up those questions, the “janissaries and gauleiters” were howling against me, and I never said a word, but I told my friend here, Senator Quirino, that we were going to win in this fight; ( Applause ) and sooner or later—and I believe it will be sooner than later—the Government would not be able to stop yielding to our demands when the Government started yielding.

I shall not delay you any longer, my friends. When you take side on these questions, forget personalities, forget personal feelings of friendship or loyalty or personal relationship. Determine your attitude on whether or not you agree with the principles sustained by each particular individual or group. I believe more than anybody else, or at least just as much as anybody else among those who are in politics today, that I can interpret the thoughts and the feelings of the young men and the young women of this country, because I myself have come from the same schools that you come from. I am not the son of a wealthy man, I have worked my way through school as you did. I completed my education right here in our country through the public schools from the first grade to the university. Your thoughts and your feelings are mine on these questions; we are going to fight for whatever is right and just, for what is best for our country, and for those principles for which you and I have sacrificed, so that those principles may triumph. I want your help and your assistance and—I repeat—I would like you to organize yourselves into a militant group. If the young men and young women of this country would organize themselves together into a solid phalanx in order to defend what is right and just, and to defend democracy and liberty in this land, there is only but one course,—whatever the politicians may make or do,— that the young men and the young women in this country will follow—and your principles will win. I thank you. ( Applause. )

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Roxas, M. (1947). Important speeches messages and other pronouncements of President Manuel Roxas . Manila : Bureau of Printing.