Speech of Honorable Manuel Roxas Senate President of the Philippines To Senator Quirino, Senator Cuenco, members of the House of Representatives, and friends

[Delivered at Club Ciro, September 14, 1945]

APPENDIX IV

MR. TOASTMASTER, SENATOR QUIRINO, SENATOR CUENCO, MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, MY FRIENDS:

My first duty as a guest is to express to those who have organized this banquet and to each and every one of you here today my heartfelt appreciation for this tribute that you have rendered me and to which I feel I am not fully entitled. I wish also to express my appreciation to the young lady who has read this poem dedicated to me. I wish also to thank my very dear friend and colleague, President Pro-Tempore of the Senate, Mr. Quirino, for the generous words he has uttered in my praise. As I listened to him say that he didn’t care whether or not I was going to pick him as my Vice-President he would hitch his wagon to my chariot just the same, the thought came to my mind that after all, in a democracy, it is neither Senator Quirino who will choose me as candidate for President nor I who will choose Senator Quirino as my candidate for Vice-President. As good soldiers in the service of our country, we stand at the post of duty. In pursuance of the command of our people, whatever their order, we will obey. If the people want us to continue serving this Government, whether in the highest post of leadership or merely in subordinate posts, I am sure that both Mr. Quirino and I will only be too glad to serve.

However, as I tried to visualize the picture of an electoral fight with myself as candidate for President and Mr. Quirino as candidate for Vice-President, I was wondering whether we would present a very beautiful picture before the people. I was afraid that that picture might look like a kangaroo—the hind legs being stronger and more powerful than the front legs. For I am sure that the people of this country have come to realize for many years now the sterling qualities of Senator Quirino, his patriotism, his courage, his ability and vast experience in the affairs of government. Very few men, if any, in our Government have rendered a more valuable service to our nation not only in the Legislature but also in the Executive Department of the Government than Senator Quirino. Senator Quirino was a graduate of “Fort Santiago University”, which fact during these days should be recognized as a badge of honor and patriotism and which, in the chaos and confusion that now prevail, is very often forgotten. My dear friend, the arch oppositionist Mr. Nueno, also was a very distinguished and honored graduate of Fort Santiago. He is considered unworthy to remain councilor of the City of Manila. I say that Senator Quirino has more than one reason to entitle him to the respect, the admiration, the faith and the confidence of the people of the Philippines. I am sure that if our people should decide to call upon him to serve not only as Vice-President but even as President of the Philippines, Mr. Quirino would acquit himself with honor to his Government, his country and people. Certainly he would be able to establish a more just government than the one that we have in the Philippines today.

I wish to thank the very generous gentleman and admirable poet who wrote this poem dedicated to me. I am not very sure that I deserve all the praise given in this poem. But in honor of the author, I should like to make as the text of my speech this afternoon two stanzas of the poem. That part which says that it is the duty of the leader of this Government—

“To return in this land the rule of law And make Democracy real, not hollow; To right wrongs and grievances; to redress, Errors, crimes; iniquities to suppress,”

And again—

“To drive away the cowards and the rogues, And the opportunists and demagogues; To bring order out of rampant chaos And the noblest sentiments in man arouse.”

These two stanzas synthesize what is most needed in this country today. What this country needs is spiritual and intellectual sanity and peace of mind. What this country needs first is justice. What this country needs first is faith that our Government will do justice to everyone, not only to those who take advantage of the situation to fish in muddied waters but also to the poor and humble citizens of our country.

All these questions that have arisen on the great issue of collaboration could be solved simply and fairly by the applica­tion of just one term—justice. Justice that will not condemn a man without giving him an opportunity to be heard; justice that will not honor a man merely because he was able to hide himself safely in the hills while the others were suffering from the tyranny and bitterness of an inhuman foe; justice that will be able to comprehend what happened here during the Japanese occupation and honor those who served their country in whatever capacity they chose to serve their country. And justice that will condemn and punish severely, whether in the Government or outside, the people who voluntarily gave aid, comfort or sustenance to the enemy, or who refused to aid the resistance movement. That question will not be settled by gossips and rumors and malicious statements circulated by interested parties. It will be settled by our courts, and the people should be willing and ready to accept the settlement of this question by our courts.

I am not defending the collaborators. I am the worst enemy of collaborators. But I don’t believe that a man merely because he served the government during the Japanese occupation either as a clerk or as a bureau chief or as a judge of the Court of First Instance or any other high position in the government was ipso facto a collaborator and a traitor to his country. I maintain that there are many ways of serving the country in any emergency. There are many ways of proving a man’s patriotism. We had to have a government in the Philippines during the Japanese occupation or the Japanese would have governed our country or would have allowed the Makapilis to set up a leadership under Benigno Ramos or Ricarte. That was the choice. All the officials and employees of the government here were ordered by General Homma to remain at their posts until otherwise directed by the Japanese authorities. Those who felt that it was their duty to their people remained at their posts during that emergency. They never profited from their positions in the government. And they never did anything to help the war efforts of the enemy. They are now branded by some of these neo-patriots as collaborators.

There will not be peace of mind among the Filipinos until that question is settled. Some of the aggressive leaders of the party that is supporting these principles have challenged those of us who believe otherwise to make this question an issue in the elections. If I thought that this was a proper issue to take to the people I would accept the challenge convinced as I am that those who stayed in the Philippines and who had seen the efforts that the Japanese displayed in order to win the hearts and the support of the Filipinos knew of the eventual redemption of the country by the United States. I am confident that the people would support us in our views on this question. But the question of collaboration is not a proper question to be taken to the people; that is a question for the courts to decide. Those who will be found guilty of siding with the enemy must be punished to the full extent of the law. I hope that all of these people who have taken up arms against the Filipinos and the Americans, those who have been guilty of giving aid, comfort and sustenance to the enemy, will be convicted; and I hope that some of them will be hanged. But I also demand and also expect that the courts will acquit those against whom no evidence of collaboration has been proven. By collaboration is meant the giving voluntarily of aid, comfort and sustenance to the enemy.

There is chaos and confusion in our Government today, and order is one of the greatest needs of this country. We have a government in name only, its existence in many respects being merely a paper existence. Many offices of the Government have been organized but there are no bureau chiefs up to now. Even the Bureau of Internal Revenue that is so essential to the Government in collecting revenues is not yet completely organized. Many provinces are still being governed by PCAU authorities, when all these questions could have been settled and the whole Government reestablished within forty-eight hours, if we had had a President who could act with courage and decision. It is the policy to call back all the elective officials in the Philippines who were elected in 1940. The Chief Executive made that declaration in a message to the Legislature two months ago. But has he carried out that announced purpose? Yes, he has carried it out in few instances—when he believed that those that were called back to their own posts were going to support him in the coming elections.

For instance, in Cebu, the municipal mayors belonging to the party of Senator Cuenco and composing more than 50 per cent of the mayors of that province have not been recalled. Not one of them. And in Cavite, my witness is Mr. Nueno, the Governor of that province, despite the promise that the President has made, has not been recalled, and the municipal mayors belonging to the party of the Governor have not been recalled. And so on. With respect to civil service employees, we have fought hard to get the provincial treasurers back. It has been done in many cases, but how? By rearranging and transferring these provincial treasurers from one province to another. For instance, a provincial treasurer of a Class A province has been shifted and appointed to a Class B province, for political reasons. In other words, favoritism, not efficiency in the Government, is the rule in the reappointment of many officials, including the judiciary. Many judges of the Court of First Instance who were serving in 1941 have not yet been recalled, while others not in. the service then have already been appointed. And the President had promised that he was going to call back all the civil service employees except those charged with collaboration. Your are better witnesses than I am, for some of you are government employees. Whereas the President has made that promise, he has not up to the present carried it out.

And what are the Government employees doing now? Nothing. I don’t really like to bring up this question; these employees might think I am criticizing them. The truth is that there is not enough work in these government, offices. The Government is not giving them work. The Customs House, for example. What work is being given to the Customs House when there are no imports? The Bureau of Immigration. What kind of work is it doing now when there are no foreign nationals coming in or going out of the country? The Bureau of Agriculture and so on down the line. I do not oppose nor do I criticize the calling back of these employees. But when these men do not have enough work to do in their own offices, they should for the time being work in some other offices where there is plenty of work to do, pending activation in their former offices.

And this brings me, ladies and gentlemen, to the very critical condition of our government finances. This worries me more than anything else. I am happy to speak to an audience who are more or less informed or this question and are interested in it. We are going to be independent very soon. The people expect that this country will be declared independent not later than July 4, 1946. What is the status of our finances? You don’t know. But I know. I think I know I know that Senator Quirino knows, but it is not because the Department of Finance has informed us officially of this situation. They have simply refused to give us such information. The President submitted a budget asking P150,000,000 for next year. He didn’t tell us where we could get it. He doesn’t even tell us what are the expected revenues in the coming year. The estimate for this year is only P7,000,000 As far as the condition of the Treasury is concerned, we really don’t know. We have tried to find out and I tell you our Government at present is the only business concern, for it is a business concern, that at the time of resumption of business is not capable of presenting a balance sheet. They had all the time to do this when they were in Washington and yet more than six months have passed since the Americans entered Manila and the condition of our government finances has not up to now been determined. They have not done anything in this direction. We don’t know how much money we have. For God’s sake, why can’t they tell us we have so much to expect in revenues and our credits amount to so much and we strike a balance in the Treasury? I don’t believe we will have it for many months to come. And yet the Legislature is being asked to appropriate one hundred fifty million pesos for next year. Where are we going to get that money? Are we going to print notes and ultimately make them worthless? Are we going to raise taxes to cover that deficit when our people have not yet recovered from the effects of war?

The President makes no proposal. The question of the finances of the Government is not a question in which the leadership is in the Congress. The Secretary of Finance is the Treasurer. He should tell us how much money we have. That reminds me of a story of Judge Vera, in connection with the expectation of getting some money from the United States in order to cover our deficit. The Government plans to borrow money from the United States to be paid at some future date, or just as soon as our finances improve. This theory recalls a man who bought sweepstakes tickets and started planning to build a house on the expectation of winning a prize. Our Government is proceeding more or less on that theory. In expectation of money coming from somewhere, the President wants us to approve P340,000,000 for public works; P340,000,000 in addition to the P150,000,000 that I spoke about before. So the Senate asks, where are we going to get this money? President Pro-Tempore Quirino asked the President that question in my presence. The President shrugged his shoulders and said: “It’s up to you to get the money.”

Do you tell me that the Legislature can discharge this responsibility to the people by appropriating money that we do not have? In addition to that, we received a message from the President saying that the dues and obligations of this government—obligations, mind you—amount to P289,000,000. And in his message he requested that the Congress take action to liquidate these obligations. He doesn’t tell us how and where to get the money. He doesn’t tell us in what manner these obligations may be liquidated. We are always receiving messages from the President to do this and to do that.

You gentlemen know what our courts are doing now. Most of the judges have been appointed and they are still in Manila. There is no work in the provinces yet. And there are few cases now because people are not interested in law suits for they are very expensive and, besides, they have not yet recovered from the effects of war. These are facts which bring out the statement that it is absolutely important to free our courts of the existing chaos.

We shall go to the United States; we shall send a mission there to ask for assistance in the work of rehabilitation. I wonder what the American Congress will think when it finds that right here in our country we have not taken care needs of our employees, that our laborers are not being paid decent wages, that we have not found ways and means funds to maintain our Government. I am very dubious or reception that the information of that nature will have in United States. If we desire to merit the assistance or America in the work of rehabilitation and reconstruction of this country we must be ready to present a sound, intelligent and workable program of rehabilitation and reconstruction.

And where is that program? There is none. With a shrug of the shoulders, the President tells Congress to devise me of solving these questions. The Legislature must informed of the problems and solutions to those problems. What will happen, ladies and gentlemen? Unless these problems are solved, unless the Government manages its fiscal affairs properly, unless we settle this question properly, many employees in this Government will soon find themselves unable to collect their salaries and laborers unable to collect their wages. For if the money is not there—for electoral reasons so many employees of the Government are being sent as agents of Malacañan to the different provinces—this Government cannot be maintained for long. There is the case of Mr. Verzosa (Nueva Vizcaya). Agents of the President are being sent to Cebu, Mindanao and other provinces, for what? To get the people together and tell them they must work for President Osmeña. Ladies and gentlemen, never has this country been more in need of a really patriotic leadership, a leadership that will forget self-interest and partisan advantage and look only after the supreme welfare of the Filipino people. I plead for your continued interest in these problems. Each nation has the government that it deserves. We will continue to have this Government if we stand supinely, silent or indifferent to what is going on around us.

I welcome this opportunity to talk to you, ladies and gentlemen, not to ask that you support me if I become a candidate. That, you will have to decide for yourselves. I have come to plead for your interest in this grave problem. Adopt a militant attitude in favor of the well-being of this Government. A democracy can exist only if the people are alert, if the people are willing to sacrifice their personal interests in behalf of the public weal. You must help in the solution of these problems. We in the Congress are powerless without your backing. Give us your support and we will do what is right and best for our nation. If you want us to continue with our efforts to put order in our Government and to raise the funds for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of this country, if you want us to insure the freedom of the Philippines and stability in he Government, if you want us to continue our efforts to insure the honor, the good name and prestige of the Philippines and the success of our independence, give us your support. Help us with the consciousness and the feeling that you are doing it not only for your country but also for the welfare of your children.

Source : National Library of the Philippines

Roxas, M. (1947). Important speeches messages and other pronouncements of President Manuel Roxas. Manila : Bureau of Printing.