Speech of Honorable Manuel Roxas At the Nacionalista Party Convention

[Delivered at the Ateneo de Manila Hall, August 16, 1941]

Mr. CHAIRMAN, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THE CONVENTION:

We meet during troubled and anxious times. Never before in the history of mankind has there been such chaos, destruction and suffering in the world. The law of the jungle reigns in three continents. An infernal military machine driven by men gone mad has been mowing down the lives and free institutions of millions of human beings, leaving in their wake massacre and butchery, devastation and ruin, and the curdled blood of countless innocent victims. We see gathering over our heads thickening clouds of lead and steel which threaten to wipe out liberty and civilization from the face of the earth. The conflagration has been sweeping on and on and is rapidly nearing our shores. This historical moment is fraught with the gravest danger to our lives, our homes, and the liberties that are closest to our hearts.

As we meet to ponder upon this serious crisis and to choose the man who can lead the nation wisely and courageously through this approaching order of life and death, our eyes irresistibly turn to the man who, for over forty years, with unsurpassed patriotism, has devoted his life and his all to achieve the welfare and liberty that we now enjoy. His name is on our lips; it is a household word in the homes of the rich and poor, in every hut and shack throughout the width and breadth of our land, because it is carved deep in the hearts of sixteen million Filipinos. If this inarticulate mass could speak at once in answer to the question that now engages the attention of this convention, the chorus of their voices would in unison, like a peal of thunder, demand his nomination. And that is because he is the spontaneous choice of our fellow citizens to assume that tremendous responsibility.

His life is an unbroken record of fruitful service and signal accomplishments in behalf of our people. In his early youth when our country was laboring under the tyranny and oppression of a foreign master, he caught the flash of that glorious fire that has kindled the lives of heroes and lovers of liberty throughout the ages and have become immortal. He interrupted his studies, left his home and the ones he loved, and took to the fields to take part in the armed struggle for our freedom. In that conflict he fought, as he has always fought in every contest since then, with unequalled gallantry, matchless courage, and unremitting devotion to his cause. With high purpose and noble aim, he risked his life in many battles on the sprawling plains of Luzon and suffered imprisonment without flinching to achieve the recognition of the rights of his countrymen.

The defeat of our arms was for him merely a temporary setback and not the end of the struggle. He renewed the fight when, as Provincial Fiscal of his beloved province, he served with rare ability prosecuting mercilessly the perpetrators of crime for, according to his moral code, they were enemies of the state. He continued the fight when, as Provincial Governor, he demonstrated the capacity of his countrymen to rule their local affairs and maintained their right to suffer no discrimination by reason of their race or social station. He continued the fight when like a plumed knight, he strode on the floor of the Philippine Assembly to prove his people’s readiness to govern the nation, and to voice for them in burning words their passionate desire for independence. He continued the fight in the halls of the Congress of the United States when as Resident Commissioner, he pleaded for the fulfillment of the aspirations of his people and won a solemn promise that their independence would be recognized upon the establishment of a stable government in the Philippines. Arduous was this task, and powerful was the opposition, but he achieved victory because of his zeal and ability, meriting the admiration of the leaders and the people of America and the everlasting gratitude of his countrymen.

And he continued the fight when, upon his return, he was elected President of the Philippine Senate, and the recognized leader of the nation. As head of that body, he endeavored ceaselessly to fulfill the condition to the grant of independence imposed by the United States while promoting, at the same time, social progress among his people. It was at this epoch that he evinced his consuming love for the common man and his deep and abiding interest in the welfare of the laboring classes. He became their friend and ablest champion and ever since has devoted his best efforts to protect them from exploitation and insure for them fair wages and satisfactory working conditions. With a clear insight into the future, he made the Senate a bulwark of nationalism and of freedom and of democracy, and the impregnable fortress against the onslaughts of economic imperialism that was threatening to gain possession of our vast natural resources.

Failing health did not stop him from fighting on. Inch by inch he gained his conquests and came nearer his goal. That was achieved when, under his leadership, the Independence Act was passed fixing a date for independence and establishing the Commonwealth Government. A weakened and weary warrior, he could have rested on his laurels and lived happily in the warmth of the affection of his dear ones, but he could not turn a deaf ear to the overwhelming clamor of his countrymen demanding that he head the new Government, and was thus elected President of the Philippines.

Under his stewardship during the last six years we have attained a progress and cultural advancement unequalled during any similar period in our history. His accomplishments are well known to all. He has brought the country closer together through the construction of a network of modern roads and bridges, the improvement of port facilities, and the stimulation of an efficient transportation service. He has eliminated sectionalism and regional prejudices by proving himself free of these faults and instilling in the people a stronger consciousness of national solidarity. He established an efficient administration free from nepotism, graft, corruption and those elements which weaken the confidence of the people in their government. He has opened thousands of schools and has secured for all children of school age the opportunity of free elementary instruction. He has improved the health service, opened hospitals and extended medical aid to the remotest communities. He has maintained the independence of the judiciary increasing the faith of the people in the courts of justice. He has stimulated economic development, created credit facilities, eradicated usury, and opened to every Filipino the opportunity to work for his economic security. He has given a new meaning to the dignity of labor by elevating the concept of human toil and placing the laborer on a level of equality in his dealings with his employer He has placed in the statute books progressive laws protecting labor from injustice, fixing a minimum wage, and insuring for the workingman the right to organize unions and to bargain collectively. He has effected a revision of the tax system, putting the burden of taxation on those best able to bear burden, and bringing about a more equitable redistribution of wealth. He has maintained the finances of the government on a sound condition, and safeguarded the integrity of our monetary system. He has enlarged our foreign commerce and built up a growing merchant marine. He has safeguarded the exercise of individual rights, particularly the right of free speech and free press and to petition for a redress of grievances. He has organized the national defense and has initiated the training of a citizen army that may be called upon to defend our fatherland. He has fortified the faith of the people in democracy by scrupulously guarding the purity of elections and the free expression of the popular will.

These accomplishments are significant in the life of a new nation. They represent a long step forward in preparing our people for the responsibilities of independence and the changes which that new status will bring.

At the close of his present administration it was his desire to enjoy a well-deserved rest, but the people would not allow it. Through an amendment to the Constitution brought about by a persistent popular demand, the constitutional obstacle to his re-election has been eliminated. The people’s insistence to draft him was moved by the conviction that he and he alone could unite the nation and face the grave problems that the world crisis has created. And again duty calls him in manner that no patriot can fail to answer. It will mean a new risk of his life and new labors and sacrifices, perhaps more trying than those which he had ever experienced in the past. But as he is a patriot, I have no doubt, he will forget his self-interest and personal convenience and submit himself once more to wishes of his people.

He is a man with the broadest human sympathies, the apostle of our freedom, and the builder of our nation. Social justice is the keystone of his social philosophy. The well-being of the common man is his ever present and deep concern. His keenest interest is for him and the millions that he represents; and they love him, because he has given them justice and has been their benefactor.

This great and trusted leader, this inspired liberal, this peerless champion of our national independence, this statesman of courage and vision, to whom we owe, in a large measure, our liberties, our progress, and our well-being, is the man who I take pride to nominate President of the Philippines. He is none other than the fearless warrior, the friend of the people, the father of his country, the living hero of the Filipinos—MANUEL L. QUEZON.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS

Source : Supreme Court Library

Roxas, M. (1941). [Speech of Honorable Manuel Roxas at the Nacionalista Party Convention]. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 40 (9), 1944-1947.