Speech of His Excellency Manuel Roxas President of the Philippines On the 10th anniversary of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines

[Delivered in Malacañan, October 31, 1946]

In every established language and in practically every culture, one of the basic and most timeless thoughts which men have arrived at is the fact that the child is the father of the man, that the care and training of the nation’s young predetermines the health and vigor of the nation itself.

The totalitarian regimes of Germany, Italy and Japan, which recently threatened the very existence of mankind, paid more attention to the training and conditioning of the youth than to the welfare of adults. One of the unmistakeable marks of a totalitarian fascist-state is a compulsory regimentation of that nation’s boys and girls. But they are trained in blind obedience, in military drill, in Heiling Hitler, or Viva-ing Il Duce, or in clenching their fist in passionate salute to the national leader. Their bodies are made strong, and their minds are made weak. They are forced into a single mold of obedience and brutality. Iron discipline is sanctified—discipline for the sake of discipline.

We call such a system cruel and stultifying. We reject it and denounce it. Yet we must recall that such a program brought results, although those results were tragic for the world. We must recognize that this program developed a generation of youths, passionate in their patriotic fervor, blind in their devotion to the Government and to the State. We can, if we will, distinguish the good features of such a system, from the evil, barbaric, and savage features. We can see that unstinting attention to our youth is essential to the development of national vigor, vitality, and virility.

Discarding the elements of regimentation, of mental suffocation and discipline for disicipline’s sake, we can still appreciate the immeasurable benefits of a youth training program, volunteer in nature, rational in principle, and devoted to the character development of the young instead of to their conversion into blind and obedient robots.

These principles were perceived long ago by a British gentleman by the name of Sir Baden-Powell. In England he founded the Boy Scout movement. That movement has since spread all over the world. There is no nation in the free areas of the earth which does not have a flourishing Boy Scout organization. I am happy in the knowledge that the Philippines has its own vigorous and active Boy Scout group, of which thousands of our young boys are members. I could say the same thing, of course, about the Girl Scouts, but on this particular occasion, I am addressing my remarks to our Boy Scouts who are celebrating this week the anniversary of their founding in the Philippines, and are hailing the acknowledgment accorded them by the International Boy Scout organization, as an independent national Boy Scout movement.

I am deeply gratified by this recognition. It is yet another symbol of our independent national existence. It is not an unimportant symbol. It indicates the coming of age of one of our major youth movements, which can now proceed under its own power and under its own leadership, to do the job which is so essential—the job the Boy Scout movement has been doing with such brilliant success all over the world. That job, as I understand it, is to make upright men out of boys; it is to develop initiative, courage, health, manual skills, and appreciation of nature; and last, but by no means least, to cultivate a spirit of national patriotism and community responsibility. It teaches boys to live and to work together, to cooperate, to adjust themselves to the necessities of gregarious living, and to make good neighbors.

The Boy Scout laws, as I recall them, pledges young men to honor their parents, to be cheerful, kind, friendly, thrifty and helpful; to love their country; and to reverence their God. I can think of no nobler rules of conduct; I can think of no finer guides for the development of our young. I was pleased indeed to take the Scout oath today when I was inducted as an honorary tenderfoot. I think I value that designation more than the other given to me today as honorary scout president. I like to think of myself as a tenderfoot. As a beginner, starting at the very bottom of the ladder of scouting, I suppose I will have to earn a considerable number of merit badges and to qualify in such things as swimming, first aid, tracking, and forest conservation before I can become a second-class scout. I have had some experience in a few of these fields and will have a little easier time of it, than many of you have had in gaining your ranks in the scouting movement. Being only a tenderfoot, I am sure to make progress. I certainly cannot be demoted.

In any event, and seriously I am proud to be associated with all of you young men of tomorrow. I envy your hopes, your dreams, and your opportunities. The world is yours. Your life is before you; you can make of it what you will. Your Government is determined to provide for you full equality of opportunity. That is one of the functions of government in a democracy—so that every youth, regardless of his economic status, will have an unlimited opportunity to turn his own talents to their maximum advantage, and to achieve the greatest heights of which he, himself, is capable. In this way the individual is given his chance to enter what I have often called “the free market place of competition” and to do his best, to run the best race of which he is capable without handicaps. That is a goal which we have not yet quite reached. In fact we are a considerable way from it. The children of economically underprivileged parents do not today have the same opportunities as the children of wealthier parents. There are still far too many of our young whose capacities must remain undeveloped, for economic reasons. It is my purpose and it is the purpose of your Government to work toward the day when every boy and every girl has every chance that he needs to make the most of the talents which the Lord has given him. There must be equality of educational opportunity. The poor man’s son must have the same chance to go through college as the son of the rich. Whatever steps are necessary to achieve this must and will be taken as soon as we are able. Those who are especially talented, manually or intellectually, must be given every encouragement to develop those talents at the expense of the Government, if necessary. I pledge my efforts in that direction.

The Boy Scout movement is inspired by the same democratic spirit which is our national heritage. It matters not that I am President of the Philippines. I am still only a tenderfoot in the Boy Scout movement. Political and class distinctions are set aside. Each is judged according to his merits and his attainments. Each of you may become an Eagle Scout, if you have the capacity. Napoleon, who was the first military leader to introduce a measure of democracy into an army, told his men in the ranks that each of them carried a marshal’s baton in his knapsack, and that there was no private soldier who did not have an opportunity to become a supreme leader if he had the ability. That is the spirit of democratic society. It is the spirit of the Philippine nation.

The fact that the Boy Scout movement is spreading so far and so fast in our country is a reflection of the basic devotion of this nation and of its people to democracy. The Boy Scout movement, as I have said, is a democratic movement. It corresponds in every way to the spirit of democracy. I should think that every young and growing boy would like to be a boy scout; it would please me very much if it were so. But above all, the Boy Scout movement is a volunteer movement. Boys belong to it and join it because they want to join it and belong to it. That is the essential element, the element that distinguishes it so completely and so vitally from the youth movements of Hitler, of Mussolini, and of other totalitarian regimes. And it is the element of free will, of choice and selection that truly distinguishes a democracy from all other forms of human association. When men may, in the exercise of whatever wisdom they have, decided to take one course or another or even in some cases to take no course at all, they are exercising their rights in a democracy. The fact that the Boy Scout movement swells its ranks with young men who want to be scouts makes those ranks happy, willing, and friendly. Those boys learn to adapt themselves to the requirements of cooperative effort the more easily because they have chosen to enter into the Boy Scout association.

What is true for boys is also true for men. Your country has made certain decisions with regard to its national and international policies. It is possible that those decisions are wrong, but those decisions represent our best judgment. We will do our job much better because we have chosen our goals and our directions. It is possible that higher powers or absolute leaders could make our decisions more efficiently for us than we can for ourselves; but in the long run the decisions we make by common consent turn out better because they have the support of the people.

As I look about me and consider all the heavy and difficult problems which our nation faces, I am sometimes discouraged and humbled by the tremendous responsibilities that weigh upon my shoulders. I become impatient. There are not enough hours in the day; there are not enough people to undertake all the labor to accomplish all that urgently cries out to be accomplished. I grow weary and think, sometimes, how much easier it would be to rest and to relax, and to let the stream of events follow the least difficult course. And then I think of our youth, of our boys and girls, and of our young men and young women. Riding through the streets, I see the bright and eager faces of the generation that will inherit our own, and of the generation after that. I feel their determination. I perceive their hopes and I am thrilled by their courage. I am revitalized and inspired, and I know that no matter how far short we fall of our goals, our young will carry on and will reach those goals and establish new goals, even further and higher. I become determined, as I am determined, that this coming generation shall inherit the best world and the best Philippines that it is within our power to endow them. I take new resolution to do what I can, and to encourage others to do what they can to insure peace, security and well-being for our people.

This war has left in its wake some very bitter tragedies. Mothers and fathers have been taken away. Brothers have been sacrificed. Our very children, theoretically inviolable in war, have suffered major casualties. For this I can never forgive our enemies. For this I cannot cease to hate with all my being the thought of war. These young men here and those other thousands and millions scattered throughout the Philippines must not be offered up as a sacrifice to greed, lust for power, or national ambitions. These young of ours must have their opportunity to live in peace and security for the greater glory of mankind. In the name of all of them, I pledge my efforts toward this end. I appeal to all of you who will one day take over the reins of leadership, never to lose hope, never to give up, never to abate your energies in the drive to reach the goal that the world is seeking today. Be a good Scout always; be an eagle Scout all your lives!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). Speech delivered by President Roxas on the 10th anniversary of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines in a ceremony in Malacañan on October 31, 1946. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42(10) , 2561-2565 .