MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 420

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM NOVEMBER 15 TO DECEMBER 16, 1953, AS PHILIPPINE TOURIST MONTH.

WHEREAS, tourist travel to and within the country would contribute to our national progress and prosperity;

WHEREAS, to promote tourist travel, it is necessary to inform the public of the benefits derived therefrom and to disseminate here and abroad information regarding places of interests, scenic spots and distinctive Philippine attractions as well as accommodations and facilities for tourists; and

WHEREAS, it is essential that the program of tourist development entrusted under Republic Act No. 710 to the Philippine Tourist and Travel Association, Inc. be assured of the widest possible public support:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period from November 15 to December 16, 1953, as Philippine Tourist Promotion Month. I call upon all government offices and instrumentalities throughout the country as well as all private entities and individuals to participate in the proper observance of said period, to give fullest publicity to the tourist promotion activities organized in connection therewith, and otherwise to generously support the Philippine Tourist and Travel Association, Inc. in its task of carrying out the government’s program of developing Philippine tourism and travel. I especially call on the schools, civic organizations and service clubs to devote one day of said period to a program of education for the promotion of knowledge and love of country as a sound basic for the encouragement of greater travel and intercourse among our people and those of other countries so as to increase tourism within our territory. I also call on the public to assist in the development of tourist attractions and facilities, especially enjoining everyone to keep our tourist spots not only bountiful but also clean and healthful for the common enjoyment of all.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President: MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library