MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 320

CALLING THE CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES TO A SPECIAL SESSION

Whereas, the public interest requires that the Congress special session in order to consider urgent legislative measures;

Now, therefore, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby call the Congress of the Philippines to a special session for a period of six days commencing at ten o’clock in the morning of the twenty-third day of June, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, to continue the consideration of the following measures:

1. H, B. No. 2903. —An Act appropriating funds for operation of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines during the period from July first, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and for other purposes.

2. H. B. No. 8124. —An Act appropriating additional sum of Thirty-three million seven hundred fifty thousand seven hundred fifty pesos for “Counterpart Fund” to carry out the purposes of Republic Act Numbered Six hundred and four.

3. H. B. No. 3125.— An Act appropriating funds for Public Works.

4. Senate Resolution concurring in the Japanese Peace Treaty

5. H. B. No. 2591. —An Act to amend section five of Republic Act Numbered Six hundred thirteen, otherwise known as the Export Control Act (Re extension of its effectivity up to December 31, 1954.)

6. H. B. No. 3116. —An Act to amend sections one and four of Republic Act Numbered Six hundred one, entitled “An Act to impose a special excise tax on foreign exchange sold by the Central Bank of the Philippines and its agents.”

7. H. B. No. 3128. —An Act to amend section three of Republic Act Numbered Six hundred, entitled “An Act to prescribe a graduated scale for the income tax on corporations by an amending sections twenty-four and fifty-four of Commonwealth Act Numbered Four hundred and sixty-six, otherwise known as the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and for other purposes.”

8. A bill extending the law increasing the rates of individual income tax (R. A. No. 590).

9. H. B. No. 3159. — An Act creating a Tariff Commission, defining its powers and for other purposes.

10. H. B. No. 2918. —An Act to amend the title and sections one, two, three and four of Republic Act Numbered Three hundred and fifty-seven, entitled “An Act to authorize the National Power Corporation to contract loans from time to time from the International Bank for reconstruction and development, authorizing the President of the Philippines to negotiate and contract the same for and on behalf of the National Power Corporation and to guarantee the same for and on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines, and for other purposes.” (Authorizing the National Power Corporation to contract loans not only from the International Bank for reconstruction and development but also from the Export-Import Bank of Washington and other international lending institutions.”

11. H. B. Nos. 2473 and 2515.—An Act providing for the exercise of emergency powers by the President of the Philippines under certain conditions.

12. H. B. 2713.—An Act creating the National Civil Defense and Economic Mobilization Board, Defining its powers and duties, providing funds therefore, and for other purposes.

All persons entitled to sit as members of the Congress of the Philippines are requested to take notice of this proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library