MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINESE

PROCLAMATION NO. 333

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST TO 13 TO SEPTEMBER 12, 1952 AS PHILIPPINE TOURIST MONTH.

WHEREAS, in the interest of a more progressive and prosperous Philippines, it is desirable to encourage and promote tourist travel to and within the country;

WHEREAS, to attain this objective, it is necessary to fully inform the public of the benefits to be derived from a program of tourist promotion and development and to disseminate here and abroad information regarding places of interest, scenic spots and distinctive Philippine attractions as well as accommodations and facilities to tourists and travelers; and

WHEREAS, it is essential that this program of tourist development entrusted under Republic Act No. 710 to the Philippine Tourist and Travel Association, Inc. be assured of the widest possible public support;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, ELPIDIO QUIRINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby declare the period from August 13 to September 12, 1952, as Philippine Tourist Promotion Month. I call upon all government offices and instrumentalities throughout the country as well as private entities and individuals to participate in the proper observance of said period, to give fullest publicity to the tourist promotion activities organized in connection therewith, and otherwise to generously support the Philippine Tourist and Travel Association, Inc. in its task of carrying out the government’s program of developing Philippine tourism and travel. I especially call on the schools, civic organizations and service clubs to devote one day of said period to a program of education for the promotion knowledge and love of country as a sound basis for the encouragement of greater travel and intercourse among our people and those of other countries so as to increase tourism within our territory. I also call on the public to assist in the development of tourist attractions and facilities, especially enjoining everyone to keep our tourist spots not only beautiful but also clean and healthful for the common enjoyment of all.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(SGD.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: House of Representatives, Legislative Library