Secretary Yasmin Busran-Lao of the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos; Atty Guiling Mamondiong, he will be the Secretary of TESDA. It is a Cabinet position. Councilor Halila Sudagar of the Davao City Council; Deputy Mayor Ismael Mike Nakan Al-Hadj; and other deputy mayors; Ali Muhammad Yusop Pasigan, the Regional Mufti of Davao Region; Director Aleem Jamal Munib of the Madrasah Schools; Laxaman Bancola, Bangon Mindanao founder; Shiekh Abdul Razzaq, Kapayapaan Peace Center founding chairman; my Muslim brothers and sisters; fellow workers in government; my beloved countrymen.

You might be surprised that there are only about three, four, or five Muslims who would be occupying a Cabinet position. Alam mo kasi, ganito ‘yan: We are trying to do a framework and if I succeed in convincing everybody in Mindanao, if I could convince my MILF brothers and Nur Misuari of the MN, there will be a reconfiguration of the territory and most of them will occupy the regional or state positions.

It's becoming difficult to start because I foresee that towards the end of the year, we’d be able to come up with the framework, on how to do federalism. But, if the Filipino nation and a plebiscite would not want it, then I am ready to concede whatever is there in the BBL Law.

We will see to it that it will pass. And also, in fairness to Nur, we might also configure his territory of the Tausug nation. Then, we will have a new boundaries and these boundaries does (sic) not really intend to separate our brother Moro from the Christian. Rather, it is intended only to delineate territories. But, that should not keep us apart from being Mindanaoans. For you know, you must realize that most of the Christians here in Mindanao, your brother Christians, are supporting the federalism and the BBL.

So, tatanggapin natin sa isa’t isa. Let us build a nation that will be founded on peace and understanding. Ang tingin ko, with the grace of Allah, I might be able to do this within six years. It will not come overnight. Certainly, it will not come next year. Probably, it will be something about two to three years from now. But I assure you that something will change before I end my term.

So, my MI brothers, a promise is a promise. My word of honor is something which I value very much. That's why when I give my word, that's it and I don't change it.

So these are the things that we have to work on for our aspirations. I do not think that there will be another chance for the Mindanaoans to expect change if… if I am gone. It might be for a long time again. Perhaps they will have to wait until my son Omar becomes President again. And that is, he is a devoted, devout Moro, Muslim. He goes to the… mosques to pray and I like it. I like religious people, especially my grand children.

Now, having said that, I’d like to, you know, talk about our problems that bedevils our country. You know, people have really lost their faith in the government. I’m not saying that it’s happening with me. It remains to be seen how we can find a solution to the problem.

May I ask everybody? I have the list, it includes police generals. There are also municipal and city mayors there. There are also some here in Mindanao. There are Maranao people on the list. There are many Bisaya people. There’s still Kuratong Baleleng until now. What surprises me is that there’s Kuratong Baleleng in Ozamiz. You are a pain in the ass, in Filipino. The foolishness of retired soldiers, entering into all sorts of things in the government – kidnapping, drugs, everything – has not stopped.

You know, times are not always like this. There is God who will maybe punish you one of these days. But in my time, I am not God, I’m just an ordinary mortal. I’m just a follower of Allah. But, I take (inaudible) — you know I started in Catholic school but it does not — I’m not a Christian actually. I believe in God. Only Allah. Nobody else. Only one God. You all know that. If I’m just going along with it, it’s because I’m a politician. You know — wherever you are, whichever church you happen to be at during a program, that’s where you go. But, everyone knows that (inaudible) I was also really disappointed with some of the other sects. That’s why I criticized them. I am the only person who has insulted the bishops too. They are scoundrels. (inaudible) So I am the… everything. Even the media. They said boycott, boycott, so I boycotted them, and that was it. But you…

Even now, these military generals. I am not condemning them. They deserve an investigation. But I cannot wait. My oath of office, when I say “so help me God, the Allah,” I have the sworn duty to let you know what is happening in our country.

So these are the things that I have to do because I’m the President. In like manner, when I was mayor I said there are things which I have to do because nobody would do it for us, except me — if you don’t want to, I will take the initiative. So look at Davao. I didn’t spare anyone here, Waray people, Maranao people, Ilonggo people, here everyone is equal and everybody is answerable to the law.

That is the order of Allah. Do not do wrong to your fellowmen and you treat everybody equal. In the eyes of Allah, we are all equal. So that's what happened and I still have—my real centerpiece, I’m working overtime with Jun Evasco and the rest for… to constitute, we are ready with our group in the government to talk to the MI, MN.

I might travel to Jolo. I hope I won't be kidnapped by Abu Sayyaf. I don't have any money to give them. Just a direct cut off—I have to go to Jolo to talk to Nur. And maybe I’ll order the military to just let him… just for a while for him to move around Mindanao to get a consensus amongst the followers of MN and we would be ready, our discussion with the MI will be simultaneous.

But I said, I assure that if there is no federalism, if the rest of the country really doesn't want it, well then I said what you give to the MI, must be given to MN because it's the same thing. I hope that we can have peace in the land. Others, I have many plans for our country but I have to clean up. (inaudible) and the others are there. Even before the campaign, I was always stressing corruption must stop. Corruption must stop. And everything that the government gave to the people, must reach the people.

Now, I would like you to know that Cotabato’s ARMM region, has the highest incidence of hunger. So that’s where I will pour everything, help, food, and even nutrition for the children. I feel sorry for the children. Because that is what the men on the ground, those who are surveying, say is the highest incidence is in Mindanao. And the hunger is more profound here in our area, including Davao. So my first priority is a national feeding program. It’s good that these Leftists are here.

Because my government has everyone. There are Leftists, communists, there are Rightists, all mixed together. For just one discussion.

And this is as good as any other time, if I may just suggest to the Communist Party of the Philippines, and the media to refrain from, you know, ambushes and killings. Anyway, we are talking. We were already given a very good example by Bro. Murad that in spite of the non-passage of the BBL, no one moved. And Nur is also just having a stand down somewhere in Jolo.

So that we can, let's stop these kidnappings of soldiers. It's useless. So that we can talk properly without the resentment. Because it's not possible that the military will just keep silent and all of their men are being kidnapped and killed and while we’re in the process of perfecting a—the wherewithals of how to proceed with the peace talks.

You know, we are a nation, we are all brothers and sisters by blood. About the only time this country of ours became chaotic, was when (Ferdinand) Magellan came here in 1521, bringing with him Christianity. I have nothing against religion but that foolish… religion should have been left in Spain. Why bring it here?

Like Mindanao, it was ahead by almost 100 years because – Lapu-Lapu was already Muslim. And you know, by force of arms because there was gunpowder. We don't have – we are the Malay race. We didn't have any gunpowder, cannons and the cannons of the day. We were ignorant about that so we are just— now over decades by force, your Malay brothers, ours in the Visayas, became Christians.

So those are the religion that was from down their thrones. And how — you know how the Spaniards are very cruel at that time. So let us take that as a footnote of a history to understand each other.

It would have been good if (inaudible) in the Visayas, if there were Russians there, or we here Malaysians, there would really be killings. That’s why that’s possible. To the fact that before the coming of religion, we were all natives of the sultanates, somehow, chiefs. Then because of colonialism, and that is what is happening in the Middle East.

They just didn’t want to (inaudible) Britain and America, they forced their way to Iraq and killed Saddam. Look at Iraq now. Look what happened to Libya. Look what happened to Syria. People are disappearing there, even children are being bombed with gasoline, because of – they were pushed to the wall for the failed promises.

Kaya sabi ko I am not including Abu Sayaff dito sa criminality, you’ve never heard me say “mga kriminal.” It is – it is a different set up there because these are the guys who were driven to desperation.

Wala na nga from Nur. Alam ko ‘yan, from Nur to the ARMM. There was no sufficient semblance of governance. And that is why they are pushed to the wall, then they became capitalized. That’s what happened in Middle East. It is not that the Middle East is exporting terrorism sa America imported terrorism, sila ‘yung —

They destroyed the Middle East. Who was Saddam anyway? (inaudible) but he was in firm control of the country. And now it turns out that after the investigation, he must have a (inaudible). After a thorough, almost 10 years investigation, it turned out there was no legal basis to declare war against Iraq. See that, that’s why it’s easy (inaudible).

As a nation, we must seek a venue. Why should we kill each other? Let's all just do business. The Maranao have already arrived in Abra. (inaudible) Anywhere, in the Philippines, as long as they hear “DVD, DVD” it’s over. Maranao – the Maranao are here, they are here.

And they were very enthusiastic, I am thankful for that. I love you, shukran – just let yourself be run over by our vehicle just to (inaudible) and the love that you have shown, the filial, brotherhood instinct – And I love you all, and may Allah give him the abundance of life there. They are just there, really what they are, almost just to earn a living.

And it is all right for them to be anywhere or everywhere because they are Filipinos and they own this country. We are all here, this is our country.

So although, religion is a very sensitive issue, let us not really do something that will inflame or agitate trouble about religion. We all believe at the same God. I said Allah has blessed us with so many things. There is a temporary lull in violence in Mindanao.

Give me a chance to perfect an arrangement and I will be happy. The end of Ramadan and you’d felt great after so many nights of praying, daytime fasting, just to make us realize how important the existence of man in this —

So let us respect each other, let us talk before doing anything that would spark violence, that is not good. After all, I am here. You know who I am. Although my grandmother came from humble beginnings – so with that small of (inaudible) it’s a bit small, a thin connection to you.

Let me use it as a bridge, not only between Christians and — let me use it a bridge for all to be happy in this world and to do the things that Allah wanted us to do: To do good and to believe in him and to live according to the rules of the greater man.

Thank you very much.