PRESIDENT RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE’S SPEECH DURING A WAKE VISIT TO KILLED-IN-ACTION SOLDIERS Naval Forces Eastern Mindanao, Panacan, Davao City 07 August 2016 (NOTE: EDITED VERSION)

I would like to address myself to the Communist Party of the Philippines.

I would like to talk to you about the rules of war. Because if it is to your advantage, and I’ve been around in government for the last 40 years, you are the very first to cry foul when something goes wrong even in the handling of prisoners. Many of your soldiers have been sued by you under the Geneva Convention in the handling of prisoners. But one of the important, and may be a very humane provision, is the prohibition of landmines. I cannot understand for the life of me that if it is to your advantage, you invoke the Geneva Convention provisions. And yet, time and again, I’ve been the mayor of the city, I said to you, didn't I think we follow the Geneva Convention? Or would you like that I would also order the Armed Forces to use landmines when you are in a position and ambushed – which is which.

It cannot be a different rule for you and a different rule for the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the police. Or would you rather that we are equal, that I tell them to start using landmines for offensive or defensive purposes.

We’re having talks, you better decide now – tonight – I am here in Davao. You may hear it maybe or if it is there – decide now. Will we use landmines? Because if we use them, I will order the Armed Forces to prepare the explosives also, the ordinance, to be equal. Why should only the government soldiers suffer from this? All of us. I can understand. Your principle – your principle – fine.

We’ve been at war for almost 45 years. That’s why I’m pleading to everybody including the Communist Party of the Philippines to continue with the peace talks. I have kept my silence despite the ranting of Sison. I’m no longer… because if I were just a mayor, it would be possible – really possible – but then I carry the burden of a nation and so I just have to control my mouth. But this cannot go on. This crazy thing about just the landmine, it destroyed your face, it’s gone. And this has been going on for 45 years.

What have you actually given to the Philippines? You cannot even hold a barangay. Influence? Yes. Why? Because of killings. You are the only ones ahead there – because you hold the gun. Take away all our guns, let’s see, just karate. I am exasperated by… you must decide now. Because if I hear another explosion that would kill the civilians and the soldiers – sometimes they ride in a truck, son of a… that’s a family. When you blow up an army truck, you know those civilians, they are not civilians – those are families going home to the camp. Because they’re human beings and the practice really is to bring the family within the camp vicinity or parameters.

I also feel pain for you. You communists here in Davao, if you die, who goes to the funeral? Me. I allowed your big-time leaders to be buried here. These guys were sad but I told them that, you know, we are in government. We can’t do anything. We cannot exhibit the same behavior because we carry the government. We can’t do anything. Then in pursuing a quest for peace I have to do it I told them. Do not be angry at me because, you know, it would just really worsen.

Now if it’s like this, if the talks failed, we have an agreement – I would insist you include the landmine issues or else no talks at all. Then we fight for another 45 years. No problem. I will recruit one million Filipinos – fight.

In the 45 years, what have you seen in your family? Have you seen your child grow up? Have you elected a single leader here in Davao. Just win because of a ticket. And yet I carry that, because we have the same feelings.

The problem is armed struggle. I can be a communist party member but I will never go to war. That armed struggle is the problem. No, I’m not trying to understand myself. I’m saying now. Stop the landmines or you tell the leaders of this government – get out from the talks. Do you know why? I am now invoking the Geneva Conventions. It is part of the international law not only of the Philippines but around the world. Either you stop it or we stop talking. Let’s just fight – another 45 years.

Why would you go down if your fathers, mothers die? Do you go down on your children’s birthdays to… Is that the life that you really need? Your leaders aren’t winning. So what do you want? Either you stop it now or I’m ordering the government panel to come home. Actually, I will just give their expenses to the soldiers. Go ahead and buy a ship full of explosives, let’s blow up this…

I’m not pleading this time. That’s an ultimatum.

I hear another explosion killing people, not only soldiers, killing people – no talks. Sorry. Madam, that’s really life. If you can’t understand each other, then good. The government doesn’t run out of money, you really can’t topple it – tomorrow.

The Defense Department is asking for 20 more thousand troops. I looked at the budget, I have no money. But that’s what you want, I will give the Defense Department the additional 20,000. No more food, no more medicine – forget about that. Focus on the soldiers first because we are at war, for peace. Cancel that. We sacrifice the hungry and the poor so we have something to fight with. Killing. That’s what you want, fine. I’m not hard to talk to. If that’s what you want, God.

Now, I’m reading now the personalities in the Philippines. It might be true. It might not be true. But then the due process you are talking about is one thing. Perhaps these people can be sued – administratively or criminally – then they should have due process – presumption of innocence. I will give all of that in the Constitution but my mouth is – there is no due process here. Due process has nothing to do with my mouth. There are no proceedings here, no lawyers.

I am speaking to the people and you should know the truth about our lives here in the Philippines. I am the only President doing this. Do you know why? The people need to know what is happening in the country.

It’s very important for the people to know the state of things or conditions in this country. That is my sworn duty.

You can’t stop me. And I am not afraid of… say you imprison me when – fine. I have no drama there. And let me tell you the truth – I can… I can leave this Presidency. I don’t care about the adoration of the people, I don’t say I’m foolish. I don’t want to show up in Manila because I could cause traffic. I’m finished, I’m done. I have no honor to chase in my life. I am already President. I will not compete with those politicians. My job is to take care of the Filipino. Period.

Now there are things that are really reaching crisis and it’s not even epidemic – kayo, Carol – it’s pandemic.

You know, two years ago the PDEA said three million addicts. That was then – two, three years ago – I remember. They said 92% of the barangays in Metro Manila are contaminated with drug use. When I was mayor, I was the one being hit with human rights issues. I didn’t listen to you, because I had a job. And I really knew it was… it was really spreading like wildfire. And I was scared for my country because I am Filipino. Now that I am President, I have to worry about all your children. Why? Because if there were three million – two or three years ago – incrementally, that means it really grew – many were contaminated because those affected would look for victims to support him. And the other – and it’s a vicious cycle – it is almost an internecine affair amongst our Filipinos.

So this is it, drugs. I said sorry. Someone here called me. But you know if there is a rule, a law, either you enforce it or none at all. But my friends, if I don’t read this because I know you, the best thing I can do for the country is to resign. But if I am that bound, I would be ashamed of my compadre, he helped with my presidency – well and good – and I can repay you in whatever way I can live. If you say someone is making a commotion there, call me, let’s face each other. But not this one because this is not personal to me. I am not your enemy. I have no ill feelings towards you. But I am angry now. You are included. Someday we will meet.

I’ll start with judges. Judge Mopas of Dasmarinas, Cavite. Judge Reyes, only known, Baguio City. Judge Savillo-RTC Branch 13, Iloilo City. Judge Casiple – Kalibo, Aklan. Judge Rene Gonzales – MTC – blanko dito. Judge Navidad-RTC Calbayog City. Judge Exequiel Dagala – MTC. Judge Dapa, Siargao.

Mayor: Reynaldo Flores – Naguilian, La Union. Dante Garcia – Tubao, La Union. Martin de Guzman – Bauang, La Union. Marjorie Apel Salazar – Lasam, Cagayan. Goto Violago – San Rafael, Bulacan. Marino Morales – Mabalacat, Pampanga. Felix Castillo – Langiden, Abra. Ex-Mayor Eufronio Eriguel – Agoo, La Union. Jesus Celeste “Boying alias” – Bolinao, Pangasinan. Jose “Pepe” Miranda – Santiago City, Isabela. Vicente Amante – San Pablo City, Laguna. Ryan Dolor – Bauan, Batangas. Vice Mayor Edgardo Trinidad – El Nido, Palawan.

In the Visayas: Alex Centena – Calinog, Iloilo. Julius Ronald Pacificador – Hamtic, Antique. Jed Mabilog, I think he’s the Mayor, Iloilo City. Sigfredo Salangutin Betita – Carles, Iloilo. Marciano Malones – Maasin, Iloilo.

I said before, during the campaign actually, all the people there, all the people: Mayor, if possible, help us. I have no feelings towards you. I have no debt, even if you didn’t ask me. This, in Iloilo many times, almost desperate, mayor, the drugs. So we just pray, just pray that I will win and maybe in the fullness of God’s time I will take care of this problem. This, I’m sorry, we are friends but…

Marciano Malones, Maasin, Iloilo. Michael Rama – the former Mayor of Cebu City. Hector Ong – Laoang, Northern Samar. Rolando Espinosa – you know I’ve been looking for you until now. You were ahead of Bato. All of you local officials, at this point let me just…

Beda Canamaque –Basay, Negros Oriental. Ex-Mayor Madeline Ong – Laoang, Northern Samar. Dito muna ako.

All policemen, PNP personnel assigned as security guards, security personnel of the mayor I mentioned, you are hereby relieved of your duty and immediately report to your mother unit. There is no more… I will remove your operational authority over them – 24 hours. All – military, police attached to these people, I give you 24 hours to report to your mother unit or I will whack you. I’ll dismiss you from the service.

Vice Mayor Francis Ansing Amboy – Maasin, Iloilo. Fralz Sabalones – San Fernando, Cebu – who ran for mayor but actually maybe they lost. Attorney Antonio Pesina of Iloilo City. Erwin “Tongtong” Plagata – Iloilo City.

The most shabulized – is that the word – shabulized, is there such a word shabulized? I will say that I have nothing personal against them – Iloilo.

Ex-Congressman JC Rahman Nava – Guimaras. Congressman Partylist Jeffrey Celis, Panay chapter. Is he still a leader, that devil? There. Panay chapter – pest. Isn’t there any other work there? Maybe there are vacancies for you?

Mindanao: Abubakar Abdulkarim Afdal – Labangan, Zamboanga del Sur. Gamar Ahay Janihim – Sirawai, Zamboanga del Norte. David Navarro – Pagadian City, Zamboanga del Sur. Bobby Alingan – Kolambugan, Davao del Norte. Yusofa Monder Bugong Ramin – Iligan City, Lanao del Norte. Jessie Aguilera – Alegria, Surigao del Norte. Fahad Salic – Marawi City. Mohammad Ali Abenal, iyong nag-surrender, sino kaya ang kasama ng yawa na yun? Dalawa sila. Jamal Dadayan – Buadiposo-Buntong, Lanao del Sur. Sabdullah Macabago – Saguiran, Lanao del Sur. Muslim Aline Macadatu – Lumbatan, Lanao del Sur. Rasul Sangki – Datu Saudi Ampatuan, Maguindanao. Montaser Sabal – Talitay, Maguindanao. Vicman Montawal – Datu Montawal, Maguindanao. Pati iyong sarili niyang bayan. Samsudin Dimaukom – Datu Saudi Ampatuan, Maguindanao. Norodin Salasal – Datu Salibo, Maguindanao.

Ex-Mayor: Benahar Tulawie – Talipao, Sulu. Reynaldo Parojinog alias Andong, the Mayor of Ozamiz City. Nova Princess Parojinog Echavez, used to be the wife of, I think, Colangco. Iyong poster boy doon sa… pa-blondie-blondie pa ang buhok hindi naman tisoy.

You know, wherever you go I will chase after you. Even if I am no longer president, as long as I have a gun. You want to wake me up for… he said, no… maybe I believe you. He’s a personal friend. We were with him in the cause, but I’m sorry because your name appears here.

Omar Solitario Ali – Marawi City. He used to be the… I said you know we are friends, Rama, Solitario – either I read all or I read none, I cannot play. In this job, I cannot play. I need to read all of this, it’s all here. From the military and the police – everything is here, or I won’t read it.

Abdul Wahab Sabal – Vice Mayor ito, Talitay, Maguindanao. Otto Montawal, Datu Montawal, Maguindanao. Nida Dimagkon – Datu Saudi Ampatuan, Maguindanao. Arafat Salic – Marawi City. Rasmiyah Macabago – Saguiaran, Lanao del Sur. Congressman Guillermo Romarate Jr. – 2nd District, Surigao del Norte. Former 2nd District Board Member Ricardo Parojinog Ardot, so iba itong si ano, kapatid siguro ito.

I would like to just give you the advice. Once you hear your name mentioned here, if you are somewhere, you are now relieved of your present assignment. Report to the PNP within 24 hours or I will order the entire Armed Forces and the police to hunt for you. Nasa sa inyo iyan.

Police Inspector Rolando Batulayan (Retired). Police Superintendent Maristelo Manalo – PNP-CIDG. PCI Roberto Palisoc – Station 7 MPD. Superintendent Ciceron Ada (Retired). PCI Eric Buenaventura – Navotas. Non-commissioned officers.

So that's why we're here, you know why? You are the enforcer and you allowed yourself to be used. You are working for the government, the one that sustained you when you were young, before, the Filipino. When you arrived, where were you? You are here now. You destroyed the country. Say whatever you want. Let's all just use shabu, even the soldiers. You want a country now? Let's all just do it together. You have infected today those who surrendered, right? Those who didn't surrender are either afraid or brave and ready, that's not counted yet.

There are now 600,000 Filipinos addicted – pushers and users. Don't tell me you're just a user – you don't have any money, you're not the son of… I'm not insulting you. I am also the son of a poor man but I'm not like you. The IQ of you people – fourteen. Why did you pass…? That’s treason. It's like in old times treason now is a state of war and you’ll become a spy and there is a war going on. But actually in the olden times it’s treason. That’s a crime against the country of the Republic of the Philippines. Didn't you feel any remorse about that?

There are still police here, I hear, saying, why would I do that? But after six years, what then? Say goodbye to your promotion. Wait six years. Say goodbye. You won't be promoted anymore. Either you’re a cynic, you're careful or you are a coward. Now if you're afraid, I've already told you I'll take responsibility for you personally and officially – if that's still not enough for you, leave your post. This is it, no more honor. We will file… not just criminal, beyond reasonable doubt, you're a policeman so you know. Administratively, you’re finished. You separate yourself from the PNP. Do not destroy the young men and women who are true to their country there. Don't destroy the PNP; don't destroy the Armed Forces, something which is a consolation to you guys, here, nothing.

Police non-commissioned officer: PO2 Geraldine Bautista Manuel – PNP PRO2 Health Service. This is a woman. SPO3 Ronald Calap – Isabela PPO. POC Rodel Samoledo – Lalio Police Station, I don't know where that is. PO3 Cecilio Domingo – probably Nueva Ecija, CIDT. PO2 Romando Mendoza, this is I think, excuse me, Ryan Mendoza – Tarlac Police Station. Jeffrey Serafica – Butuan PPO. PO1 Norman Adarlo – Puerto Galera NPS. Mark Canete – RSRPSB, what is this devil, MIMAROPA, I just heard of it now, is that an office? Ah, that's right, Region 4.

PO1 Mark Christian Catalina – PNP Camarines Norte. PO2 Alan Carpio – PCP 8 Pasay City. PO3 Eric Lazo – QCPD Station 6. PO3 Alexander Macabeo – PCP 3 Paranaque City. PO3 Johnny Mahilum – QCPD Station 6 Batasan. Doon siguro pinapasa iyong congressman na iyon. PO2 Celito Melendrez – Binangonan Police Station.

Actually, this is just now, as corrected, I have retrieved validation upon arrival – mine was just raw. Remove the protector-protector, because we're not sure about that, or take what. He might say it's his son, so don't touch that, Duterte's son is his security, something like that. So I had it revalidated. And again when I saw the mayors I know, I had it revalidated. This was just passed to me now.

PNP officers: General, this is finished, Vicente Loot (Retired). General Valerio – Santa Barbara, Iloilo (Retired). General Bernardo Diaz – Region 6. General Idio – RTC of Calbayog City. Police Superintendent Floro (Retired) – Antique PNP and City Director. Police Superintendent Kashmir Disomangcop – COP of Iloilo Base Commander. Police Superintendent Delia Paz – Chief RDIDM. Police Superintendent Genepa – RIU Region 6 Intelligence. Police Superintendent Ipil Duenas, I don't have an address. Superintendent Condag. Police Superintendent Eugenio Malic – PNP Maritime Group. PNP Lamsis, former P/Supt of Chief Antique, anti-drug. Police Superintendent Gomboc. Police Superintendent Lebin. PCI Rio Maymay. PSI Kenneth Militar – one of those in Iloilo – Militar – Iloilo. PSI Donasco, no address. Inspector De Jose – SOG PNP Region 6. Police Inspector Duarte, thankfully not Duterte the devil, (laughter) former PCOP of Arevalo, Iloilo. Iloilo is really terrible. This one, say it's politics. PIC Vicente Vicente – Chief of Police Banate. Superintendent Romeo Santander – former chief Intel Cebu.

So we reached 600,000 all over, what is 'tibuok'? All over the Philippines because someone played a role. How easy was it? Why are there so many? How is it that it is in this magnitude? It is because government personnel were into it. That's the explanation. Just whatever shabu-shabu there is. So two, three, four. I am the human rights violator, I really held Davao because I knew it was dangerous, I really cornered them here. Extra judicial killing, maybe. But if you say I killed people who were tied up, you must be crazy. Extra judicial killing.

And you know, truthfully, I’ll share with you a secret that you do not want to believe. Those pushers are high. And the first thing you know if you have… don't they say someone is hunting me, someone is following me. Because the first thing that will destroy the mind or the mindset is paranoia – paranoid – so they carry a gun.

Now these NGOs, these newspapers, are saying why are they all dead? Why are there guns? Planted? Maybe one or two. When the police operate, they don't go alone or in pairs. They have backup – three, four of them carrying armalites. So when these pushers know they're going to be arrested, they're high, their minds are messed up, they really…

So look at what happened to the Chief of Police of Magsaysay, Davao del Sur, or he's dead, ah, he's alive. Now, I hope and I pray that he would make it. Shot in the chest, shattered. Another police officer… I forgot, I apologize for the lapse of memory, the one who died he was serving a warrant, drugs, dead. Now these NGOs, these newspapers, we respect your views but kindly explain to me. If they are being salvaged, why would this police officer die? Now he’s hanging between life and death. Kindly tell me. Why? If it’s salvage, just shoot him with an armalite from a distance. Don't even get close, wait for him to leave the house, then target him. Or why are these police officers… it’s not just this one, there have been many in the past.

So I told my police here when I was mayor, I don't want to see you dying there, I'll kick you. Why would you let them go first? Shoot them. Those who pull out guns are hostile. Don't wait for them to draw their guns. Just like that. Now if you scratch yourself, well, that's your problem. (laughter) You shouldn't wait, what, to scratch or to pull out a gun? So I told these police officers, I don't want to catch you hesitating, I'll kick you. Why would you let them go first? That's my order to the police. In Davao. Now that I'm President, it's the same. Why wait for him to pull it out and say, sir, it's just an apple, I'm hungry. That isn’t the way. Illegal? No, of course not. Human rights violation.

Now, these NGOs, you’ve been repeating this kind of sloganeering that, you know, drug addiction is a disease, is an ailment. It’s an illness, we shouldn’t kill them. They should be treated. Okay. Where is your office? I'll give you these 600,000 tomorrow. I’ll tell them to deliver it. Who are these NGOs? Go ahead, get them treated. You said it’s an illness. Go ahead, give it to them. You take care of it.

Human rights? United Nations? Come here. You lecture here. Instead, you NGOs go around lecturing about shabu, let alone the salvaging, telling your children not to get involved. You just wait, when someone falls, ah, human rights violation. I guarantee it, they will not go to prison. Period. In the performance of duty, none of them will go to prison as long as I’m President, that’s it. I will not allow a police officer or a soldier or an officer of the Armed Forces, in the performance of their duties, to be prosecuted by you. I would like to say now – they will never go to prison – not under my watch.

Now these police officers who are kidnappers, those who get drunk and spray the armalite and kill civilians, well, I’m sorry, they are included in – you are trash to me, I think. Do not pray for any deliverance from me.

PO2 Michael Cortez – Barile Police Station. SPO1 Jen dela Victoria – PS5 Cebu CPO. SPO1 Onel Nabua – Barile Police Station. PO2 Jomar Ibanez – Lapu-Lapu Police Station. PO3 Ryan Martus Kiamco – Cebu Provincial Office.

PNP Officers Mindanao: PCI Ibrahim Jabiran – Zamboanga CPO. PCI Perfecto Abrasaldo Awi Jr. – Misamis Oriental. Police Inspector Roy Sinojales Montes – Iligan PRO. Police Superintendent Ricardo Gando Pulot alias Daganis – Chief of Police, Quezon Bukidnon. Police Inspector Martin Plaza – former Panabo chief intel.

So this is 600,000 for them.

Police non-commissioned officer: PO1 Pierre Dizo, my aide Dilo, they might replace him, maybe Dilo will be arrested, that’s a pity. Another aide of mine, his counterpart in Manila.

PO3 Omar, this is Zamboanga del Sur, Dizo. PO1 Omar Juani – Zamboanga City Public Safety. Rommel Mansul – PRO9. Why is this report here?

PO3 Daryl Page – Tabasan Municipal Station. SPO1 Totong Joe Valdez – 9th RNG. SPO1 Rodrigo, it’s good it wasn’t Duterte, (laughter) I almost had an accident here. I would have been shot in the back, their guns are capped. He was just looking for an excuse but to die.

SPO4 Rodrigo Ramos – Bukidnon PRO. SPO1 Reynaldo dela Victoria – CDO. SPO3 Emilio Mendoza – Lozario PP5 Iligan City. Marlo Espinosa – Bukidnon. SPO3 Ritchie Mat – CDIG Mati, Davao Oriental. Maybe this is the one from Davao. SPO3 Rosell Iliviera – CIDG Tagum, Davao del Norte. PO3 Jessie Balabag, come on, Region 11. You, why are you laughing there? You, huh?

PO3 Filomeno Toronio – Digos Police Station. PO1 Glenn Alicarte – PRO 12. Walang address. PO1 Philip Pantarolia – Tacurong City Police Office. SPO1 Gerry dela Rosa – SCPPO. It’s not complete. PO3 Bebot Ruiz – GSCPO. PO3 Estelito Solanio – Malongon MPS Sarangani. PO1 Jerebel Ocsio – PRO RMN.

I am sorry for my country. I grieve for the agony and suffering of the Republic of the Philippines.

SPO1 Billones, Ernesto – NCR. JS1 Montemayor, Lito – Roxas District Jail Aparri District. PO1 Vicente Reynaldo Celis – NCR. PG Saet, Drexel – MIMAROPA. SPO1 Tubil, Felix – Region 3. SPO3 Angeles, Nicolas Ponce – Region 3. SPO2 Erseni, Rod – Marinduque BFP. FO1 Reynaldo Valencia – Claveria Police Station. S/Sergeant Vic dela Cruz – MIMAROPA. Brigadier General Leoncio Daniega – NCR. SPO3 Gerry Mendoza – NCR. Reymante Dayto – Region 5. Reymar Dayto – Region 5.

Visayas: Zamora, Renato Gumaro – Region 6. JO1 Alan Coca Manatad – Region 7. SPO3 Christie Cielo Tingad – Region 7.

Mindanao. This is the last. We have a problem here. RSAD Casimiro Castro – CAFGU 38IB 6th Infantry Division ARMM. Pfc. RSAD Philip Miro – 40IB 6th Infantry Division ARMM. Corporal Cusinan Lopez Giamad Loy – 52 Brigade ARMM. Pfc Mamadali Ipad – 64IB 6th Infantry Division ARMM. Yasin Abolgalib – Bobong, Yasin Boboy, nothing. JO1 Ogacho, Alfredo Galis. FO1 Ablaca, Nicolas Ponce – ARMM. FO3 Ibanez, Ricardo Villaris – Region 9. Marine Corporal Alfrenz Gurias Abedin, Western Mindanao. Jimmy Manlangit – Region 12.

This is… others are undergoing revalidation again. Because it’s hard to… I could be wrong. I could be wrong. But if this has undergone a process. So any mistake of the military and the police here, I am the one who is at fault.

I ordered the listing, I ordered the validation. I’m the one reading it and I am the sole person responsible for these all.

Now, I am ordering those mentioned here, I said: report to your chief PNP 24 hours. You are hereby relieved of your, whatever your position there. Umalis kayo diyan, mag-report kayo. I said I’ll be harsh.

All the mayors mentioned here, I’m ordering the PNP chief to remove the police supervision and cancel any and all private arms licensed to them. They’re all cancelled. Go out to the naked. Go out naked to the world and show your foolishness.

All. Military, police, if you are assigned to security, go back to your mother unit immediately. Then the cancellation of the firearms licenses and permits – for all those mentioned – are ordered cancelled as of tonight.

All of you judges or whatever, you report to the Supreme Court. Police, you report to PNP Chief. And to the Army, you report to the Chief-of-Staff – General Visaya – all within 24 hours. You do not do that, I will order the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the entire PNP to hunt for you.

Thank you. (applause)