Kindly sit down. Thank you very much.

May I ask somebody to remove the prompter? No… I don’t… I don’t do that, I don’t speak while reading. I’m not used to it. We don’t have that in the province.

President Ramos; Atty. Avelino Cruz; Justice Acosta; very Rev. Fr. Aloysius Maranan; the citizens of the San Beda Republic; valued guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Well, naka-tsamba tayo. Kung baga sa bisaya, ‘yung naka— sa sabong, naka-(inaudible). Well, actually, I’d like to tell you the odyssey of my presidency.

Alam mo, wala talaga akong balak maging presidente. But early on, President Ramos went to Davao and sought an audience with me, together with Paul Dominguez and Jesus Dureza. And it was there, he said that it is high time that Mindanao would have its president ever. I was giving him excuses. Alam mo naman si Presidente and he would just say: “Shut up. You listen to me.” And another offering of apology: “Sir, hindi mo talaga ako pwede diyan… Small time na mayor lang tayo.” And he would just say: “I came here to Davao to talk to you, not to talk to me. So you listen.”

So well, time passed and there was a lot of movement, just small ones, from Cebu, but mostly Visayan and a little bit of following in Manila, Luzon. You know, I really don’t have a machinery. I would not want to belittle PDP. But it was a moribund party, until I came. There wasn’t… there weren’t many people and we had to revive it. But I said going back earlier— you know, since the time President and I talked, up to the time when they were presenting their platforms of government— the three presidential candidates, never talked or mentioned anything about Mindanao.

Well, I said the biggest problem of the Philippines isn’t even the drugs. If you kill them all 24 hours a day, that’s it. But Mindanao, because it has fierce territory. And you know, the president is the president. He knows, that’s why he went to me. What’s going to happen to Mindanao? There’s a war going on. There might be a lull because we stopped. We’re talking to Murad and President and I are backchanneling with Nur Misuari. We have Nur’s number. We can get to talk to him. But, none… of the three with a platform about Mindanao.

Remember that Murad said: I will go to war if there is no BBL. That will be difficult. And true enough, there really wasn’t a BBL. But, I said early on, this is dangerous… Trying to find out what will happen to the Philippines. But still during the filing of the certificate of candidacy, I did not file anything. It was not until after I was substituted on the deadline, the last day. Because there were really the urgings now of what will happen to the country.

You know, what’s difficult with the Moro, you might want to know— My grandmother is Maranao. But my grandfather, Chinese. Really from Xiamen. This is difficult to make someone feel embarrassed. Perhaps if this one gets embarrassed, he will retaliate. He got embarrassed, so we have to talk to him repeatedly and Jaafar to “hang on, not yet, do not try to incite violence which you might not be able to stop on time.”

I said: If I win the presidency, will we kill each other? It’s either I shoot you or you shoot me or where will I go? One line of my family is all Moro. Because my grandchildren, I have many grandchildren who are all Moro. This too. So if there is anybody as much as interested really in Mindanao, it’s me. That prompted me to reconsider and you know my cards. But I did not have the money. But I’ve always been with PDP, ever since. I never changed parties, ever since. Only PDP. I’m only for local positions because you know, PDP is suffering from a financial hiatus. There are no backers.

So, ‘nong tumakbo ako, I decided to run, I just prayed to God. You know guys, we have to talk. We cannot ignore the BBL and Nur Misuari.

Let me remind you that Magellan landed in the Philippines in 1521 bringing with him Christianity, no offense intended. I am Catholic. When he brought in the religion— Christianity— Islam was ahead by about around 80 years, according to the archives of Malaysia. Just reading.

So they started to conquer the island. Naturally, they met the stiffest resistance in Mindanao because Islam was already established there. The Spaniards wanted to conquer the island and subjugate the people there to Christianity. Some of them succeeded. But most of the Maranao, the early fighters there, really fought. It resulted in so many killings and massacres. That’s what made the difference.

So it is historical that unless we address the historical injustice committed against the Moro people, there will never be peace in Mindanao. The last card there is for them to just agree. If there is nothing else, federalism.

That is why I ran, my centerpiece was really federalism. That’s what Misuari is asking for, like a final agreement. If that doesn’t pass within my six years, believe me, you will have a hard time.

I’m not saying this because I have Maranao blood. I could just do that anytime and I can enter Mindanao. If… through the back door or the front gate. Because I have the goodwill. And the, you know, the filial feelings of the people there. That is – No candidate… That’s why I’m afraid, I said, if this explodes, another round of violence.

The problem, I said to the Moro: Why are you angry at the people of Mindanao, when Manila is the one making the laws, the BBL, and even the laws to enable it to be implemented? Why are you bombing the island itself? If you want, let’s load our weapons, the mortars that haven’t fired from the Army, we’ll just… they’re making them into fuses. “If they build in Manila, let’s blow up Congress and Malacañang.” Why kill your fellow people here? We all want the same thing.

So, doon ang… Then the next was really, the corruption. And ang drugs. My God. ‘tong corruption in my time, during my watch, there will be no corruption, period.

Kaya yesterday, I was reading the Inquirer or isa pa, Daily Bulletin… ‘yung letters to the editor. Meron doon babae that she was given the go around, she had to kept on going back to the —

I told the staff: Find this. Whatever office this is. Tell them I summoned them here. I just said it in my inaugural speech: You are paid to do your work. If the government can’t pay you what you want, look for another job. Go to Ayala or Gokongwei. They’ll give you a better salary. But you know if you enter government service, that’s as far as you’ll go and you must know that. When you, you know, you enter into government service, you must realize that’s as far as you’ll go and that is very important.

Well, corruption. Left and right. Even the bullets… Why is this government oppressing its own people? Answer me that. I said: Why? If there isn’t… I said: So it has to stop. All of it. From the Office of the President down.

I would maybe distribute the circular. I said to the Cabinet… 30 days – whatever department – 30 days, reduce the signing authority. I do not care – whatever you want. Three to five signatures, one month, it will come out. Don’t follow up. That is mandatory and I will really get angry.

Now, if you cannot comply with it, then sorry. We part ways. That’s the only way to do it. Just like in Davao. You asked for a permit…Electrical, engineering or that business, three days. It’s within 72 hours. If you don’t return it… do not release it to the guy. I’ll say: Give it to me after three days, why?... I’ll ask you: Why did this paper take so long—? That’s how you instill discipline.

So if you say you don’t want drugs, leave because I am the mayor. But you’re still there, I already said that. Then I’ll buy from you now. Then I’ll buy again tomorrow. Then I’ll tell the police, buy a third time. After the delivery, kill him.

Look, we cannot build a country by killing our own people. That is admitted. But, you know, when we are infiltrated by different kinds of tribes, and from other sources outside of our country, and you just cook the shabu there on the ships. You’ll throw it away, put a GPS on it. These fools even put GPS on it.

And we are the only country — I think in the world, except South America — where shabu is cooked right inside the national penitentiary. That’s why I had them arrested. I brought this son of a bitch to life. So that that woman there has nothing to say, just keeps talking.

Give him a trial, a fair trial, judicial trial. Or okay. Or what happens after? Because it’s reversed. If you’re from there, you’ll be thrown there; if you’re from here, you’ll be here, in Muntinlupa. Oh, when he gets there, what did he do? He still cooked shabu. Well, it’s better that I just had him killed, it lessens our problems.

That’s why I’m angry, because shabu, constant use of shabu, even for months, would destroy the human brain. It shrinks the (inaudible). Even the brain itself. Actually, that’s what the forensics in Mexico said. Because they are just starting to do meth, because heroin is expensive now, it’s cheap here. It’s better with those from poppies, because marijuana, heroin, and cocaine, they’re grown naturally. There aren’t many chemicals. This shabu, water is used to cook it, water from a car battery. It’s like there’s a starter inside— That’s why people go crazy.

Remember, I am not defending the police. I’m in the middle. I’m just pushing for it because you are putting my country in peril. I just gave a book to — Ioan Grillo. It’s sold online. Buy it. After you buy it, read it and face me. Tell me: Am I wrong or right? Four or seven years, if nobody interdicts, the drug business in the Philippines — we will be a narcopolitic. So it will end, someone will really end it. I have placed the burden upon myself. I will end it even at the cost of my honor, my life, and the presidency.

That’s why I have repeatedly stressed that I will not die if I don’t become president. Anyway, we had a ruckus in the media, boycott me. Look, you, you don’t want to boycott me? If you don’t boycott me, I will boycott you. I have no…

I can let go of this presidency any time. Don’t do that to me. Do not. Because I’m not used to that. Just being treated rudely like that. Imagine being asked publicly: “How is your health?” “I’m fine.” “So, where is your medical report?”

It’s good the media is here, if it weren’t… they would treat you rudely… Or I’ll treat you rudely too. I don’t have… We won’t understand each other here. For the things that I order the police and the military to do, I am the one ultimately, legally responsible for it. Me, not them.

Don’t sue the police. Nothing will happen there. (inaudible) I looked for it in the Constitution, because we’re from San Beda. Of course… How about a raid against us? You saw here, they’re more in love, I don’t have to mention it. Due process, due process. What due process? Due process, you fool. If you’re already in court… not given by the President, due process. I am not a court. Why should I give you due process? I can give you a lawyer. I cannot handle a proceeding or proceedings against you.

I’ll call you to Malacañang. I’ll curse at you there. Then I’ll shoot you. Don’t… Due process. Due process. Ask for that in court. And during the time, when you are in custody, being investigated maybe, but my job is I have this sworn, the sacred duty to tell the Filipino the state of things in this country and simply the truth, period.

That’s why— it was said there: “Rodrigo Duterte, after naming several generals, who’d give them due process?” Did I get it? It was short, you know… I said it before, even before the campaign: You might want to retire early. You guys who know that I know that’s how we are. That’s not for— What due process? All the columnists, all of you know because you’re not from San Beda.

Well, the two events in my life that made me simply proud: One is that I graduated from San Beda College, and the other one was the greatest compliment that I received to make me towards the presidency.

One day, Mendiola was really very dangerous at that time. The militants, the students, and the left, let’s not pretend, they were the ones. Communists. Basically, a clash there.

So we were inside, in the school, the high school students were going home. Then, I said: Maybe we should go home too. Everyone went home. Let’s eat for a while. Because we might get stuck in traffic. If we get stuck in traffic, we’re dead. So we ate at the barbecue place. Then, I do not remember. I think it was [Cablitas?] was one of them. We were going out, so we were in the pedestrian platform, Justice Solidum arrived. When he entered, he was just in the front seat driving, I said to him, his Volkswagen was rattling. He said, he knew us: “Where are you going?”

I said: “Sir, it’s dangerous outside.” He said, “Never mind. You go back.” There weren’t many students left. Maybe those who were chattering reached them who hadn’t gone home yet. So we went there. He asked something. (inaudible) I think I heard something, so I stood up. I said: Sir, I’m— I’m already old. 71 years old. Then he said to me, there were two of us. “Why are you standing?” “I thought, sir, that I heard my name called.” “Ah, because you’re always talking at the back.” (inaudible) When I got there he said: (inaudible) “Sit down. You recite.” I stood up. Then he looked at us. “So what?” “Sir, there is no question yet, sir.”

“Duterte, do not, Duterte, do not scratch your… you’re in the classroom and spread your dandruff. Keep it on your hand. Because it’s the only one you have”.

So you might want to say that, the “dandruff President”. It’s true because I said… I am boastful. (He) got even more angry… So a commotion happened. “Duterte, do not scratch. Do not spread your dandruff in this room. Keep it on your head it’s the only one you’ve got.”

Well, that made me a lawyer. Actually, we in my batch, we didn’t bother others, we were all, just among ourselves.

In (inaudible) succession and remedial law, they were really excellent, they also went through Justice, Secretary Puno and the others, our professors. Rudy, Robles, at that time, sir, he just topped the bar at the time, we were the first ones (to benefit from his expertise).

By the way, I was in Bohol campaigning for the presidency. I passed by Vic’s house. Victor de la Serna. We met there in Bohol sometimes. Boy Brillantes was there. But when I went back, (he was) a bit old… But he said that after the meeting, you should pass by. So I didn’t pass by, so he sent (a message).

“Sir, this is my little help for you. This is really hard earned money.” I hid that, along with the money. I didn’t spend it. I didn’t even know. Until now it’s still in the envelope. I just put a rubber band around it. “Do something good for your country and if you find it hard because there are many who don’t want it, then if it is good, declare Martial Law.” I will show it to you. You guys, if you go to Davao, it’s in my safe. I will really show it to you. Call Vic. “If you find it hard to do it because of… then declare Martial Law.”

Well, I will not do it. Far from it actually. We were there around during those times. My only concern is… let the Filipino taste what is government. So that’s why, the usual is if they go there… My plan is to give them a shopping list. I mean the requirements for that particular whatever then don’t add to it, don’t take from it. If he produces all those documents, he gives it to you, you have to have a journal. Receive the following application for whatever. You sign it. Do not do it in the… because it can be erased… And let him sign also. Give him a stub then go to the computer. The expenses are huge. Then it’s not used. Then look at the workload. Then you say come back on this day, next month on this day at this hour. Give him a stub. When he gives it, it needs to be there already.

I do not want to see the Filipino queuing outside. Ayoko ‘yan. Specially ‘yung mahirap. It might be a pretended sentiment, whatever you call it to do the unbeliever, basta ayaw ko, lalo na ‘yung mga taga-probinsya. Lalo na ‘yung taga-probinsya na magastos pag pupunta rito tapos maubos na ang sweldo kababalik. You know it’s always one trip dito e.

If you go down to NAIA, you ask for a lodging there somewhere, you’ll stay with someone. Then, you go there, just one trip for the distance. Then, you go back and forth for days, that’s nonsense, something has got to be there.

So I said to Bebot Bello: “Find a space there”. Put your office wherever you want, if you want to move to a bigger one, find a space there where you can place the satellites of, in the DFA, then in the National Bureau of Investigation, there, one stop, same building. At least same vicinity. Maybe you can walk one hundred meters. Then that’s it. I don’t want people to go back and forth. I would like to stress it again. I don’t want to make the Filipino suffer, period. I don’t want to.

So that's mandatory, including the Office of the President down to the barangay level. I will bind the local governments to strictly adhere to what the essence of government service is. That's where we are. That's where we are. Just bear with it because, well, it's only six years. But if we have a disagreement here, if you back down… because I really don't want that.

Davao is what Davao is today. Sinabi ko, here are the rules. Umalis kayo. I would not pursue you beyond the boundaries of my city. Go out. Tapos kayong taga-gobyerno, ganito. If you cannot do it, tell me and I will give you your marching orders out. Pati police. I have the most behaved police force in the entire Philippines in Davao. I do not allow checkpoints.

So here now, I will, one of these days, depending also on the advice of the military and the police. I would… remove all the checkpoints. Now, in the countryside who will set up checkpoints? Well, it will be the NPA. What are you doing? You're carrying arms, you don't have… We're talking, right? Oh, so you should slow down for now.

I will be asking the NDF to just really do that. Lahat… mabuti na lang goodwill ng MI and the rest of Mindanao, the Moro leaders are up against arms also against the drug mule. And it’s good for our country. It’s good for us. Just like China… War, it is not an option. So what did the others say? Peaceful talks. I cannot give you the wherewithal now. I have to consult many people, including President Ramos. He might also want to be one of the… but I would like to respectfully ask him to go to China and start the back talk. Ibigay natin. But we do not also want to offend the United States. Why? Because we have identified ourselves allied with the Western powers. So there’s an interest which we should not forget: Our interest and the interest of our allies.

Now there are a lot of complications there. Because now that the Tribunal has ruled, the arbitral decision states that… And if China would insist on a space domain, that you have to identify yourself before you can cross that vast sea there, America will not like it. Although they insist it’s the Philippine air space and, of course, the maritime security, it’s just too narrow there. You know, if that closes, everything will increase because even the insurance of the cargoes and the boats, and the ships there, will increase. So you do create another problem for our economy and somebody else’s finances. So we have to be careful there. So we have to navigate with courtesy. It's not driven by… It's really just talk, your honor, your excellency, okay bow, bow.

Here now, in this job. Even here. Perhaps, you get a lot of whispers. You see it, left and right. As a fiscal, people whisper to me about that. But now you get a lot of whispers, including outside or state matter but I assure you that the run of this country would be like just what we are in our hearts. The San Beda faithfulness to our nation.

So.. gambling has to stop, but in the meantime that I am focused on the drug menace. Why? Because when you eliminate that, there is that apparatus of gambling. Those who collect bets and you suddenly have vacancies, everybody stops. The drug trade will take over that organization, it will get involved. See? Doesn’t mean to say that I like jueteng. We might…I cannot (inaudible) So I called the military. Not everyone, though. Just a thing there to help the police. But they have to undergo so many legal lectures about the law on arrest and seizure. Then the delivery of persons to the judicial authority, the number of hours; how to get a warrant for an arrest or to search a building. Many. Even in the handling of drug cases. (inaudible) But I remember at the time when I was a prosecutor, very early on in the 1970’s. It was really a heartbreaking job. You know, you have a case it’s good, the affidavits are there. But when presenting the evidence, some wise say that “we want to have an analysis of the… because your honor we’ve heard the stories that…” And it’s true. I was holding it. I said: In my time, do not do it to me. Not to me, to someone else. To someone else. Not to me because we might get into trouble with that…

Well, anyway, I cannot detain you for a longer time. If there’s anything that you’d like me to answer, let us convert this thing into an open forum if you like. Okay with me. But just avoid those… And those lawyers who want…There are a lot…I am a lawyer…Litigation, I mean in the courtroom. Not those drug lords. Goodness gracious. There are many cases where you shouldn't get involved… Give it to others. Give it to those from U.P. and Ateneo. You might have an easier time. Because I know they also taught drug lords, but they weren't lawyers, you idiot. Send them to court. Give it to others. Many are there. Just not San Beda because, my friends in Davao when I was mayor, they avoided cases. More (inaudible) the lawyer there. They didn't like it because they knew I didn't. So their lawyers are outside. Nothing significant but that was the practice. The seductions, the abductions with consent, that's really a Bedan trait. Okay. Adultery, okay. Concubinage. Yours truly, I've also had that. We wouldn't survive if it were just what… That’s why during the inauguration, two sets of families. It’s okay. First in history, first from Mindanao; first president to have two families present there. Don't you like that? That is in keeping obedience of the torture that is there but has never accepted by anybody, but everybody is doing it.

Well, anyway I’d like to thank you for this moment with you. And if there’s anything that I can do for you. If it’s legal, if it’s right, no problem. I have no problem… If some of you are old, unemployed, then just tell me. Many… There are thousands actually, it’s 1,600. Didn’t I say, let it be, if there’s nothing there, no corruption nothing. Don't bother those who are already in position. Let it be, that’s okay with me. I just need competence and integrity, honesty, if you have that, we can work together. You can go to me anytime. The problem, but this is funny, don’t wear jeans. That’s true. That’s right. You won’t be allowed in. You’re there when you’re wearing jeans because it’s a bit… Jeans are prohibited. This is prohibited.

So now I’m going to… I know that. But during Estrada’s time there was this incident that my son, the vice mayor now of Davao City, got into trouble with a security guard. He hit the gate, the security guard’s hand was broken. Then, you know, the media, as the media want to do. So interviews began: “How will you file a case?”

The security guard said, “I won’t file a case because my father is a congressman.” So the media immediately called: “What can you say about the statement of the security guard?” The one who was hurt also didn’t want to file a case. I said: “That’s easy.” So right there and then, I tendered my resignation for Congress. It’s on record. I am the only Congressman who tendered a resignation. I said: Because of the incident involving my son, and then so on and so forth. Then I submitted it to Villar. Villar said… He said: “You know the agenda, the resignation of Duterte?” Joker, the late Joker Arroyo, said: “No, we are not allowed to accept any resignation from anyone. We are not Duterte’s employer. We are not from his district. It is only the people of his district who can accept his resignation.”

I, for (inaudible) the reason of propriety, had already resigned. I said: “You know, there will be so many elections in the future.” If God allows me to live. We’re talking about God. I will end my talk here. Do you know and review the tapes, do you know that I was the only one, the only candidate who invoked, who was invoking the name of God during the campaign? Do you know that? You review the tapes. You won’t hear anyone else say it. I, every time: If by the grace of God, God wills it. That would repeat. And the ultimate statement was I made in Luneta during the miting de avance. I said that: “If God wants me to be president, I will be president of this country. If God does not want me president, he will give me the sign or maybe defeat,” I said.

And I know, many will enter politics, I am already at a dead end. I was elected mayor in Davao in 1988. I coasted along for 23 years as mayor of Davao City; one term congressman; one term vice mayor to Inday, my daughter, she also studied at San Beda. The one who beat up the police officer was also here, the parent. That’s also one thing. You know — except for Marcos, Imee, and Abet, Governor Abet in Bataan — Do you know that even in Mindanao, outside, I don’t have any mayor or governor. Even in Mindanao. I don’t have a single barangay captain in Luzon, Bicol, or Visayas.

That’s why I was so perplexed also after the result because during the campaign you are mesmerized by the crowds. So you think that you are already formidable, then the… I really don’t know how I won. I don’t have a single barangay captain here in Calabarzon and Metro Manila, none. Except of course the ones from San Beda. There are so many of us now, I thought San Beda was just new. Imagine, if all the ones from San Beda voted, that’s all it took to make me win. Like (inaudible), after President Ramos he was the first one I went to because he’s a Bedista… Then he said “okay.” “Where are you?” He’s there. I offered him something, he didn’t want it, in the Cabinet. I offered him a Cabinet post. All of them are good. Because I am irregular. I was involved in a car accident. I am hard of hearing in my right ear, I have a fracture here. But, they are all good, Vit Aguirre, cum laude; Art Tugade; Bingbong Medialdea, many of them are from San Beda. Many of them. I said… Rudy Salalima.

They say, this Duterte doesn’t know anyone if not from San Beda or from Davao. Is that a riddle? I’ll give you the answer. I am a provincial person. I studied in Manila. Along the way, I didn’t really meet anyone who became… except my wife because she was a stewardess. My wife, German, Zimmerman. She’s beautiful. But the people I know, from Davao, far and wide in between the years — they said to me: “Who else do I know?” “Well, except your wife…in Manila?” Here, just in the YMCA dormitory, and in school. So who else would I know who is brilliant? Except Sal because he was really outstanding, Sal Panelo, UP.

I don’t know anyone else who is bright. I wasn’t introduced to society. They didn’t even recognize me, my name. None, except in school. So I got to know the ones I know who are bright. Carlos Dominguez, the Finance [Secretary]. He was my childhood friend since Kindergarten. He was valedictorian until he finished… I don’t know what school in America. So all the people I know — the only people I know who have… PAGCOR, Andrea, she campaigned for me. That’s really… So that’s all I know in my life, so I got those people, those… Because no one else applied, I just kept looking.

That’s the secret there. Because I don’t know anyone. The only people I know who are bright. All… Vit Aguirre; Tugade, a bright boy. Sonny Dominguez, valedictorian. All valedictorians. The president, only 75. It’s okay. Jess Dureza. He was my classmate, valedictorian.

I even saw his grades, general weighted average, when we graduated, we got our cards at the same time. I said, when I looked at him: “Jess, how much was yours?” He said: “96, bay.” Yours?” I took mine. I said: “Nothing, nothing. I’ll get it later.” Then when I went out, 78.

By the way, Jess Dureza is working for me ha, so is Sonny Dominguez, Art Tugade and Vit. All brilliant working for ordinaryong Bedista lang.

Thank you.