Kindly sit down. Thank you.

Speaker Pantaleon Alvarez, Secretary Salvador Medialdea, Congressman Antonio Floirendo Jr., Mayor James Gamao, Mr. Alexander Valoria, the members of the Floirendo family, distinguished guests, my beloved countrymen.

I was about very young, as in young, I had the occasion to accompany my father to visit north Davao, then a part of one huge province. And I can remember that at that time there was a talk about Mr. Floirendo who fell off his horse and that he was injured. And my father asked questions about the state of the abaca plantation. ‘Yan ho ang una ninyo. I was small then, but I realized that the hugeness of the plantation.

Few years later, you branched out into the banana industry, then to real estate and to something big, really big and it is really [DICT] which is the biggest now.

I remember also your Damosa, the historical landmark of the Floirendo’s here in Davao before, because it was, the dealer shop that we bought our first car. That Galaxy Ford. Yes. That was our first and also our last because thereafter, well, my father transferred to work in Manila.

You know, what I just… maybe, not so learned philosophy about world trade. We are shrinking very fast. What used to be one month to cross the Pacific, something like just about a matter of two weeks and… the boats are fast and the aircrafts have become high-tech and we are actually near to each other, even in a matter of state nations.

In… I remember there in… Our economic teachers were weak. But what I remember from him is this: The constant, the constant theory is that whether you export or you import goods and services, you go always for the fastest, the safest, and the cheapest.

Nowadays, it seems to be that all has been prophesied about a decade earlier. But this time, we are full also of troubles. Instead of making the maritime sea safe, international waters secured for everybody, we have now the conflicts in Africa, the narrow alley there that passes by Somalia and of course, the Moluccas, where there is a constant threat of piracy. Piracy, they call it.

And so that’s what’s confusing us here now. And also this time, there is a threat—Not really a threat, but it could be a potential plus point, this China Sea.

For as long as China would just remain its posturing now and does not in anyway continue to build structures that would prevent or obstruct maritime journeys there, okay lang.

Ang problema nito, if it continues to build up, as we have just read the intelligence report last night and there seems to be new barges coming in and they suspect that’s going to be another construction somewhere.

Eh, pagka-ganon… And when the time comes that there is really a military institutions, everything will violate the constant theory that my economic professor told me. Because one of that is that it must be the safest and it must be the cheapest, the shortest, because if with that, you have to go around the Pacific.

Ang problema nito is we do not really know what the intentions of China are. Ano ba talaga gusto niya? Because if he continues building military installations there, everything will go up. Then trade in this part of that alley there, that corridor, would go up. And insurance would go up, for the ship and the goods that they transport, because then it would be a source of conflict and thereby the threat is always there.

And so the actuarians now would say that it is not as safe as it used to be, five or ten years ago, and so we have every reason to increase the insurance.

Pag ka ‘yan na ang pumasok, then I’m afraid that my professor was correct, that it could not be the cheapest, the fastest, and the shortest.

That is the problem. I’ll just limit myself to that. I have nothing against China now. I do not intend to raise the issue before the ASEAN, because if I do, there’s going to be a convoluted thing there. Everyone for themselves.

When as a matter of fact, it is just an issue between the Philippines and China. I will not because I do not want any clutters there. But, for sure, and you can be very sure of this, that when we face bilateral, if we are already facing my counterparts from Beijing or somewhere, I said there will, there’ll be time when I will say that: This is the arbitral ruling and if you want to talk to me, this will be my platform and we do not go out of the four corners of this document, whether you like it or not I proceed and my predicate for my willingness to talk to you would be the arbitration judgment in our favor.

It has nothing to do with being afraid. We do not have to be afraid of anybody. We can, maybe, fight, maybe can lose a battle, but if it’s a war… Well, I don’t know how many nations will get into it.

We are all for peace. I do not want to ignite anything there. I’ve been holding my tongue, and as my nature probably, you know by now, I’m the guy that would just blurt out anything that enters my mind.

But, you know, that is not an idiosyncrasy that would be personal to me. I carry on my shoulders the burden of this country. I am the President. I take care solely of the foreign affairs of this country and I should be wary of my behavior and gesture, and even in the official and personal capacity.

‘Yan lang ho ang makita ko dito na… Everything is all right. You see ships beyond the boundaries of our international waters. But sometimes, there are things that would just crop up, it has never been raised before as assiduous as this. But now, if you ask them, China would just say that: We will not honor it— ‘Wag natin bang-banggain muna because there are no formal talks.

But you can be very sure, when it’s just us, face to face, I will really say: Let us not talk of anything else. Let us talk about this arbitration. But not now. It’s just a matter of timing.

I was a bit… was unsettling coming here. Sakay ako sa chopper at nabasa ko ‘yung report that ‘yung Coast Guard made some little trips near them and there are a lot of barges. You know, a barge. What is a purpose of a barge? If you put something there and bring it somewhere, usually– I think they’re starting to… sa Masinloc. And this would be another ruckus there. I don’t know. We have a one-on-one. Maybe, I’ll just bring it, pero ‘yung eyeball to eyeball, kami lang. Philippines with China.

Pero kung I have to face China, Russia, and United States, then Philippines on one side and they can ask questions. Maybe I’ll just navigate into something like: I am not prepared to talk to the United States at this time. I am not ready to, I said, to exchange barbs there with China. I don’t know.

I’ll just proceed with the right drift that we do not want any quarrel, that we do not want any, at all, at this time. Except that we want to trade, commerce with everybody. We have plenty to sell, plenty to ship. I hope that it would not be the time where we have to make crucial decisions in our national life.

I was thinking about what – Ambassador Lagdameo is here. What do you think sir, should you focus on China for now? These people of ours seem a bit tough.

But, my thing there is I go, I’ll just have a soft landing, just a soft landing for me. But I hope that doesn’t happen, but the problem with this is, everybody’s interested like Vietnam. Then you have Malaysia, then you have Indonesia.

The problem with that is, I don't have a correct reading on them. And even in Malaysia because they also have the same problem which is really personified by the Philippines rather than us being the first, us filing it first.

And I would say that it would be the credit of President Aquino. Credit is given where it is due.

Ang problema, it is accompanied now by so many… Maraming prob– Ang naka-attach doon is something which is big. And so they say that they would not honor it but we cannot be, you know, we can only take so much. We can only take so much.

But you cannot be slapped everyday with that kind of words. What you're saying is, it's like you're challenging them: I will, anybody to all and sundry, I’m not willing to agree on anything because that is ours, according to the other side, which is also our position. And the International Court supporting us, clearly with… in plain language. It's truly ours.

But since we are a small country, we cannot match the arms and armaments and the weaponry of China so at this time, take out war as an option.

If there is no war then there is only one thing that we can do. China says it is not good to go to war because of so many reasons. But ours frankly, getting down to the facts, going to the minimum. What is it? We really can't handle it. It’s going to be a massacre. So let's hold off for now.

Let us find out how we go about, I said navigating the stormy waters there. But I’m sure as your President, I won't lead you into a trap. But I won't embarrass you either.

There will be a time… Well, I have to make a stand and I have to make it clear to China that you know, every time you talk about sole ownership or even entitlements there, is something which is totally unacceptable to us.

So that's all I can say for the time being. Just ignore the politics at the national level, it's really just politics. It’s all politics. The problem is, they say: The problem with our people, our officials, is that it's all politics.

But you must remember that in a democracy, the leaders are elected by the people. And therefore, you cannot take away entirely even after elections what you should be doing for the next few months because after three years, count it by 12, there’s gonna be a[n] election again.

It's good for me because I sit there for six years and I can plan.

As I have said, you who want to push – to move forward. What is it? Help rather. My Tagalog is very bad.

Those of you who really want to help this country, your country, now is the time to do it. Ngayon na sa panahon ko. I assure you, it will be a clean government as I have repeatedly stressed.

There will be no graft and corruption and I stake my name, life, and the presidency itself.

Ngayon na– Take advantage of that and for as long as you inform me, there will be no problem at all. I am available to everybody, not only to the Cabinet officials.

You have so many friends that are connected to me. Tony Boy… who… the Speaker, all those handling things are from Davao – Are you not surprised that everyone handling the government now is from Davao?

It is really the time of the Davaoeños. You know, before they were saying that pangit kung to divide Davao but there was already ripe talks that dapat ang Davao i-divide na to spur development.

But since it was my father who was the governor of the… and divided Davao. Eh parang I sensed na ayaw niya na gusto niya. Kasi ano, when you start to divide a kingdom, it always affects the king. So nakita ko na ‘yung wisdom ngayon. It was good that Davao was really divided.

Well, it started to be a gerrymandering. Like giving territories to your political lieutenants. But then as time passed, everyone was just competing for themselves, you know how it is.

So you have Davao. [Was it redone?] Davao del Norte, just Davao. Then you have Del Sur also, little movement there.

About time really to– in that area because the lands there are owned by a few families.

Just for example, Digos. Digos was just a barrio of the municipality of Santa Cruz before. Do you know that? When they were separated from the landed estates, from the owners, then they started to occupy, it used to be known as the pati ‘Padada Christiansen’ Plantation.’

And they have the of Malita. The of Santa Maria. When it was, it was divided and even Oriental, it’s moving really, not as fast as Davao del Norte.

Davao del Norte was just lucky because here, the horizons were set, the vision of Antonio Floirendo, Sr. So he was really the visionary. He should have been the governor here.

But maybe he didn’t want to, a little bit of disdain for politics. He supported candidates including me and my father, and everyone, and until now, their children.

Pero I suppose that the theory of dividing it to several local governments to spur up competition and development. Competition is very important.

But the biggest to rise in Mindanao, Anflo and the DICT now, which I would just like to simply call Anflo for short. After all, that’s really what— It’s the name that carried the family all throughout till the next generation.

So again, I would like to thank DICT or Anflo, the family, for giving back the profits of the years, flowing it back into some enterprises and it has now– the Anflo provided jobs, opportunities, and all and the ancillary, pati ‘yung mga collateral businesses allied along the way.

So again, congratulations and long live Anflo.