Please sit down.

Senate President Aquilino Pimentel III; Ambassador Ralte, the Indian Ambassador to the Philippines; General Ronald Dela Rosa; Mr. Dante Jimenez; Volunteers Against Crime and Corruption, the Board of Trustees; Officers and Awardees; fellow workers in government; my beloved countrymen.

Alam mo, it is not only the drug menace that has created a crisis at this country. But we do not seem to agree all. And this is a democratic state. And I will always grant, concede that right to them — How we define justice in this country.

As lawyers of Criminal Law, especially yours truly, I was a prosecutor for 10 years. And in school, there are two schools of thought taught in our schools. One is that — It’s the classical theory, that you pay for your crime. The other is the positivists — which is actually the one adopted in most of the countries now, around the world — is that there is always a chance for the criminal to recreate himself and brought back to the mainstream of society. I agree. But not to all.

Which is the better gamble? Me, I stick to an eye for an eye and a tooth for— That kind of story because I believe in the classical theory.

All of us, justices, all of us here, are from the government, the Senate President is a bar topnotcher. But ultimately, at the end of the day, it is how you characterize yourself, what you are.

It’s not really dependent on the professors or the learned lecturers of our country. But I said, it is always how you gauge yourself as a human being.

Ang problema dito — I said different interpretations and different you know, those pretenders and also know too much or know too little. Dito tayo nagbabanggaan. Kasi, when I was pondering on whether or not I would run for the presidency, foremost in my mind was the problem now of drugs, corruption, and criminality on the streets.

The criminals had a hay day. I do not want to attribute anything to any previous administration, but I would say hinayaan nila, hinayaan nila ang droga.

And I was a mayor of Davao City, I was the favorite whipping boy of the human rights people. Well, of course, if that is their belief, then so be it. But the problem is we do not agree or we cannot agree on our basic principles — how we look upon crime, criminality, and the application of the judicial interpretation of Criminal Law.

There are those who are hardliners there, and then there’s the scholarly journey in this world. You know, we only live once. We cannot come back here again to correct our errors.

Now during my campaign, I was hitting hard kasi galit ako sa gobyerno for actually letting the monsters to grow and grow. And I did not even realize until I became President, how much widespread and the dimensional problems of the drug industry.

You know, si… ’yung director general ng PDEA, si General… he was with me. No, he’s the present one. ‘Yung…. Well, they made an accurate, almost an accurate estimate that the drug was about, the addicts rather, numbered around three million.

When I became president— In Davao, it was clean and I would be very frank with you, in front of everybody and the nation — in Davao you can walk. There wasn’t much rape, but there were thefts but not to the point where they would kill you, and rape your family.

That… You know, I was a prosecutor, and maybe ultimately that persecution complex might have entered my mind.

But that isn’t the case here, it’s individual. Case by case. Well, I look at the guy, just also the body language, this one is truly a devil. Something like that.

I have acquired that sense of… 10 years of doing trial work. Nakahalata na ako na mahirap kung hayaan ko lang ito nong mayor ako. 1988 was the crossroads sa ating bayan. And there were a lot of guns issued to people without any investigation of whether he can handle a firearm in his hands.

And because of the desire of the government at that time to get rid of the communist in my city, ‘yung Alsa Masa. And every Tom, Dick, and Harry, who claim to be an anti-communist guy in town, was issued a firearm. And the manufacturing of the ‘paltik’ or the home-made guns, which is also very good, actually was produced inside the police main headquarters in Davao City.

There was a lathe machine and they acquired for accuracy of you know — Talagang finished product very good because they took in some guys who were expert dito sa machining and everything.

And so when I was mayor, the NPA disappeared because they were somewhat my friends. Now, not so much because we’re saying just so harsh words. Because maybe I’m, I’m not really… I’m a socialist. I’m the first leftist President of this Republic, but it doesn’t mean to say I’m a member of the Communist Party.

That's just what it is about my personality. My paradigm is that I am just the son of a poor man. We migrated to Davao, it was a long sacrifice for all. That's why we grew up like that and we never tasted cars at that time. It was not until, almost when we were older.

So, that's how it is. So, my paradigm is, it's easy to talk to the communists. The problem is criminality entered the picture. And so, they would just enter any residence in Davao.

Since you cannot withdraw more than 50,000, it's noticeable. The banks would limit you each withdrawal. So, if they asked for a certain amount, if the person couldn't borrow money, they stayed inside the house as boarders and… Well, they freeloaded and raped the women, all of the women inside that house. Two, three days, it was like they held them hostage.

So that's when I… said: This cannot go on. This has to stop. And when I was mayor I said: “Go out of the city in 48 hours. Go out of the city, all of you drug addicts, robbers, all criminals.”

And there was a purge. For those who did not honor the… Eh, patayan talaga. But that’s it. Pagka-lumaban ka, any false move, you know, it was not until after the… nauso ‘yung bomba na self-destruct then blowing everybody out to the heavens.

Before, you had to wait. But in the recent conference of the chiefs of police in Europe and United States, it is now really… it’s agreed among the law enforcers that you make a false move, because if you raise your hands, you really will raise your hands.

If you, if you start to scratch your crotch, without anything… a firearm, that's it. So, and that is good and I said to Dela Rosa, that is the theory that we should follow. Why should I sacrifice my, the police?

I am very late because I just came in from Samar then I passed by Tacloban, the policeman that was wounded and the other guy is very stiff there with the wife and children kneeling around the coffin.

I cannot accept that… You picture somebody, these shabu users, that is why they can commit the bestial acts that a human being can make, because of their brain which is already shrunk.

These… I want to curse at you all. You don't understand, you think they are just children or apostles of Christ. God, when you talk about… you know, the bleeding hearts would present: “Well, because they are poor. Why aren't the rich ones?”

Well, the rich don’t… It’s pure business for the big people. Only those who got rich from drugs, like these sons of bitches, the police. They already have many mansions.

With the active participation of the police and with the corrosive effect of money, which is really very easy since you have a colony of addicts, ‘yun ang nangyari sa ating bayan.

So they picture so lightly and so poignant that a dead idiot there who happens to, you know— If you are a user, then you are a pusher. Unless you are the son of the one of the Forbes billionaire list there, eh talagang—

If you are hooked, you have to take it, you have to have the fix, and you have to find something to get it. Thereby, along the way, committing all crimes and when already skanked, they go around picking children and raping them anywhere, inside a truck or inside a junk. And that’s it, they have no fear when they’re high, they don’t know their brains are running.

I’ve been dealing with criminals for 10 years. Who would want to kill another person? They think that we celebrate every night. They picture us something like a vicious murderer. Oh well, as they say, there’s international, I do not care.

I never had any intention of going international. As a matter of fact, I was not even ready to the last minute to be a national. Eh, small time lang ako po sa Davao.

Pero when I was here, I cannot allow my country to flounder. Because if I do that, then I will compromise this generation and their children. ‘Yan ang naka…

Imagine three million. It’s not a joke, three million addicts. O, how do we fix them? Paano natin gawin? Do we have the hospital? We are operating on a budget.

Gusto ko magmu— So ang budget, which was prepared the previous year is the one that I’m operating on. “Why don’t you just arrest them and place everywhere?” Where do I get the money? You don’t move around in this planet without money.

The money I’m spending now to operate government is part of, what… left by… There’s no other source, there is a lump sum of 300 billion to take care of the 3.7 million addicts in this country. That’s not because of—

We have to go to Congress. But there’s a hearing now of the budget for next year and that is the time that we are… That’s why the intelligence fund also increased because I don’t know where to put it, but I’ve ordered the military to open up their camps. They have land. Just give me about two hectares of your camp there and where I can place the rehabilitation guys and also their patients.

And I would need thousands of doctors, thousands of nurses, and maybe millions for the medicines and the psychologists— But you know, as the experts have really warned us before, six months to one year of shabu use will shrink the brain of a person. O, how do we go about making their brains bloat again? Go to the gasoline station and play the—

Look at this Human Rights. I know it is the object, the target really is the establishment, the abuse of government on its own people, that’s really the essence of the— But at some time, you know, even these Abu Sayyaf… you know, I’ve a little blood in me, my grandmother is Maranao. But for the first time, I really said and I’m addressing you now guys: I lost my respect for you. Because a Tausug warrior — well that’s according to the stories of, from the Moro community — supposed to be brave and honorable men.

When you killed that child, 7 years old and the others in front of the camera, I lost my respect for you. That’s why I sent the soldiers.

I know that there will be some reprisals, I’m ready for that. There’s always a drawback there. But you know every time you do that, it a slap on the face of government. And ito ’yung mukha ng gobyerno.

Well, maybe Congress. But when you… you’re probably saying: What’s wrong, what’s, you know, what’s keeping this country jerky? It’s the face of the President. Kaya mag-ano tayo nito… I would say, just because, so he is a poor and because he was poor — that is the dramatics of these idiots: Poor, so he has special privilege because he’s poor. So, you do not go hard at him. Maybe treatment even though he’s crazy already, you just have to sacrifice for publicity. “O dadalhin namin sa ospital ‘to.” And sa ospital, the hospital would just say: “We’ll take care of him, five days, he goes out. Because we need the bed spaces for the others.” Saan tayo pupunta nito ngayon? Where do I get the billions?

My budget only goes that far. He said: Okay. So in the meantime, just kill them. Son of a— I will really kill you.

Don't… let's be frank. We will really kill each other here. I cannot simply define justice that is fair to all. Life is never fair. But when you start, you, who is the cause of the cause is the cause of them all.

Who gave you the right? Forget about God, forget about the laws of men. Just think of the one universal equation. Who gave you the right to cook shabu, sell it to my sons and daughters and make them crazy? Sino?

Don't mention God right now. Don't mention the law right now. No Human Rights right now. Don't mention those vigilantes you're talking about. Who gave you the right to distribute shabu and destroy a community?

You are going to destroy my country, you will die. Son of a— Let's clarify things here. I will not allow it. I will not compromise the next generation, they will die. Many families now… if there is in a family, a drug pusher or drug user, the family is ruined. Automatically, that family becomes dysfunctional. Because the child will steal if they can't get anything anymore.

Now… who? Drug lord, there is none. “Where’s the big fish?” They’ve been always asking. “Where, where are they? My God, I’ll tell you they are, outside of the Philippines.

How they conduct their business? By cellphone. So, even there in prison. This is the only country where you conduct business regarding shabu through the cellphone.

So, no denial. Months before it was being said that they were cooking shabu inside. And I myself warned, warned the Secretary back in the previous administration. When she was criticizing me for uttering those words in the Senate hearing I said: ‘Those… I will kill them.”

And it was Enrile who also asked me. So I was just responding to— Eh sabi kasi ni Enrile: If you find the smugglers who rise in your city, what will you do? “Ako ang pagkatao ko, ganito, I’ll kill him.”

You rob us seven billion pesos a year? Hindi kita bubuhayin. And, you know, there’s a amigo, I’ll kill people for money. But since you are a drug pusher, I kill you for nothing.

We don't understand each other in this country. There’s a democracy. Unfortunately, for you I won the election. But what was my— I didn't even have… I didn't have any senators, I was alone, only Koko.

I have a governor, because my partner is also a governor, one governor… Abet Garcia and Imee, those are my only Governors. I don't have any barangay captains, and yet I won by 15 million, six million of that was my margin over them.

So that’s what I said back then, that if I… this is the issue with us. It’s not about the infrastructure. Every year there is infrastructure. That’s the source of corruption. I said: I’ll guess. I will do away with corruption. It will be a clean government. Then and now, I will state to you publicly. There will be no corruption in my government.

Because if you do that, you might think… I’m not good at Tagalog. If you do that, then I’d be, you know, I might try to reinvent you into a drug pusher. “You might just think, sorry. But you’re just corrupt, I thought you were a drug pusher.”

That’s why. He who is the cause of the cause is the cause of them all. You only have yourself to blame. So you should not be shouting that it’s unjust.

I said that before, when I was… Well the secret really there is Ramos. He showed me something. “Mayor Duterte you read this.” He went to me. So I saw it. So I just kept quiet. “So, what do you intend to do?” “Sir, I have no money, sir, really.” “No, no, I’m not…” “What can you do for your country?” I said to him: I’m not the one who should be fixing this. Maybe those in the military, and the police themselves.

“You have to run because you’re the only one who can do it.” I said: “What, sir?” He said: “Let’s not… do not mess up with me. Run.” I refused.

October 16, last… I didn’t file. I got angry, returned to Davao. “Money, do you want money? I will give you a bank, you run.” “Where will the money come from, sir?” He said: “Just wait, because those… will contribute.” But he gave something there in front of me. “Here’s the money. Donated by my friends and a little of mine. Here’s the list of the guys if you have to thank.”

And so he was pressing me, so nag-substitute ako. So, what was my program of my government? No corruption in government. I will suppress drugs and crime.

So, these Human Rights [groups], they should have campaigned against me. So how about now the 15 million who voted for me because they want corruption stopped, those planted bullets there… I’ll have you zipped up in a body bag.

I am just an ordinary person. My Cabinet members are all number one, Koko. Mine there, maybe you can’t… I have assembled the best of men in the Philippines today. Tugade, don’t you… he’s a billionaire actually. If you know Art Tugade. When they were students he was already the CEO of Delgado Shipping.

Sonny Dominguez, he’s a childhood friend of mine, he’s consistently a valedictorian, he’s okay at everything. Yasay, sometimes, I thought there was an American here who was speaking. Why does—? But, he’s a friend, a childhood friend of mine too. You know why, he’s a son of a Pastor. He learned a lot from his father so he’s practiced at… well, we’re just Visayans after all—

So, we are forced to… When we were first year, we Visayans thought our tongues would become stiff, by the Jesuits at Ateneo, so I had to—read that, “You can’t have a brass band.” “C’mon guys.”

Because our tongues are indeed stiff, that’s why my grandfather, when that happened, those priests back then. The voice and diction in first year was very—really, the priest would make you do that. “Now, follow after me: Silly kitkit sitting in the kitchen.” “The old professor to school and broke into copious flow of resources.”

Because the Visayans, we were laughed at. We were really beaten down by the priest like that. It’s true. You’d ask him… No, because the Visayan is stiff.

Look, I’ll give you an example. These politicians, they have their little quirks. Hearing this guy every morning: “And now Ladies and Gentlemen, the next song you’ll hear is from Doris Day, singing Day by Day.” My mother said to him: You should kill him… [laughter and applause] Well, that’s life.

But let us be clear on this: I am committed by my oath of office. Those victims, they did not start the process that turned out to be bloody, they did. They were the ones who cooked it up, they were the ones who ordered it. They knew that it was prohibited, whether you are poor or rich.

The world turns every 24 hours in a cycle. It will never stop to listen to your excuses. Just because you are poor, you’ll only reach… I, if I wasn’t in government, if your daughter was raped by my son, if you’re a drug addict, would I support you?

Those soldiers are there in Jolo now, they’re still, there’s fighting raging on now in… I really poured the soldiers there. When they come home and find out that their wives, the ones… you’ve gotten addicted to drugs or you’ve touched their daughters. Would you think they, you could assuage his anger, his hatred by just one dead body?

He will go wild. Look, it's like this. At the start, we really delved into the intrigue that 'A' pointed to, 'B' pointed to you. So, just let it be. Arrest him and let him out. He wants to fix things, let him.

Then, we need to look for 'B', and we will tell 'C' that 'A' pointed to you. Then we arrest him. Or okay: You want to bail? Okay. No, there's no problem with that when he gets out.

So we sowed intrigues. I got it from reading so many books about the Mafia. So, it’s just a… it’s a shame there’s no Mafia here. I could be the head of Omerta. I’m already skilled in intrigue and we started that.

That’s why those bundles [referring to 'balot-balot'], it’s torture, that’s not ours. Believe me. My intention was only during Dela Rosa’s time. He couldn’t even comb his own hair. And then, he would bundle people up? You just shoot the guy and throw him there. Why do you have to—? How many hours does that take? That’s the job of the other side. That’s their torture. So not everything… maybe government, government, everything is just government.

That’s the drama that’s being played out to you. So you choose. Me, I’m a hardliner; me, I’m ready to kill because you destroy my country. I’ve been telling you: Do not destroy this generation or if you allow everybody to just come in and invite them to do business sa drug industry, then there is no tomorrow for your grandchildren. Wala, you’ll end up just like the failed states of South America.

Basahin mo ‘yung kay Ioan Grillo, and how they operated led to— ‘Yung mayor noon, babae. She takes her oath of office in the morning, in the afternoon, she’s dead.

That is why I am in favor of… Senator, the postponement of the election. Because there is a war going on and you know, if they use this, I will finish them first. So, I will crush them, castrate them so that they will not, because otherwise, the next thing that you’ll realize is that we have a narco-politics.

I said: In three to seven years’ time, they will fall because of the so many billions. And I’ll have to destroy their lieutenants. If the lieutenants are rich, well, poor, it’s the same. You know, I cannot be selective, there is a war.

Actually my orders to Dela Rosa is: “Destroy them.” My orders to the Armed Forces of the Philippines now fighting the Abu Sayyaf: “Destroy them.”

We don’t need drama there with… we’ve already discussed that. Treatment, UN, treatment of prisoners – not now. We are busy with the… then we will have a reckoning when the day comes and we will answer.

Ako… but let me, let it be known to everybody: ‘Yang pulis, pati military, if I order them to do something against crime and to stop criminality and terrorism, they will have my blessings and I will support them all the way.

I will never, never, never allow a policeman, a soldier to go to prison for doing his duty to the country.  Fight tayo diyan.

But those with two wives. You, how many wives do you have, Chief PNP? This is from Davao, but I have not heard or if I heard, I did not hear it.

So I cannot stay long with you. You know, I’m also invited for dinner with the soldiers who have been wounded. So, because it is Araw ng Kagitingan (Day of Valor) I said: “Let’s have dinner in Malacañan.” So I bought so many wheelchairs, gave them computers.

Here’s one lieutenant, who lost his eyes, both… the one who cried on TV, the one who hugged me. I said: “Do not worry. I will take care of you. I will reinvent you.”

So he is now learning Braille. Maybe we’ll have something, perhaps sharpen your memory and you can take Law there at San Beda. I will talk to the priests. Just if he… somebody reading to him. We’ll find out if he can be of service to his country in another way.

The AFP actually has a horror story, don’t tell anyone about… they didn’t have an MRI before, they didn’t have— Their building’s drainage was already failing. How is that? What about the germs? There’s no drainage anymore. So I said, you condemn it, then I’ll give you a new building. I gave them almost half a billion pesos.

And I said, let me discuss this. We are businessmen. [Speaks in Bisaya]. I’m talking to him, delivering a speech. I’ll end at three minutes. That’s how it is, this, this lowest bid, let’s remove it. It’s the source of all corruption.

I will not compromise the Armed Forces by… The COA (Commission on Audit) is here, I told them: “Oh my God I will not follow you.” Because it’s all corruption. The lowest bidder doesn’t have capital, just saliva (meaning nothing). They invent a corporation like our MRT. And that’s why what happened in Crame was expedited.

If he answers… Of course if you have a business, you will profit, there’s no death. Because they want bidding, it will be rigged. It should be quality first. The specification is quality. Durable because it’s being used by government. But let’s cut this crap of lowest bid, lowest bid. They don’t have capital, they’ll sub-contract it. Then the 20 percent, you know what that means.

Then another 20. Would you believe it, even the barangay captain signs the completion in his barangay. So, he gets another two, three percent. So your project— That’s why the soldiers, I told them, this, these soldiers one day this will explode, because they go around the country.

Would you believe it, there's an airport, the airport I thought… “What is this?” “Airport, sir.” “Why is there a building?” It looks like a basketball court. I checked the records, it's complete. It's even better than NAIA.

So, it's like this, the 100 kilometers, you can really go for the lowest bid, what will come to you is about 60. That's how it is, whoever can provide. They'll add it to their contact price. Better disabuse your, this… the lowest bid, lowest bid. It’s just a source of corruption.

Then many cases were filed. If you file a case against me, I will kick you. I would not compromise with the… There’s only two sources, two countries where we can buy the… you know.

If you buy from others, they will add a markup to it. They are listening to us 24 hours. Then that's your lowest bid, nonsense. That's why I have—we have to talk to the… this COA.

Sometimes you know, when the integrity of the Republic is at stake, do not give me that shit about the, needing to buy through the lowest bid. Then the guns, oh my. There, I said, only two sources, two countries where we can buy the armaments and especially the gadget for intelligence gathering.

I have to inform you this because you must know. I know you don't know this but… I’ve been in government for 23 years, 10 years as a prosecutor. I was a congressman for one term, and a vice mayor for one term when my daughter punched someone, Inday.

That's the story of my life. But I’m happy that we are here. Because… when you say victims of crime and corruption, we are all affected, because we are all taxpayers.

You know, but they said. Let us give the, our people the respite sa corruption. I’ll give them six years. I will be very harsh, very strict, only because it is not our own money that they are spending.

It’s the people’s money. So I agree with the vision… with your vision for our country and I suppose that we should, because there are many…. You know when people get bored, they start scratching, just whatever itches. I now realize it’s time to stop talking.

Thank you very much.