Secretary Delfin Lorenzana; Secretary Michael Dino, Presidential Assistant; General; Visaya; Lt. Gen. Edgardo Año, General Harold Cabreros, he just came from me, just left; ; Undersecretary Arthur Tabaquero, Undersecretary Cesar Yano; to those troops and friends.

Can you just give the tikas pahinga? Just relax.

I was at your hospital the other night. And I saw several things that government could contribute more to the help and the recuperation of the soldiers.

I committed a Barrett, it’s a Barrett thing, it’s like a high-pressure air chamber. That which the divers use when they have — That high pressure is good. I hope you would not have to use it yourself. It is good for those who have been in the field for a long time and cannot be extracted immediately. And to have signs of infection, severe, gangrene.

Once you reach there and they start the machine on you, you have a better survival rate of retaining every part of your body. No, no extremities. Then you’ll have the MRI, a new one. And I have two more: Gamma ray, just an x-ray beam, a laser that they will target directly at the area that needs it and things because I want you to be well protected, well taken care of, well motivated and the will to fight.

I want us to have — I was heading here, I was informed that we lost maybe — I do not know if it’s a CAFGU but nevertheless the same, we have three dead in Monkayo, Davao del Norte, plus 10 wounded.

I don’t know if I have to go to where they are now. But for sure some of them are still in Davao City. Anyway, I’ll be going back there.

I just want you to know that at least in my time, everything you need. Everything you need to fight the enemies of the state to be at an advantage in terms of equipment. We have a plan to give everything but I do not think I have… Maybe the Secretary doesn’t want to tell you, keep it to yourselves. We’ll acquire so many things.

And when Kerry came here. He made an agreement with me. I had a disagreement with the Americans. He left me with 32 million.

He said: I have the 32 million. Delfin was there. He said: You can use it. So, 32 million dollars. I’ll divide it among you in the police but we are doing well with the air equipment somewhere in Jolo or… I don’t want to mention it here because it might not be for public use.

We have equipment that we can use there. I think this is your share. Let's buy everything so you can use it, and the other things. But let me just say this… The clouds are going down, the ceiling is low. I have to take off soon.

Ano ba ‘yung sabihin ko sa’yo na— In, just in case talagang we’ll have terrorism but just about… Prepare for that two to three years from now. ‘Yung ISIS pati ‘yung style of you know. Because we have to deal with the Abu Sayyaf one of these days.

When we are prepared here, when I think that  already in my hands. The things that I would need to fight a war correctly and accurately, we will have to go there and fight. But before that, kailangan ko ‘yung mga bagay-bagay na to give you an edge. I will not order you to fight na disadvantaged.

When I feel that in that area and even the terrain would make it hard for us to win the battle, not the war, we’ll always win the war. Gobyerno tayo eh.

But when I feel that it would result in a considerable loss, I would just bide my time. Only when we are ready, and we shall have acquired the equipment and I will buy it for you; only when I think that we are on the advantage, theoretically we are on top, so to speak, we are already on the high ground, with the weapons, with the assets, then we will enter.

We have to end this mindless thing of brutalism and that is ISIS. And that ISIS has no party, no ideology. It's gone. They just want one thing, death.

Just like I said to… this Sison. He foams at the mouth. His saliva leaks through the screen. Your face is wet. You'd think he's someone important speaking. They can't even hold a single barangay anywhere… ambush style—

Then they wouldn't win elections, in Davao, if they didn't hitch a ride with my party, no one would win there. It’s only in Davao that the Left has many officials. And that's because of me. I make them win, because I have no problem with—

In exchange, I said you leave. We are the same.

These communists, you'd think they are a force to reckon with, the way they talk. When in fact, I said they could not even occupy a barangay for a single day.

So if it were just them, but because they are the ones in the position in the mountain, they have the advantage with the ambushes. But they can't finish us off. And one day, we will have equipment, even just bring a small firearm. They're finished. Just use rocks on the braggarts. I brag about… as if they are really the ones in power.

But one thing, you can be sure of. I will not leave you. Because the machines that are there, if bought immediately— I don't want monthly payments. I only want it done in a day.

You have a new building. If you are at the AFP, you might also want to rest a bit. It's good… like a hotel. The hospital is like a hotel. And there will be beautiful women serving you, wearing shorts. For… everything I have there. All my focus will be there, bulls eye. Hit. Reached. But I said I’ll take care of them.

By the way, I sent them… All those who are in wheelchairs, to start, because I’ll send you to school. I said, go back to AB. I will send you all to school.

Learn English, voice and diction then also improve your grammar. I will put you in call centers. Those who are really… It's pitiful. I said I won't abandon you.

Then that one whose eye was hit. I said: ‘Don't worry, sister, I’ll give you a woman every day. So you won’t regret… not life.’

But if you're already gone… then you'll just keep getting hit.

But I know I said I will not abandon you. You can be sure that you will have… And I’m working on the education of your families, it will be free. Nearest school to your residence. So the child won’t have to—

My proposal. Just wait, this year. Kindergarten to high school. College, we'll have scholarships. The really bright ones. I will really pay even if they are troublemakers, even if they sniff… only those who are truly deserving. But up to high school, after graduation, college scholarship. If they maintain a certain standard so they can enroll, there will be no problem.

I’m not asking for 95, 95. My scholars are… because there are others like you. Maybe soldiers don’t want to study anymore. Or, if they want to, they were favored. If someone really doesn’t want to study, you need not really be scholars if based on the highest grades. Just enough. Nearest school for the children in high school then for the scholarship, they can choose. And well of course, the other benefits in case we are unlucky.

You know, in this life, we can’t ask for our luck right now. Just develop the game of survival, don’t let others get ahead of you and if you hit someone who isn’t actually the enemy, just say, “Mayor, I was wrong.” [Speaks Bisaya] Because that mayor has a girlfriend. I’m angry about that. There’s a teacher in that barangay. He’s also involved. [Speaks Bisaya] The teachers just keep going. [Speaks Bisaya]

Find out first if he’s married. No. I said you can trust him… even the police. [Speaks Bisaya] Those ‘chick boy’ police. Army, not so much. [Speaks Bisaya]

And even with corruption because you are far from temptation. I had a problem with the police there with drugs but this will continue. There will be no let-up until we have destroyed the apparatus of the drug front.

Their bosses are in China. They operate in a digital map in real time. You drop it there in Panadacan, get the money there in Tondo.

That’s why they say: “Where are the big fish? Where is the billionaire boss?” They aren’t here. Only the lieutenants are here.

What the lieutenants drop, that’s called “trash.” That’s about it, that’s why we’re having a hard time.

Now there are about 600 confirmed addicts. That’s why I’ve ordered you to provide the space. You are the big ones there. Not big, just one corner, high barbed wire. They are, they will… undergo rehab. But one year of shabu use, that’s it because the brain by then will have shrunk, it will get smaller. So they’re really crazy forever.

So that which is left like that, I won’t take your camps all the time. [Speaks Bisaya] The letter, I will really keep it far away because they pose a danger to society and there could be hundreds of them. I have to relocate them to an island. Put that there in gyms like these. Later when it’s a monkey on your back. It’s like there’s a monkey clinging to your back and when the urge, the need to have it fixed, that’s when problems arise.

So there are many holdups, thefts, killings. When [someone is] high, crazy, raping children, women, the elderly. Even mothers are raped because [they are] demonic. So it has really… that’s why even if they say [people are] dying, it will go on until… all of them belong to the apparatus.

If there’s nothing coming from China, make a call but there will be no meeting at the stock [market], no one will distribute [it], then at least we are a little bit free and comfortable.

So I arrived here first, apparently no president has reached here before. I said: Why did Harold get assigned there? There must be many beautiful things there. Because in Davao he always talks to many people, beautiful things with the pastor. Did you see the pastor’s singer? He’s his best friend… Yes. The singers on the program, did you watch them on TV? I don’t know what Harold did here, but maybe it’s there with the beautiful things too… but I clearly see, I don’t have—

I won’t stay long because I’ll be caught by the low ceiling. If my helicopter crashes, there will be no more of you. To you women, go ahead, you’re on your own.

So I’m happy that you have this fire in your belly to serve the country. All of us. And I said I’ve been there all this time. You just don’t know me but ask the police. There was never a time I abandoned the police.

If there’s a case, everything, if [someone] doesn’t want to settle the case, [they] kill [them], it’s like everything [ends that way]. Salvaging here, salvaging there. Because when I became mayor, I said: “If you are a criminal, if you are a drug addict… get out of my city because I will kill you.”

And that brought me to human rights. I don’t care about that. I said: I have a problem to solve. I must first solve the problems of the country. After all, if I get imprisoned, it will be me [who is imprisoned]. Well, I’m already 71 years old. The Revised Penal Code says, when you reach 70, you will be released.

When I am 71 and President, if I order a kill, you cannot arrest me, I have immunity. And I have this pardoning power, I will pardon you if I order you to. They have no chance. Now, when I step down, I can be sued. Open the Revised Penal Code:

“All persons upon reaching the age…” mandatory to release. I am already 71. After I am President, I will be 77. Where will you put me? Or, there is nothing.

So, in all of the things that you do upon orders of your commanders, in the performance of your duty, do it.

Do not be afraid of cases. There are cases but… I will see to it that nobody goes to prison just exactly for doing your duty. Because if they make a mistake, pardon. The President can grant pardon — absolute or conditional.

The President, you cannot sue him. Okay, let's go. War? Okay, kill them all… “Sir, we have a case.” Pardon. That thick, good for one battalion. “Fill in the blank, I’ll sign it. Put your name, go to the Ombudsman.” “Yes, sir.”

Then another order: “Restore to his former position but this time after 30 days, promotion.” Straight from sergeant to general, that’s—

What nonsense— But that is just to emphasize to you that a joke like that, I will spend and defend my people. You order someone then abandon them?

Most of the Army in Davao who are running around with lawsuits, they come to me. I provide lawyers.

But I, when I was a fiscal 10 years ago, everything the soldiers, police, connections— ask— Connected to the performance of duty. That case will really fall apart. Now that I am President, they will fall even more, we are tough. Soldiers of the Philippines, sometimes stubborn.

Thank you.