Let me begin by addressing myself to you to your officers, Brigadier General Rolando Bautista, Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea, Presidential Adviser for Military Affairs Arthur Tabaquero, the men and women of the Presidential Security Group (PSG), your families, even your children are here now.

Good evening and I would like to just be — either short or long — depending on the flow of…You know I am happy to be here. I apologize for not meeting you earlier because you are after all, just like me, working for the government. That’s why, I am happy that you secure my person but just the same I would like to caution everybody that I do not cultivate adoration or a personal loyalty. Just remain loyal to the Constitution and I’d be happy, really, just honor the flag. We are all just workers in the government and I came from a poor family and from the ranks as well.

I started my career as a special council and that is the position that is lowest in the issuance of the prosecutorial body. I was there for a long time and so my rapport is better with the military and the police because I was at one time in the past a prosecutor. I was the only prosecutor assigned to our area, far away in Mindanao, to prosecute the rebels, prosecute the military offenders and the police.

But I like to tell you a very simple story. All those who had cases with you and it’s on record, in the performance of your duty, I really dismissed them. Your personal matters, you know that, you’ve been in — that has always been the rule and until now — if you do your duty in connection with your mandate, do it, and don’t be afraid because usually there are harassments, harassments. But I really do not believe in those…Sometimes it is excessively done but you cannot discount that possibility in the heat of battle.

You don’t have…The moments that you enjoy with your family are really the moments where you forget about the job. When you leave — leave — when you leave home [labay is Bisaya], our job is already here, me also. I pray to God that I finish my term, good, if not then that is actually destiny. But I’ll just reiterate to you — especially those of you who go in and out of command. But for you who would go out there and fight for our country, the security of our people, you will have my full support.

So this new conflict here but first this drug problem, you have to help us. You have to help the police because we cannot — well, maintain order throughout the land every inch of the territory, that is impossible. Just ride a plane to get here it’s 1:30 jet and that is just how vast the territory of the Philippines is; and I do not really expect that every moment in our lives we will have peace immediately.

We have this drug problem, it was only after I became a President or I had become the President of the Republic, that nakita ninyo gaano kalawak ang problema.

I was the favorite whipping boy of the senators there and they built their careers also criticizing me. Well and good, that’s your job I do not really…I would not be mad at you if you — because when I was a prosecutor, that’s what I did, my job, my job, okay.

But when I became President and I cracked down on everything, the truth came out. But remember that two years ago, the PDEA came up with a statistics that there are about three million Filipino addicts. When I became President and I pursued it, I said, “We have to finish this problem because it is threatening our country,” with three million addicts, my God. And those who surrendered today are just about 180. That’s when the Philippines saw how heavy our problem is.

Case they started drugs here — it’s the Chinese actually. Then when they knew it was getting hot — they hadn’t even approached me — long before I became a President, they transferred venues. So they are there our statistics and our intelligence matrix, actually nameless those…China has provided the profile now, just because I opened up and said that China is where these…And they are using real-time and they are listening to us now I am very sure about that, especially the Chinese military.

But I hope they would have the good sense really of ‘what is this?’ Are you there living it that way to make my country chaotic? Are you into it or help us? Because you know…We really know that we are this poor in our technical know-how, especially them and besides they are there in their country.

I said here, what the columnists say, those bright people ‘where’s the big fish?’ Well, I am sorry to say to you that the big fish is in China. If you want to get an international warrant and go there. But until now, we really can’t do anything but I have to destroy the apparatus and it’s like that now. And if I don’t finish it here, the supply and the demand nothing will really happen.

And I am not bragging — were it — another one won, it would be difficult, the Philippines would suffer, if someone else won, I wouldn’t brag. Well, Davao City is like that because that’s just how it is. You go out of my city, I will kill you, period. Why? Because you are destroying my country. You are destroying the youth of this…Our children can no longer go out, they are afraid. Ride a jeep, there’s a holdupper.

Then others, even…Why do you think that I won by landslide outside of the votes? It’s because of insecurity, that the money they used, they worked hard for, their child becomes addicted to drugs, that’s a family dysfunction, by the way. That’s why it’s pitiful. You know the mother is there, the father is here without a wife and even there’s biology it really messes up the family or others have two mothers and a father. You can just imagine the dysfunction of the family. Have pity on the Filipino.

Sir, I am not a communist but there is a dimension in my life, I am a socialist because I am just the son of a poor man. I tasted — we — and I can remember 1956, our house in Davao was demolished. Well, my father thought that it was a wetland, it was wet. Then it turned out Mindanao was divided so many years ago here in Manila. When they opened up Mindanao, ‘here, this is vacant,’ I cannot blame them after all at that time when Mindanao was being divided, the Philippines was very big. With 104 million now, the Philippines became… We are the number 2 in — in bulk rate, then our economic growth is down here.

That’s why I ran because I saw it was the government itself oppressing the people, people were really being beaten: permits, licenses, everything. Every time the poor person arrives, they’re even given a bullet, oh dear.

And it was — all of you are military — it was Ramos who was there long, long before; and he was pleading and he showed to me. So we already knew, even Ramos, a long time ago. He just didn’t want to but he was sad. He said he was the father of the police then that’s what happened. So I really cannot, he said ‘I need somebody to fix government, you’. I said, ‘I don’t want to, sir, I don’t have money.’ He said, ‘Not you. Run.’ I did not file, he got angry and went to Davao. I said, ‘Sir, I don’t have money and I don’t want to.’ He said, ‘president, that’s it.’ I got it from my friends. You will receive money, run.’ He called me every day, I was really forced to substitute. That’s really the truth. He is still alive, you ask him.

You know the problem with corruption because he said, ‘it seems that during my presidency I didn’t…’. He was not able to introduce anything that is a life changing story for all of us. That’s it…Then because if I want to…You know I am addressing to the

I am trying to save lives. That’s why I was…I got the ground running offered peace to everybody, to the communist, to the MI, MN. But those criminals I have no — I have nothing for them. I cannot go into this Abu Sayyaf. Those are the enemies that have to be destroyed. So really…There’s nothing, you will have to just destroy them.

But for the sake of peace and save lives. You know, we are spending billions and I hate to, you know, sign a paper, when I was mayor, to buy bullets just to kill a Filipino.

These communists are our friends. They are socialist but they are Communist Party of the Philippines. I am just socialist in my dimension because I am the son of a poor man. I hate government and anyone oppressing the people.

The poor are the ones getting the bullet, those who are not powerful. Meanwhile, we mayors, generals, Cabinet members, you are waived of — even if you bring a ton of diamonds or brilliants there, it doesn’t matter.

That is the kind of government that really — it’s into the core of our essence as a Filipino. During my time it will be cleaned, that’s just how it is. Really Congress — I told them, ‘the people don’t want pork barrel.’ You go into it, I don’t know what will happen. Do not defy the Gods. Because I have drugs and corruption. Do not…I mean, as far as I would like to, I want to operate within the law. But these drug addicts are finished.

This corruption, everywhere, a license hasn’t arrived until now, it’s late, it hasn’t arrived, it’s already paid for, two years ago, three years ago. What kind of…The poor go to get a clearance, they still have to give something. Then the back-and-forth, the chief of office isn’t there.

That’s why I…Here in the executive department — I can’t control Congress and the judiciary. Here with me, if you’re not in your office, I will — just dismissal. You say it’s illegal, so be it, just go to court if you want. But if you’re not there, I am warning everybody, I will repeat the warning tomorrow that if you were paid for eight hours, do not shortchange the Filipino. So if you work there, most of the time, after lunch break they don’t come back, they watch movies at the mall, so our payment is good for eight hours then you only report for three to four hours, that’s swindling actually. You are swindling the Filipino people of their money. You are paying for a certain amount of a certain hour. So work.

And apparently, there's nothing we can do – even with this contractualization. These companies… Secretary Bebot Bello said earlier on ANC that he would meet with them to inspect and see the records. If that happens, nothing will come of it. We do not have the personnel to go there and check and, you know, it could result in corruption again. I'm not there, we aren't. That's their role, put an inspector there and just give [them] something. Whether or not it's accurate because I know how the system operates. I've been in government for a long time, add that up, it’s 40 years. Because my time as a prosecutor was a good 10 years, don't try to fool me like that.

That's why tomorrow I will… Follow the law, or I will inspect and criticize you. Choose. No more inspections, inspection only if there’s a violation. I do not need to… Just let the workers say that they will leave after five months, we'll have a deal, I mean, I do not care.

As I said: in this presidency I am wagering, I’m putting at stake, at stake, my honor, my life, and the presidency itself. I will have to use your camps. Because… It’s only the military who has a vast reservation here with these lands.

I’m just asking for one hectare of land, after all, I’ve already enclosed it with barbed wire. I will build these rehab centers, because these three million [people] will return to the streets, they will rob and kill because they need their fix for the day. I’ve noticed that crime has decreased a bit because everyone is afraid.

I’d like to remind you again, that this is a — I’m not — what am I, Commander-in-Chief? Me, even I am stunned, Commander-in-Chief? You're being mischievous. I will be with you, I will support you and you will have everything that you will need to destroy the enemy.

Kerry and I talked, about human rights, ‘I have a job to do, let us go to another topic’ ‘the money?’ Yes, 32 [million], ‘Ah, I give you, 32 million dollars’. So I said to Delfin Lorenzana, ‘What is your priority?’ Because our performance is good in Sulu and I am impressed with what we have accomplished. So buy more, buy a lot more.’

So I have said my piece, this is also like my farewell to General Rolly. Because he is already a General. And for the others who are here, so, you just handle them. But from the time, I’d like to be with you. Thank you.