Kindly sit down. Thank you.

I’ll dispense with the acknowledgements [of our ?] presence. We all know each other here. And, you know I was for the longest time Mayor of Davao City. A good 23 years. That’s why I feel uneasy when you stand up, even during the National Security Council meetings.

I’m used to… so I’d rather you address me as Mayor because it sounds better. The President, sometimes… I feel uncomfortable. I am not used to this kind of life.

You know, in the old days, I said, I was the weeping boy. Everything, even the extrajudicial killings. [Father?] who would want to kill a person? We cannot build a nation over the dead bodies of our own citizens.

The problem is everyone was given a gun, everybody was holding a licensed gun. Criminality became fashionable. Because… their style back then in Davao was: they would climb into a house. The rich, they would hold hostage, and demand ransom. It might not be given immediately because your money is in the bank. And you know in the bank you cannot withdraw one million, two million, three million at one time to give to the kidnappers. So they stayed in the house. They just while away their time, raping the wife, raping the maids and the daughters.

So that was the start of my [rage?] regarding criminality. Well, I am a prosecutor. Imagine, when it comes to drugs, that's what happens. They rape children. They kill the fathers. They punch the mothers if they don't give money. You all know that. They steal.

Then, came the problem of criminality. Because they have to have the fix everyday, they get it from other people. So they wanted money to come to their hands at the expense of somebody else’s life. Because that’s why they stab people here, hold up people there, hold up everywhere. Until such time that it became a [vogue?], a fad for criminals to get high first. Whatever their professions. What else are they, in the practice. Almost everyone is shooting up because they are no longer afraid. You lose the sense of fear when you are on shabu.

Ang problema niyan, sabi ng mga forensics, one year of using shabu almost everyday would shrink the brain of a person. Nandito ba si PDEA? Sid, maupo ka lang. You just join us, dito. He’s General Lapeña who’s our PDEA. He was my chief of police many years ago. He earned his force in Davao while also working as special council. Mga junior officers  sila. He coasted along to be my chief of police and [RT?]. Together with, si Delfin Lorenzana, the Secretary of Defense. He was assigned there. He brought in the first… second ranger scout rangers sa Davao, Martial Law years.

So ngayon, I was appalled by the misery and agony. Sabi ng PDEA three years, two years ago, that there are three million addicts in this country. So that’s why we have this serious problem. Kinausap ko ‘yung congressman, mag-tulong kayo because ang — Sa kampanya ko, I was never a serious and [was more?] of a man when I was campaigning and I was saying: “Do not destroy the youth of this land.”

Now, I cannot divulge to you everything that transpired or what was given to us by the security agencies all over the world. But, if you are asking me now. “Why is,” they say, “Duterte only going after the small fish? Where are the big fish? Why the poor?”

There are no big fish here. Because there were some before. But when they… because they have these mansions and cars, enjoying life. But when they realized that their time was running out, they scattered. Now, they are using modern technology. They have this high, refined digital map. He will give the orders to his lieutenants here. He will just say, look at the map. “Okay, focus on Tondo, or Pandacan, or here. Drop it around there… then get the money, there’s someone parked there. Get that woman, just take the payment.”

So, how are we supposed to deal with the problem? I already said… I wanted to confront them. Not just here. It’s everywhere, in Asia. That’s why, we have a blank there regarding who the drug lords are, they have no faces because they are out of the country. I would need an international warrant of arrest to arrest or go to war. But can we afford it? No one will—

So here, you know, let me, I said — You might be offended. My grandfather was Chinese. Pure Chinese — Lam. My mother, Maranao. It’s like this, the Chinese, they’re okay with wholesale, wholesale. Those who profit. The profit is small but if your collection from the entire Pandacan and Tondo, at the end of the day, is millions.

That’s why they see it, he said cradling a dead cadaver there. They’ll even make a scene. Because there is the apparatus. Unless I destroy the apparatus, they will have a problem. Three presidents from now would not be able to solve it. Money is just too corrosive. So they can buy, you know, judges, fiscals, the police, mayors, governors, that’s just how it is, money.

And one time, there was this operation in Davao. You know he said: “Just keep me alive, and the two women. We’ll deliver you 500 million.” If you’re just a police officer, your salary even as a prosecutor, even as a judge. If you’re given 200 million for the case or 50 million. They will really fall for it.

You know, I’ve been telling you. I am no longer in politics. I cannot hanker for more, I am already president. But in this fight, I will stake my honor, my life and the presidency. Impeach? Go ahead, impeach. At least I will be free. Or if I am impeached, then I will leave. That’s it. I have no problem with that. I have no illusions about this… In the first place, I didn’t even want to run. That’s why I said: I was unfortunate. Here I am. I have a big problem. Help me. That’s why I said, I will be frank, I am not into… I will finish this. I will finish it. I was the one who reached this point. You… That’s what’s difficult.

This… it’s not a… it’s a drug problem. It’s a drug crisis. 300… 170,000 surrenderees. Is that a police problem? The police cannot solve it. They are into it. Mind you, that didn’t come from us, it’s intrigue, it came from an intercept. A country friend of ours provided us the intercept. I can’t even watch it. I have to go to every policeman. This is true.

Because you know… you were educated there at PMA. The government’s expense, four years. When you become an officer, you are given a rank, a career and an honorable name. Then until, then you waste everything by committing treason against your own country.

I cannot show you because… it’s a matter of security. But just imagine I bring it there and I will give you the matrix of how it’s being played. So, transshipment then they cook it here. Now, there isn’t much anymore because many have really died.

This serious problem now reaching millions. It's good you are here and will help. So I’ve been trying to figure out how I can cope up with the problem. And then let me tell you: Francis, if you are pointed at, run for president. There’s… What will you replace it with?

I was just fooled because… I wanted to punch the — Until, just until I sat down on my first day, before I was proclaimed in Davao, until three, four o'clock.

Now — started at 3 o’clock. Then when I got home, I’ll just [barge?] in and sleep. Everything is gone. You’re tired, the problem. Then I asked about the salary, 130 — It would have been better if I remained a mayor. That’s all there is to it. I don’t even know if I still have an allowance here or not. I can’t ask. I don’t have anyone to ask. I’ll go up there. There’s — True, you know that? What’s really pushing me to move is my love for my country. I really love my country and everybody knows it.

There’s a huge problem. The enormity and the dimension of which has never been shown in the past in this country. Unfortunately for us, we were the ones who encountered it. Me. You know — What should I say? No, you know that is bad. What am I, a priest?

Because in this country, you know that. Because you are lawyers. The essence of fear to violate a law is gone. Because it can be bought. With the short, corrosive effect of money, it can be bought, sad to say, even at the highest levels. The problem will not end because there are protectors. They themselves are the ones cooking it up. Now, it’s no longer happening because the big-time players know they will really be taken down. So they scattered.

But, the problem is with the state of technology now, they can use that, that easy. So ask around, even here in our matrix, the names are blank… it’s the faces. The names are there. I don’t know if it’s really the… they’re using the real name. This fight is difficult. That’s why it’s really timely that you come here because I knew or I know that there is not so much space. That’s why I said to the military, the Armed Forces, to open up their camps.

Because the military has the large reservations. Open up your camps and I will [seat?] something there. Like barracks style… The recalcitrant or those guys who really don’t want to be imprisoned or are no longer of service to humanity because they are — Let’s just send them there.

We just have to control their flow of movement. What’s painful is that even the brightest of our children are into drugs. They are being victimized. What I said is the sense of accountability. So, how do you do it? Destroy the apparatus. Until it’s exhausted, there’s nothing you can do. You, can you do something? How many of you are there now, surrenderees? Can you do anything about it there?

And let me put it bluntly to you, what can you do? Enter rehab. They come out the same way. So, in the spirit of, you know, I said we cannot build a nation by killing people over the bodies of your fellow citizens.

But I’ll have to control. So, if they are already broken, you have to check with them if they can really be resuscitated, as they say. Just put them there. Anyway, we don’t need any legal basis. The legal basis is we take him in for his own protection. That’s why we are allowed to arrest insane people. For compulsory confinement. Why? It is to protect him from harm and to protect the public. But eventually they have to move out.

Chief of Staff, sir, I assure you that just try to help us for the time being, but until such time that we’ll be able to build really ’yung parang talagang rehab centers all over the country. And it would take time and money.

But as a stopgap measure, just to come up with something that’s viable, just put them in the camps for now. High security only. That’s… good. Even if they get scared. For the meantime while they are in rehab. So we have to spend so much on doctors. I know that because I have a rehab facility in Davao. It’s a 50-bed capacity. I established it, because they say I kill children. Don’t believe it. Even if I wanted to, if I’m given that right, I cannot kill children and women, while we don’t have space. Because in the morning, they have to, you know, exercise, that’s part of the rehab. But what I saw was the most—

Because in the morning, they have to, you know, exercise, that’s part of the rehab. But what I saw was the most. I mean Senator Sotto had a good idea for this rehabilitation.

But, I saw the most— The ones who really stuck with it, it was based on faith. Those who joined… Most of those I saw in Davao, okay. Born again… They, they and they are somewhat managing… to win daily away from drugs.

The others, none. The technical, technical teaching, they have none. So that’s my problem. I… so much in… but I said I have to destroy the apparatus and it’s a very cruel game in this world that you earn a living at the expense of your fellowmen.

If you harm my child, girl or boy, that’s it, that’s it, they are no longer useful. Should you be deprived of a future, you know why. We are not rich. When we get old, we have to be with our – like the Chinese, Filipino. They will be the ones selling medicine, they will be the ones feeding you. Nothing, really nothing, we are no longer useful in this world and you place in jeopardy my very own existence.

They might kill me, my child, or you deprive me of a future life. Because you there, most of those I see. Well, one of them said, build a home for the aged. I have a home for the aged. My expense is 33 million. They have a comfortable life, many have finished their studies. All have — I just don’t like gambling. They have TV everything, but I don’t like that, even card games. I don’t like betting, there’s nothing else, but it’s pitiful. We are hesitant. Let’s go to a home for the aged. I still have to travel to Tarlac because I’m not known… Davao, it’s pitiful for… there’s Rody. It’s just there—

Where will we go? Not to our child. But now, if you spiritually kill my child, where will I go?

So, actually we are all threatened. We just don't know it. Just imagine, you have two children. If you have a child who is an addict in your house, you will have a problem for all time. Many people there, couples separate. Do you know why? They start to blame each other. Then they separate. Like when you lose a child. Some people, if you cannot handle the agony, you and your spouse will separate. Because the other girl would always say: “It’s your fault.” It’s not easy to lose a child. Dead or… it’s not easy to lose a child. They lose their minds.

So, actually it’s our very existence that is at stake here. That’s why I said, I repeat: I will stake my honor, my life, even the presidency. I can let go of this. That’s why I’ve offered, I offered to Congress, if you can fast track the federal set-up, so that it would bring peace to Mindanao particularly.

I will deal with the Abu Sayyaf later on. It’s closely connected also with the aspiration of the Moro people. This historical injustice… , I said, quickly do… then you have a— My advice to you guys is do not go for a pure parliament. We’re finished. This is not a country without… everyone following the law.

We have sadly and without offending my race, we have not reached that kind of level of civilization. It's just… but you have to maintain the institution or the presidency.

My advice is copy, copy the French set-up. We have to have because Filipinos really want to vote for a President. You can’t take that away from them. So even if they don’t have [anything]. Look at what’s important in the elections. You’d really see, except for… you yourself as mayor. Those senators and others, they lost their significance, right? Sometimes they just say… it’s up to whoever, if you don’t like [someone], if you don’t want to vote, then don’t.

We take for granted that they will choose their own. We don’t force [the idea of]… this senator, he’s nothing anymore. But you, the president and the mayor, that’s what you make sure of. The councilor, he can lose, he can win. It depends on his luck in life. That’s how it is. So maintain the… if they can shorten the proceedings, you have a Constitution that’s federal. In three or two years, then you have to elect a president. Of course that would automatically, legally, I would no longer be eligible, so I will offer to resign, two years, if you have the federal setup, I would resign as President. Three years, I’m gone, four years, thank goodness. And it would be really a… when I work… do not be, do not feel short changed. My will to, to work is there. But if you ask me if I’m happy, I am not. It’s a lonely [situation], when I go home it’s work, then I’m woken up [the President knocks] “Sir, wake up sir because it’s three in the morning…”

Minsan, when my father died and there was a temporary interruption sa — There were times na naglalakad ako at umiiyak ako pero sikreto lang… na I know that it’s the life, ganoon talaga ang buhay. But again, it’s getting late I, I would like to repeat my song, mahirap talaga ito mabigat. I would like also to thank Allan for expediting my sharing with you this moment.

Have you eaten? There’s a little space now, right? Go ahead and slice [something]… We haven’t eaten yet. But, if there’s anything, I no longer have politics. I can’t really… I’m already in [a certain position]. I will never engage in — Except politically, maybe during election time. But if you approach me about a problem, don’t hesitate. There’s no really reason for you to avoid me. I’m done. I’m finished.

I believe it's true because of Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana. When I gave the order, the following day there was already a folder, that's how… and what I wanted was the military. You know, do not hesitate to use the military, the police, and all government [forces]. But you can rely on them in terms of everything… it’s only the military and the police. Because with the military, when you go to camp, you say: “Where is your CO?” “He’s not here.” “Who’s the second in command?” “Okay, I need someone—Without…” That’s why I increased their salaries. Without any hesitation, if you say anywhere… Mamasapano, you go there and die. Nothing. Nothing, that’s them.

I said: My justification is I cannot run a country with a corrupt police. Stop constantly asking for things here and there and accepting drugs. I said: At least they have something, just take it slowly, twice you [will get it], I said. That was a campaign promise. Why? Because if not, you’re dead.

The difficult part is the starting salary, the entry level is 14,000 [pesos]. If you're here in Manila, how will you feed your family? That’s how it is. That’s really… if you don’t yet grasp the dimensions of the problem, there’s really nothing you can do.

I will help you. Because do not, do not… Do not mix politics into your thinking, politics.

I am the person who, when shaking hands with me, or saying “[Adre?], I surrender, I’ve lost, I’m down, it’s okay.”