My Filipino brothers and sisters, the first thing I would like to say is I would like to thank the government, the nation of Laos for hosting you here, giving you the chance for a livelihood and protecting you. Thank you to the government of Laos, the Laotians. We deeply appreciate the space you made for my countrymen.

My companion is here, our Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Perfecto Yasay. Jun, could you–? And of course the others, they’re behind because of protocol, we will go first. I was only with my aide, Bong Go, he was with me in the vehicle. You can call him anytime if you have, well, problems with our— yours here and you want to reach my office.

Now, despite the bombing in Davao, I had to come here. One is to show that they cannot force us to our knees to postpone it because of them. Because in the end, in the fullness of God’s time, there will truly be a reckoning. And there will be change. I’m just about two months plus, three. Just give me time and I’ll fix the country.

As I have promised you, there will be a clean government and it will be clean. And whether inside or outside the country, I assure you, when you return home, the system will be different and I would like to assure you that as a returning Filipino citizen, you will be accorded with the respect and dignity of a Filipino worker.

That is the first thing to go. I really don’t know how those who don’t believe it, I’ve already had many resign from the LTO and LTFRB and there will be a continuing purge, a real cleaning. I’m just taking my time so that they can prepare and I’ll tell you, I’ll give you two months, maybe you save your salary because you are out of government.

I will really do that and you can see, the people I talked to, those guys, all Filipinos, all good men who joined my government.

You from Davao, you know Jun Yasay. He is from Davao, he is very good, he is a professor of Law at universities in America. He migrated there many years ago because during martial law days, he was also wanted, he seemed like an activist and we shared the same room, during our student days. I was taking Law at San Beda and he was at UP in Padre Faura. So, I got him because he is bright. Really bright.

Then you have the, well, he’s not here, the caretaker, si Medialdea. He’s the Executive Secretary. Marami pa hong dadating. I brought along with me, si Defense Secretary. He used to be assigned there I Mindanao many years ago when I was mayor and he brought the 2 nd Ranger battalion with him in his assignments. Magkaibigan po kami, he is a military man; he is good; he is honest and he will serve the country well.

Here is Ramos, our— I fell asleep on the flight. Secretary Lopez, DTI. He takes care of these medium and small industries. These are the ones from Go Negosyo if you caught them, he and Joey Concepcion, they were the ones so I got them.

Here with us is Secretary Andanar of our media. He used to be working with GMA. He transferred to me. Is everyone here already? And Sonny Dominguez, my childhood friend and also from Davao. He was the Secretary of Agriculture during the time of Cory Aquino. He was once upon a time president of PAL, Philippine Airlines.

I’m not good, because my operation is no longer very good. I’m old. Secretary Esperon is here, he is the National Security Adviser. Who else is—? Of course, the Undersecretary for Local Government, General Coy. He was also assigned in Davao once upon a time. The DS[WD], Judy Taguiwalo. There. The congressmen are afraid of her because— they belong to the left, like our perception of politics. Left and right, they are leftists like me before, once upon a time.

This government of mine, I invited everyone. They call them the Communist Party of the Philippines but they are not actually members, they are just in their socialist dimension. So we are all mixed up.

I’m talking with the NDF/NPA/CPP, and the Moro National Liberation Front and the Moro—MILF. Oh, Aiza Seguerra is in the National Youth Commission. Aiza, where are you? I saw you here earlier. I’m sorry I cannot, I do not, I cannot memorize you anymore. I am also excited.

But anyway, the Cabinet members who would make the difference in our work now are here. We are here to work with the ASEAN and next year, we will be the host so they will be the ones coming here.

Then again, I would like, for the second time, pasalamat ako sa Laos for taking care of the Filipinos here and protecting them. It is with gratitude that I bow to you being an Asian also.

Now, the bombing in Davao was in retaliation for the almost total all-out operation. You know, if I didn’t do that, we are being slapped everyday, almost. They would take tourists hostage or kidnap people, then ask for money and if it isn’t given or is given and they pass it on to another group, they add to it and they kill them in front of the world.

As a country, a sovereign state, I cannot simply allow that. And itong bombing has been going on ever since. Kayong mga taga- Davao, if you would care to remember, we had this problem with them early in the 70s and they bombed the Catholic church, the Cathedral, twice during Mayor Santos’ time and mine, 1989. Then ang airport, simbahan, terminal, those were retaliations but those are also the sacrifice that we have to bear.

You know, I am asking you, I am very sad. I share the grief of those who died. But those were just collateral damage, retaliation. But that will not stop us because I cannot go to them and say, ‘please stop and I am on bended knee, kneeling.’ I carry the burden of a country, a sovereign state and at all costs, I must uphold the dignity and the integrity of our country.

Give me a little time. I’m just maybe two months, three months. I already have a conflict there with human rights and of course with—

You know, they didn't understand the problem. I was the favorite whipping boy of human rights and you all know that. When I was mayor, the town, my city, was really chaotic. You people from Davao, you know that. So I was at the crossroads of deciding whether I will preside over the affairs of the city that is peaceful or choose chaos.

So I gave everybody the chance. I talked to the left, the NPA and they left Davao but I also talked to the criminals, even the drug addicts, everyone, I said: 'leave Davao because I will kill you if you are here.'

Now, those who left are alive. They are in Manila, in Cebu, they continue to steal there. Davao is really peaceful except for a terroristic activity once in a while, you can go about. Go home now and nobody, no criminals, no hold-uppers, drug pushers, almost all are gone. Just a little more time to eliminate them all.

But let me state my case. They will pay. Let them pay. How many lives did they kill, 15? Well, give me time. When the time comes, I will really crush all of you. You watch me. After all, you saw how I operate. I am not bragging but I have this time of running a governance for, I’ve been 23 years mayor of Davao City.

I was once a congressman and the vice mayor of my daughter. The one who punched someone, you saw that on… that’s the mayor now so they should also be careful. She has a very short fuse…I don’t know, she’s ill-tempered. She doesn’t forgive easily either. So that’s how it is.

But on the other side, except for this rebellion going on, if I will succeed with my talks with the Communist Party of the Philippines. If I am successful, by the grace of God, with the MI and the MN, I promise you, I will crush that rebellion. I will cut down all the roots there to the last. They also started it. I am not bragging.

And let it be known to them that I will retaliate. I cannot allow that to happen. Whatever you do to your fellow human being, I will do to you. That’s what other countries with human rights don’t understand. They just talk and talk.

I don’t want to name that country— but you know what country it is. It’s alright with hypocrites. But for me, if you do something, you pay. You can’t just get away with debts using human rights. I don’t want that. Not that. Pay because those are two principles in criminal law.

[Deposit ivesture?] means that you can rehabilitate a criminal. I dare you to say the contrary. These guys are beyond redemption. It’s over. ISIS, you see it there in the Middle East. They’ve burned 20 young girls for refusing to have sex. What— if you put someone like that in front of me.

Do you know I am capable of eating a person? I will really open your body, give me vinegar and salt, and I will eat you. Yes, it’s true. You, if you really anger me to the extreme, I can eat a person, just give me vinegar and salt, and I will eat you in front of them.

I told the Bisaya, there is no limit to revenge. I will not lend money. Go ahead, keep bombing. When the time comes, I will eat you in front of people. I will devour you and if I have to erase you, I want— I said, afterwards, not even a coconut will be standing there. Not a single coconut will be standing there. So that’s how it is.

And I would also ask for your understanding that we are still in the process of eradicating drugs. Many have died. Those who said they were killed by the police, that’s true. Others were salvaged. That’s true but not by us. Why are you pointing the finger at me?

So let me say, you don’t want to believe me. Believe me if I say I was the one— you are destroying the Filipino people. If I relent, if I stop, if I renege in these commitments, I would have compromised the next generation of the Filipino.

Our country is broken and they will continue and continue. If I do not interdict, if I don’t stop this now, nobody can. I am not insulting anyone. Look at the picture of Manila politics. Who’s there? Who can be President? Do that. Can they, eat people? Yes. Me, if you anger me, truthfully. I will eat you alive. Raw. That’s how I am, I don’t know, maybe my grandmother was a Moro, Maranao. Maybe my father was a *wakwak*—

So we are good. We are trying to stop the very tough corruption. Many in the BIR have been removed, even those who— resigned.

When I was running, I told the generals, resign because you are involved in drugs. He’s still alive. So if you have time, your friend—

You know, President Ramos went to Davao 4 times, not 3 times. Four. Then the first time, he didn’t show anything, he just said, you must run because it’s about time that Mindanao would have its own president.

That was the only conversation, it was limited. And you can ask him, Ramos is still alive. The second time, he was strongly urging me to run. He said, ‘you are the only one who can stop this, depending on how.’ Then he showed me a list of— they were already there, generals— involved in drugs. Even the police, it was that thick, I haven’t released the others yet because I’m still validating them.

He said, ‘if you do not run, who will we run?’ I said, ‘you sir? Don’t involve me because I have no money and I’m not big time. I’m just small time.’

He said, “No. if you keep on refusing, this country will go to the dogs.” He showed me, what can you do with this? I said, I saw the generals, like that. That wasn’t mine. Even the one with De Leila, that wasn’t mine.

I’m not that— have you seen it? Well, at least, she’s a performer. The others just talk, just present like that, with her, at least she’s active. Well, is the video there?

The third time, this was in Davao. I said, ‘I have no money.’ He came back with a tennis bag. He said, “Here, I solicited money from my friends. I don’t have money because I’m retired too. There.”

When Bong and I opened it after he left, it was P5-million. But I said, ‘whose is this, sir?’ “It’s just a mix of everything.” So I couldn’t put it in the election returns, from whom it came. It was anonymous, he didn’t want to say. He said, that’s not really my money so he pressured me.

October 16, I didn’t file. The substitution was approaching, he really bothered me every day. So I said, “okay sir, okay sir.” I ran.

I didn't think that, I have no party, I mean PDP is a little bit moribund, it's no longer moving. But I have no governor except for three provinces, that's it. I have no governor, I have no barangay captain in Luzon, not even a councilor and yet, I won by a big majority. Sixteen million plus, six of which was really my margin from my nearest opponent. So they don't know me.

What does that message mean? There has to be a message in the result of the election. There is something which the people would want to convey to me, to do something about it. So as far as I know, during the election I said, I will end corruption, drugs, and even this— that includes the Abu Sayyaf. So that— barbaric— extremely— why do you have to—

Why is that? Are you showing these men here to scare them? That's it, we will all die anyway. God. Even them. My message to the Filipinos, don't be afraid to die. People will really die. When? Only God knows that. We have no, we don’t have that refuge but by what manner? Well, choose what kind of— how it is done, for what reason, but when?

Tayong mga Kristiyanos. I am a Christian, that’s the religion of my father. We can only say na God has promised us eternal life. Even in our prayers, God says, “He will come to judge the living and the dead.”

So he will return to the world and judge life, both the living and the dead. Maybe the dead will rise, maybe we will all run in fear. Well anyway, that is what God says. As a Christian, we were raised like that, “He will come to judge the living and the dead.”

When is that? Only God can tell us but perhaps the most certain thing is, this planet will come to an end, that's for sure. Someday, it’s gonna be just like a stone whirling around the solar system, when we will die.

You shouldn't. Because you who are courageous, would you think that you’d have the guts to go over so many thousands of miles to be here to work? And you are brave. That's why I salute you.

That's why I bowed to you because those people who have that courage, the foresight and vision to go out of this country to seek better, greener pastures. I admire you and one of those things is really the uncertain— you might die there, you might have an accident. But do not be afraid of that, take it from me, I am Pastor Duterte.

From now on, our religion— is there a priest here? Ah, a priest like [pangasaba?]. What I really don’t like is scaring you. When we were young, they would say we'll go to hell, we'll go to hell, whatever hell burns with—

But you know, there are things which the Catholic Church must change or else, it will — by the end of this three decades from now, it becomes irrelevant. Just go to the new one, the Church of Duterte, it’s good.

There are no prohibitions. Drink, go ahead and drink. Women, oh, go ahead until your husband kills you. It’s easy to kill a husband, your husband, legally. Just add seasoning, especially for those from the Visayas. Salty, cheap, is it salty? Is it the translation? Add two extra spoonfuls to his food, give it to him. In two years’ time, his kidneys will fail. Don’t bother with dialysis, tell him, ‘that’s probably your luck.’

Well anyway, joking aside, let’s have—I’d like to share, to break bread with you tonight and I hope you’d make it good; that we are ready, si Yasay, Secretary Yasay is—nandito, dumating si Senator Cayetano. Yan mahusay rin. Sayang pero anyway, he will still be president. If he aspires for the presidency, I’ll give him my support and I say it now.

That’s good that they, they will face Obama, they are both American. His mother is American. At least the president before was fair-skinned. So as long as I’m here, let’s eat. I said, we are ready. I have the 8888. That’s a 24-hour facility where you can call.

I’m sorry, they’re still here, I saw Secretary Dureza and Secretary Abella, the spokesman. The Secretary of Defense, he’s from Cotabato.

Who else is handsome? Oh, Secretary Esperon. Chief of Staff of—during President Gloria’s time, he was the National Security— ah no, Chief of Staff. I got him as National Security Adviser. So we’re pretty much complete. Did I mention everything? Except for Judy and oh, that Maverick, come here. When he opens his mouth, instead of putting to close a controversy, he lets it be a big issue. Sal Panelo, he’s from Bicol. So he’s here, all accounted for.

I don’t see these other staff, but we have companions, our aides, but anyway, you’ll see them.

After this we can have— then we have to go home because tomorrow, it’s too early, right? Eight o’clock. Goodness gracious, I said. That’s why in Davao, I start in the afternoon. Usually in the afternoon. Around 2 pm then until 12 midnight. The reason for going in the morning is because we have to abide by the protocol of the place, we have to respect their wishes.

So that’s it and I am very happy to see all of you in good health. I hope the single women, there are many single women here. None? We’ve run out of supply ah. We’ll send more here. May you settle here and if it’s time to get married— you’re good here, Laos is a very good country. It’s very close to Thailand. It’s almost like our fellow countrymen because we look almost, the Asian’s tag is almost the same.

So to the President and the Prime Minister and to all the people of Laos, maraming salamat po.

Thank you very much.