Kindly sit down. Thank you.

Still here? Is … still here? You join us now.

Senate President Aquilino Pimentel III; Secretary Delfin Lorenzana; Secretary Hermogenes Esperon, Jr.; General Ricardo Visaya; our brave soldiers who have been wounded in action; the officers and men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; my fellow workers in government; my beloved countrymen.

You know, soldiers, I was a guest earlier at the Day of Valor in Fort Bonifacio and while I was proceeding there by helicopter, I was fetched from the Palace of the People. I don’t like calling it “Malacañan.” You know why? It’s a name adopted by the Spaniards. It has a very strong imperialist undertone. I do not. It’s not that we have a problem, but I’m just being Filipino, I’m not Spanish. I wanted it to be called the People’s Palace. Because in Davao, there’s a large park there, we had a hard time looking for a name. And I simply said, call it the “People’s Park.” I have no desire other than for my country, the Philippines.

In the chopper, I was thinking about what to say to you. Jerome, what, I’m not good at you know, Tagalog. I still have to grapple with words. So let me just say it in English.

I was trying to put my mind in the proper perspective of talking to soldiers but you know, the one thing that I really like was not even a soldier.

During the Japanese occupation, they arrested Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos and he was brought to Malabang with his family. But on one occasion there, it seemed like a festival, he was made to swear to the Japanese flag. And Justice Abad Santos said, “No way. No way will I do that.” And there weren’t any people there. History records it like this:

His son cried, the son cried and begged his father, “Father, just agree, there’s no one here, what’s the big deal? It’s just a simple thing, why would you sacrifice yourself?” And you know what? His answer to his son was this, “You know son, do not suggest to me a thing which would be treason to my country.” He said, don’t cry for me because not all Filipinos, not all Filipinos are given that rare chance to die for his country.

That is what you should remember. That is my favorite and also of Rizal. But this, I told you, not all Filipinos were given this opportunity. How I wish I would hear my son say something to me on the same, similar, or parallel and I could tell him, “Thank you. Be grateful that you were given the chance to have me die for my country.”

I’m not a soldier, I don’t know where I’m going but that’s how it is. We all have something we follow whether you like it or not, there is always a day for you. So you who managed to slip through, it means to say, “fight again.”

But this, I can assure you: My Presidency will take care of you, you have nothing to worry about.

Jerome, I told him to study braille. Do you know Jerome Bocelli? Singer? Yeah. He is blind. Well he has a strong spirit but because his father wanted him to be a lawyer, he studied at the school for the blind, he finished law. He is a lawyer, the one who sings with a beautiful voice. A handsome man. He finished law because that was what his father wanted him to be.

But after he became a lawyer, he granted his father’s wish, he went back to singing. Next to a fool are all these beautiful female singers now, sometimes with their arms around him, it’s enviable.

You know, there is a concert with Sarah Brightman, look for it, that woman has a very high voice.

By the way, before I forget really, I brought with me, you asked for it Jerome and your friend, you asked for a laptop? Oh, the laptop is here. Eat first, maybe you’ll just keep playing with the laptop, that’s what everyone does. Where are the two? Give it to him and everything else.

And maybe even a car, include that too. Where’s the other one? Oh, you? Oh. And I also brought, this is an electric wheelchair. Don’t bump it. Don’t use it on the stairs either. Stay downstairs. It’s an electric wheelchair. And who else wants something, even for a small wound on the knee, you just want to go for a ride, there, drive it. But he has to learn, it’s just like driving. Like a steering wheel. But it’s a… Where is it… the wheelchair is behind. Return it to your doctor, tell him it’s ugly. There, drive it, like a steering wheel, just maneuver it like that. So let’s not give a speech, let’s just chat.

Be careful. Be careful. Assist him/her. No, no, no, no. Just wait for that, you will be ready for that.

Control it, assist him/her. Where’s the technician?

What is this, Bong? Are we running now or…? You might get electrocuted in the rear, it might double our problem here. Ah, watch out now, ha? Just, move it forward.

Let it be, it’s just the Secretary and the Senate President who… then on the side, that’s it, that’s it, okay. He/She is used to this.

You see how he/she squeezes something, like what? Sit down there, just listen.

So, the thing is, you know, we know how to pay our debt of gratitude. All of you, actually, you are all heroes. There’s no problem with that. Most of you will go back. Girme is here. Girme Gutierrez. He/She is the owner of Trust Trade. He/She said, the soldiers there, he/she has a proposal. He/She will give you guns, Gloc 30 because of Du30, Gloc 30, he/she will give all of you. Free.

He is one honest person, he no longer buys cheap guns like others. Don’t tell that, or he might get angry. That’s only in Danao.

So I have, let’s not make speeches here. What I really plan to do is to release what I mentioned earlier. Well, the P4.6-billion is already for release to the widows and the retired generals, but for you, we will continue the assistance and financial aid. Like you, even if you return to service, you have a Gloc.

If the medal is taking too long, the promotion, we can hurry up Secretary Lorenzana, speed things up so you can be promoted.

Can you, Delfin, directly make them all generals? Let's not delay this any further. If you consider me a hero, then make me a general. In the sight of the Filipino people, you are all generals.

That's why I, when I salute you wounded in action, I say I am saluting you. So you lower your hand first. That's my respect for you. Others don't do that but then I, I usually bow in any crowd, I bow. But to salute the wounded, I am really the first to say, “I salute you, sir.”

Then if you can't lower your hand, one soldier and I just looked at each other. I said, what should we do here?

He felt embarrassed, out of respect perhaps, he felt embarrassed. I said, “Lower your hand now.” I wasn't the first to lower my hand. I said, “I won't lower my hand either.” Both of us were acting crazy. Lower yours.

What's important, what bothers you especially those of you with families, your children. I know that. Anyone. We, one day in our lives, that's just it, it's there. If you survive, you survive, if you reach valor there if you want it but your problem is your family so I know that.

I have a program for everyone. Well of course, I promised you next year. Senator is here. Don't let it be obvious that I'm setting you up but I want you to promise us, that the salaries of all police and soldiers will be doubled and I will start the, the state university or the nearest, the national high school, accommodate them all for those things. Your children will really be trained.

Or if they are exceptionally bright, they can choose the, we’ll have a special category for those with IQs reaching 102, 101. They are really bright so it's a waste if they aren't used by the country. So they will enjoy scholarships. That's long term. I'll include that now. I mean trust, I am the President. So that's what I can— so education is free from kindergarten to college.

So that's okay. Go back, let fate decide, it's okay after all, so okay. Just prioritize the safety of your family. We all know, you all know. When you enter as a soldier, you know that one day you will definitely be hit. And the enemy will be hit too. What's important is that you have to serve the country well, even if you get wounded and some even commit suicide. I have great respect for all of you, that's why I salute. Other presidents don't do that, but that's my respect for you. Again.

So that's what we should talk about: the life of a soldier. Because if you enter war every day and you survive, you have no problem, don't overthink it. Your morale will be high, especially if you score a lot of victories.

But at times, don't always say it's you, it's always us. There will really be accidents. So there’s always a drawback somewhere when there’s fighting. But I assure you about what happens to a soldier when he gets wounded or is seriously hit.

Like Jerome, I want him to study braille because if he masters it and even someone reads books to him, the Supreme Court might consider letting him answer orally. Just read to him what was given to the bar examinees because if you complete it, I will talk to my alma mater, San Beda. I will enroll you in the College of Law.

Learn to sing like Bocelli so we can get the good ones there. They'll even be holding onto you. Look, when you know how to sing. So I want you to go further, to travel another mile in life. Study hard, I'm telling you, you're lucky, you've already seen, you're not blind yet.

Is everything you saw complete? Did you see them all? Then just hold onto it. It's all the same anyway. When you hold it, you'll know what it is.

Do not be too sentimental about it because there is life after being wounded, so everyone has their own luck. God gave that to you. Really, it’s only God that can answer you. I cannot, but I am sure that we are here. We will not abandon you.

When I was mayor in Davao, that's why look at Davao, it's beautiful. They're all dead, but it's beautiful. The death of those sons of bitches, what a nuisance.

I told them, really, criminals, get out of here. Drug addicts, get out of here. All of you get out or I will kill you.

When Secretary Goy was city director, Lito, they all died. They were all wiped out there. We all have a mandate, even them.

Do you know they were recommended for dismissal? 27 police officers. That's why I got upset, I said, I won't allow it. I won't allow soldiers, police, to go to jail for doing their job? That's nonsense. Don't be afraid, just do your job. It only takes my signature, whatever, pardon. It's there in the Constitution. True. Just follow orders, don't be like the others. Whatever you are told to do, do it at work, you won't have any problems.

File a case, will you lose in court? It's easy. Get that from Bong, it's already signed, that thick. I already signed that before, pardon here, pardon there, damn it. Annoying.

Just work, work. You are all protected. Everyone, as long as you are working, you don't have to worry about anything…

If you tell me you were forced to shoot and hit ten beautiful women, I will get angry. Why did you choose the beautiful ones? But the mistake, that doesn't matter. As long as it's in the performance of duty, there is really no problem and to think that even if there isn't, that's not our job. It's good that I heard that. Why did Bato have to wrap the dead? Isn't it the job of a soldier or police officer to make a mummy out of them? That wrapping, you're wasting your time. It only takes one bullet and you know, when you are in a war, in the coming days it will be hard for us to.. But remember, don't go to war with anger.

Professional only. Not like *prrrt* like that. Just one bullet. You save ammo there, that's nonsense, we are the government. Just don't enter war with anger. “Son of a bitch, they're here,” then you'll be in trouble. You begin to, you waste your resources and you are inviting danger. Whatever you were taught in training, but when the time comes, I say we all…

The important thing is, we know your wife is protected. We know how many women you've fathered children with because it's pitiful. So how many wives do you really have? Don't lie to me, just tell me the truth. Because we can help with that too.

Most of them are police, a police officer died, three families sometimes. Because these crazy people have nothing to do but park in those bars. All the beautiful ones, they take them. All compromises, police. Usually, both of their wives cry. Where is Bato? How many does he have, let me ask.

Well anyway, seriously now. Don't you— go back and fight. If you're a soldier, you know, it's like this. You'll be made to choose: are you a soldier? Cross EDSA and then get run over by… Is that the kind of death you want? If I were a soldier, I want to die in a face-to-face firefight. Why would I choose a death at a certain age? I'm a soldier, that's all. I am ready to die. What I'm saying to the government is, don't forget. Because our lives, you offered to our country, the least that we can do, ladies and gentlemen, is really not to neglect. That's family.

The secret is, they give them a psychologist. Family. What will happen to my children?

You haven't even changed your wife yet, change that. I changed mine, twice already. But children, of course, that's not possible. A child is a child. So I'm separated from my wife but I know, it's difficult especially when the one is a man and our child is a girl. We should worry. So disabuse your mind not to think of so much. Concentrate on your rehab. We will take care.

I will create a program. After that, if you really can't handle fieldwork anymore, you can have a very functional and productive life. The important thing is, what will you do from this [if] you can no longer return to the field.

So you must be happy, I'm letting you choose what you want. But family, is protected. By December I think, we will complete the doubling of the salary. That was my promise during the election. Not because I want to deceive you with, “here’s your salary.” I was mayor for 23 years, even ask Secretary Lorenzana. He had artillery then, Gutierrez. The artillery in the province disappeared, one family. Damn it. I said, what kind of thing is that?

So I was there to help the soldiers, he was in a wheelchair, you don't really know where it will fall. If it fell in the house, the people there would be gone, nothing to see. So we were able to fix it. I was always there when you, when they needed me and for as long as God will give me the productive years of my life, I’m 71, I will be in the Presidency to protect you and to pray.

Thank you very much.