Two policemen, either military, police or police. Dalawang ano talaga, taga-gobyerno, araw-araw namamatay in this drive against drugs, the drug industry.

I am here because I want to support, to show the police that they have my support. And, I will help them. I would like to assure everybody, and the police, and the law enforcement, that in their work, if they are charged or get into trouble in the performance of their duties, they be responsible, I will assume all legal and official, whatever, responsibility for their actions.

‘Yun lang ‘yung sa trabaho nila. In the fulfilment or in the exercise of their duties as the security officers of this country. They have my 101 support and I take full responsibility for the things that you would do in obedience to my order.

So, they have that protection and I will not allow any police or military personnel to be imprisoned, just because they are doing their duty. That is what they can expect from me.

And, I’m just thinking that if I hadn’t become President, then we would never have known the widespread nature and dimensions of the addiction of 3.7 million people in this country.

You know, if I… if I cannot interdict or stop this industry, then I would have compromised the next generation, your children. It’s dangerous. Then, we will become a failed state. So if that happens, it would be a pity for the Filipino people.

So, despite or in spite of the criticisms hurled against me, whether true or not, as long as it’s this fight against drugs, it’s mine. Personal. I keep saying that I put at stake my honor, my life, and the presidency itself. Which of those do you think I can let go of.

I am not keen on remaining there… As a matter of fact, if they can hurry up the federal system. In three years, if they want it, when it’s ready, I will resign to give way to a federal system of government.

But this time, I have this problem of a drug industry, growing bigger and bigger. Had it been that… if that was the one who became President, that one general in the police, that one from the military, that was his police aide. So what would happen now?

And even if someone else had won against us, they could directly order… There’s no need to say it, they know when to kill legally, when not. For me, seek them out and destroy them. My order was just the police action.

This is a war. This is a crisis that faces the government, eye to eye here. It stares at us. Really scary. So, I, even if that’s all I can do, I’m okay with it. But this drug industry and these idiots must stop, or else they will die. I can’t do anything about that.

You can see the police. Everyday, everywhere, a police officer dies. That’s why I’m here to underscore my concern for the Filipino. I said the next generation will be compromised by this. It’s not resolved by counting 1,106 bodies or carcasses there. The person is already dead… a carcass.

They are counting the dead. What’s painful about this is that they are counting the dead of gangsters, who have committed a crime against society. The police, even they, are not given [recognition], they can’t even give it to the people, a child whose head was severed.

I am not anybody from the Human Rights [Commission]. You can see their bigotry. They just really want to attack me. But I don’t believe in that.

I am not, I was not, I was not elected President of what? The UN? I was elected by my countrymen. And I will work. Your children in Manila, they need to study, you can’t even walk around. You have stolen the right of these citizens to not be able to walk at night, they are afraid. What is that?

It’s there, hold-ups, drugs. When you get home, there’s a dead body there, drugs. Someone decapitated his mother, drugs. And yet, this idiot Human Rights… including this De Lima. She can no longer… Her life has already been serialized.

If I were De Lima, ladies and gentlemen, I’ll [laughter and applause]. Your life has been, not just life, the innermost of your core as a female is being serialized every day. You should resign. You resign. It’s being shown now, you resign. Or you will have no face. What will you show to women? “Follow me.” Will you say? “This is how to be a woman of the world.”

When I was mayor, she said: “I will prove that Mayor Duterte is the leader of a DDS.” I said: “What is DDS? Davao Development System.” Why do you have to interpret it the wrong way? Who else would want to kill my fellow man?

You think it’s very easy to kill a fellow human being. You build a nation over the bones of your countrymen?

But I have to save, I said, this generation. Otherwise, our society here is already compromised. No good anymore. It’s too widespread. By the millions. So the previous, what, they allowed it to bloom and—

You are thinking now. You are here. You are from Manila. What do you think? What do I think? I’ll read your mind. You are thinking of your family, no one will do anything wrong. Life will lift you up. Before, it happened at night, now it’s happening in broad daylight. Then, murder, rape. [Speaks in Bisaya]

There’s no report from Human Rights. Even to condole and commiserate with the— That’s why… but me, let me just also insert one little… I won in Tacloban so thank you very much. You did not make a mistake.