Secretary Benjamin Diokno, Acting Secretary Ricardo David, Jr., [he was there, in Kuala Lumpur? Oh Indonesia, I’m sorry], Lt. Gen. Glorioso Miranda, Major Service Commanders, Brigadier General Joseph Acosta, the officials, men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, with me in the government, my dear countrymen:

I was really planning to visit you a long time ago but I said because I do not want to travel around, I don’t want to go around on land…

[Kindly give the order of tikas pahinga]

Just relax. Just give me your orders, that’s why I’m here.

So I do not want to travel around, there will be traffic. I feel sorry for the people. Minutes before I pass through, they already close all the corners so you create a traffic congestion at the back exponentially and it would be about two hours, three hours before it is corrected because when you pass through, there will be a scramble again.

So I said, just helicopters. I prioritized the soldiers’ camps. I found time, but I have yet to visit the Veterans.

Now, actually I’m here to show myself. To introduce myself probably but you don’t know me. I am a Visayan. We trace our lineage through my father, my father is Cebuano but my mother is from Mindanao. She is a daughter of a Maranao but her father, is Chinese. But anyway that’s the makeup of my personality.

I’m here to visit you, to share your grief, that… First of all, that’s just life, anyway we shouldn’t blame each other here. We entered this knowing that. But at the same time, I’d like to share your — whatever happiness that you have here. I am here and let us thank Secretary Diokno, he gave you everything you wanted in terms of equipment.

Including a building that you wanted – not to condemn it but it’s no longer suitable for the confinement of soldiers who are hospitalized. I’ll give you a new building then refit it, fix the bathroom, it’s been a long time since it was nice.

I am sure with the years that have passed by, it has — that building has seen a lot of waste around, so we have to condemn it first, refit then — but I’ll give you a new building para rin sa ating mga kasama.

Now, itong ibinigay ko sa inyo would cost you something like, people of the Republic of the Philippines, to about half a billion. May Barrett kayo and this is the thing also that I was about to use when I was suffering from smoking. Pero that’s a long story, magtanong nalang kayo ng doctor kung ano ang Barrett, ay ‘yung Buerger’s disease, it’s caused by cigarette smoking.

And then all of that – MRI and the Gamma ray, the surgery for the tumor, it’s non – non-invasive. There’s a lot, but what Secretary Diokno gave you is about half a billion and it will be released soon.

You know, I’m not military, I didn’t even finish my ROTC but I’m not into delays and such. Let’s be frank. I don’t like things taking too long and I don’t like corruption. It’s half a billion pesos. That money will really be used in the right way. There won’t be any rigging of bids because I’m looking at everything that the government buys. I’m not interfering. But my promise to the people of the nation is that it will be a clean government. We won’t be exempt from that because it’s the people’s money.

So all of that will be done quickly. I don’t like those delays just to – you know, for one way or another, to accommodate them, I don’t like that. And I’m not the type of person to believe in COA. That lowest bid, because if you buy something even with the lowest bid, you’ll be given something cheap. That’s why I told them, I informed COA, I said I won’t follow that.

We’ll argue about that because the lowest bid is the source of corruption. A race to lower the price, you lower your price, others offer to sell 100, have them sell 20, then buy from me the made in – you know. Let’s not talk about that now because there’s a conflict.

Then the soldiers will say, “sir, it broke down quickly.” Like those police jeeps. Look at what they bought – they’re gone. I said, “don’t give me…” My police there, Isuzu and it would last for about three to five years. Just don’t crash it. There are police who drive, they’re drunk. How else, they’re parked there, they patrol there, at the bar. So when he’s buried if he dies, two families. These police officers. I’ve been mayor for 23 years, let’s not beat around the bush.

It will be strictly in accordance with the law and I want it fast. So I promise to you that that building should start, two months from now and your equipment, the state of the art. It doesn’t matter how expensive, as long as I don’t want something that’s used and breaks down.

There will be changes in your internal procedure. There are complaints even about the medicines because there will be changes. I will insist on it. One thing that I will make clear to everybody: There will be no compromise of the lives of soldiers. I don’t want to risk the lives of…

So give your lives to your country, the least that we can do, the country through me: we’ll give you what you want.

The state of the art, even the equipment for war. I won't just buy that on the open market. I want government to government. Or I will intervene if we need to buy, not something made in… I don't even know what—and then it causes trouble.

That's just it, we were overtaken in—so let's not look for trouble right now. I am the President, after all. Maybe after I'm gone, you can go wild.

Just what should be given and what we truly deserve, that's where we stand. And I will—you can be sure I will insist on it. Sorry to those many… You know, I have to talk to… I won't just pass through there, my seat is with them, “Hey, what happened to you?”…

Anyway, one of the things that you will have in the fullness of God’s time and of Allah is your program, your children’s education will be free. That's what I promised before and I will make it true, I don't make empty promises.

I mean I don’t really—why should I lie? Why should I, make empty promises, what will I gain from that? So that will be fulfilled. Education and I’ll work on that even if, you know, the imponderables of life, we really don't know when. We don't know if you're right, if you'll get away with it. But if something happens, I will work for two or three years before the pension, salary first. For example, if I were a CAFGU member in our area, then I will continue your salary for two to three years before the pension.

Now, this is what I dislike the most and if there are police officers here, I said let's be frank. I want the Armed Forces to create an office just to handle the pension benefits. They will finish it and they will prepare everything. And if I die, if Sergeant Rodrigo Duterte dies, don't make the widow and children go through a lot of trouble.

If I pay the Armed Forces of the Philippines, this huge… Why the widow? As for the police, don't get angry, but it's true. The wife has to go here, the widow, to follow up at Crame and then after he's gone, it's all spent. It's even used for a mistress, and there's even a child.

I won't try to be corny with you. I'm in love with women. Who isn't? But that kind of style, I don't like that. I really didn't like it even when I was a mayor, to bring someone in and then you take advantage of the lady because you brought her in. I'll be frank with you, don't do that. It's not good.

So, I told the police, you prepare that. It’s already in an envelope, number of years. Didn’t I think you had a computer? I spent so much on that, a computer, it’s all there.

Death certificate, you’re the ones who experienced the death, so you produce it. It doesn’t need to be a local, uh, certificate stating that ‘Duterte is dead, there, encounter in Basilan.’

Then, just call the family, the widow, that’s it. I don’t want a drama where the wife goes around and around. Why is it like that? That’s what I don’t like about Crame, the widows are still being used there. That when they return home, they either have a new husband or… These are the things that are totally unacceptable to me.

Now, if you don’t believe me, this is a fight, so choose. But these are the things that I would never tolerate. I am here with a specific duty: To serve the Republic. I promised you a clean government. It will be a clean government. It really is clean.

That’s it, so I will run over many people along the way. I hope you won’t get angry if what we’re doing is right. Otherwise, you might stage a coup and I’ll lose my job. Don’t stage a coup, just call me at Malacañang: “Hey, Duterte, get out of there. We’ll take over.” “Okay, fine. Come here, I’ll announce: My fellow countrymen, this is the new, uh, leader of our country, he’s the chairman, this is the one who will run the government. Go ahead. Bye-bye. You guys handle it. I’m going home.”

But if… We need help here. A clean government. And whatever you have, it will reach you. Whatever should—to the last one—

I’m not very familiar with the Armed Forces, but in the Police, at the station, every month someone delivers liquidation reports. People don’t know what they should liquidate. They say: ‘Use your, uh, initiative.’ That’s their favorite. Those people at the station. How do we liquidate this here—? Because the money didn’t arrive, they’re the ones who have to liquidate it.

This time, I will draw a matrix of government. I need the intelligence fund or operation funds that I mentioned to really arrive there. Because I want it to be felt at the bottom. There’s light, that’s okay.

I, I’m just about a month or so, give me time to… What about three to four months? I’ll prepare the government machinery, then I can impose now new roles, whatever it is that would make our jobs comfortable.

But one thing is sure, I said: Whatever is due to you is there. So speak up — earlier, General Acosta mentioned this, it’s on the slides. I understand that, I’m used to it — even the mayor, I know… In our place, I was the one who bought the MRI. Because the government, there was nothing, the national — CT scan. So I know that.

So I was really surprised earlier that a national government institution under the Armed Forces doesn't have any MRIs. But in Davao, even the small hospitals have them. Son of a… That’s why I was just listening earlier but I would have wanted to blurt out and say: What kind of thing is this? The lives that are put at stake, in jeopardy, in danger, in peril, and there’s no — the barest minimum of equipment.

I didn’t show my annoyance, but I said ‘ah’. So when they said, ‘What do you want? I want,’ ‘Okay, building, okay.’ That building is okay, everything. Bisaya, even if it’s wrong, it’s just right. Don’t give me half, it’s not completed… That’s how it is in the province. Look at local government, half-completed school. A one kilometer bridge is just here. That’s what we see.

So what is destroying our life? Drugs. It was really allowed to flourish, to bloom. I was the favorite whipping boy then. “Duterte, extrajudicial killings in Davao that’s why it’s peaceful.” Now that I’m President, I suppressed everything. Even things I didn’t know about. It’s 500,000 surrenderees. What am I supposed to do with them? Am I supposed to make them carne norte? (dried beef)

Then I have to order the military, I said to the Secretary of Defense: ‘You have to provide the spaces because you are the large government reservations that were given.’ I just need about one hectare there. It will be enclosed with high wire anyway. And I would build so many rehab centers all over the country. You know why? Because you know, shabu, take it from me: One year constant use of shabu will shrink, it will dry up the brain. So most of those who are affected, you can see, they’re dazed when they speak. You start with a normal conversation and then it would run afoul, go somewhere else. Others are like that, constantly scratching… That’s why all addicts have bad teeth. They’re all ground down.

And it has… PDEA said three years ago that there are three million addicts in the Philippines. That was three or two and a half years ago. You know, you’ve read that. So now, how many? So just add an incremental increase at a very conservative number, that would translate, maybe just give it another 700,000… 3,700,000 addicts in the Philippines. All potential criminals, every time they want a fix and they do not have the money.

You can see here, crime has lowered. There’s no one holding up anyone. No one is breaking into houses. Because everyone is hiding, afraid of being killed. Say that face-to-face on TV, and so? I have a problem to solve. And the only way to do it is you know… I don’t want to kill people. We cannot build a country by killing our own citizens. That’s really a given. But we cannot allow a group of men or a percentage of the civilians to destroy the youth and to destroy our country. I really can’t allow that.

So every military unit should have one team, not all of them, that is an anti-drug group and they were… I will lecture if you want. I’ll start the lectures. Because even when I’m… Now, what is it now? I started in 1974, I was new then… I got married right away. Money was short so I had to teach at the Police Academy. I was handling criminal law, criminal evidence, and criminal procedure. And if you just listen to me, in about one hour, you will have all the things that you would learn to be an effective policeman. It is all there, it’s all there if you just listen.

But every unit of the Armed Forces should have one team, of course, for terrorism, drugs, and terrorism. In the days to come, the rampaging ideology of ISIS will come here to us, whether we like it or not because we have a — not all of them.

As I said: You Moros, don’t do… I’m a Moro too. But that, this, if we can’t reach an agreement here, ISIS will enter here. That’s why I’m praying to God that we can just talk to each other.

I have kept my cool despite this… Although I lifted the truce, because they were jamming us, but then again, I said I am not up to it, just to answer them with, blah-blah. I’ll just let it be for now because if it were just me… But I carry the burden of a nation. So my mouth, it’s really restrained until such time that I said, maybe we can reach you.

When this war is over, I have a lot to give to you. But you know the cost of waging a war, bullets, ammo, mortar, repair, all of that, including buying new state of the art equipment, it eats a lot into the economy of the country.

So I need to reach an agreement with the communists. And I have to deal with the MI, MN, before I go after those— I will not talk to the Abu Sayyaf. I will not deal with criminals. I do not kill people with barbaric… We, with just one bullet. Why do you have to, on duty, like that? In Cotabato, they cut off ears. That’s not our job. Our job is one bullet, and when they’re dead, leave them. It doesn’t change anything if you do something else or add to what is not needed. So that’s what I have for you, because you may change assignments.

Well, we will build a shop there inside that hospital that would house the new equipment. Give me until December. And your hospital, by December, it needs to be finished.

I don’t want it finished two years after. Give me the hospital, the proper building, not something makeshift. Regarding the equipment, I don’t believe in the lowest bid, lowest bid. Lowest bid, the price is about one million or 100 million, for that highway, then you go for the lowest bid. There are no trucks, no tractors, nothing. They bid, they lower the price, they drop it by 20. Oh, so they win. Now if they still give to the mayor, the COA will get involved, and even the barangay captain will certify that one kilometer is complete, that short. It’s worthless. Go ahead, investigate, investigate. Not this time. Really not. All the money value of the Filipino, it really goes in.

So I hope to see you again. I said maybe God will have mercy on us… The money is there, I already gave it. I will really have it checked, if it’s a building, it’s a building. Don’t give me that, those biddings, I’m there. I’m there. I will bid so there won’t be trouble. Me. Then…

There’s still a lot… Where should I look? Where is the best? I just asked the doctor, what is the best? That’s it, COA will say the lowest bid. You’re noisy after the product of your work is broken. I will argue with the… I’ll have to, I’ll talk to COA again. I have to revise it. It must really be the quality. Even with the weapons.

Before, we bought made in China… The police bought made in China M-16s… Even if it was intentional, those fools there made the rifle’s barrel crooked. One… Look at the barrel, maybe there are only two rifles. So when the bullet comes out, it does that. That’s sabotage.

We should buy from our traditional market. Everything will be quality and fast and I have something I want to do but it is not a good topic today. Maybe tomorrow. I’ll explain why I’m holding off, we’re holding off, because I’m waiting for some equipment.

I still need 10,000 soldiers because what Defense requested, Lorenzana, was 20, I said I can’t give you that, maybe 10 police. When that’s in place, I can maneuver then I have the equipment. That’s when we can do something, but I have to fortify.

I can’t enter there with it empty, hollow. I’ll put something there first. I need about 5,000. Just to have some SAF battalions, give me about 7 to deploy to Mindanao. When I deploy them, I’m ready, I’ll go in. But until then, let’s just relax a bit. No need to go to war at this hour. We save our energy for a better fight. But we must have the quality in our hands.

I won’t stay long because even I haven’t eaten. I know you haven’t eaten yet. I’m hungry too. I know you’re hungry. Because I can hear it behind me. Oh dear. I know that, lectures and then that’s it.

Guys, I’m your friend. I’m here to serve you. Don’t be too… I’m just the son of a poor man and I also came from the ranks like you, all throughout the years. I have nothing— I have nothing to tell you but with this statement: I will serve you and I will not abandon you.

Thank you very much.