[start of recording]

You know, every time I sign something that is really to buy bullets and guns to kill your own countrymen, it hurts me. Not only because I am the President of everybody, including those who fight against the government. When they are here in the Philippines, there is only one President, and that is me. So it bleeds my heart to—every time there is a fight and people die on both sides, it makes me sad. Because that is human life.

Last night, Secretary Lorenzana and I were together, I called Nur. If it were possible for us to talk as soon as possible and he said to me, he said: How about this, I have a warrant?

My order to the police and the military, when Nur comes out from wherever he is now, is to escort him and bring him to where I am or call me, I will go and we will talk.

You know, in this war, no one will win here, we all lose. It’s a waste of money on bullets and weapons that are worthless. And there are people who don’t want—you know, they don’t give… even a little hope that we can have peace.

I don’t have any problem with Nur. We have agreed in principle to talk to, to resolve the conflict of the history of Mindanao. I also don’t have a problem with the MI, but I have a problem with Abu Sayyaf because they are terrorists and the killing—beheading in front of the world, civilian or soldier.

You know, I hate to say this. My grandmother is Maranao. Moro. Everytime there is fighting, you will know here, I really get hurt.

In the olden times, the stories of our ancestors, the Tausug warrior is an honorable man. But why is it—cutting off the heads of his hostages. This is not the job of a true Tausug. Something is going wrong somewhere.

So, I appeal to the Tausug, Samal, Yakan, let's just understand each other. And you know, we craft the Philippines, it is our task to make the Philippines a place liked by everyone, where no one loses.

Now, if we talk and our brothers on the Moro side really want a federal system, then okay. What wrong is there in us killing each other for no reason? We know, I know the Christians know, your father knows — if you are from Mindanao — that the Moro were here first, with the Muslim religion for 100 years, for 70 years before Christianity arrived.

But that alone is not our fault. What started this were the Spanish who came here, in 1571 they landed in Leyte bringing the Christian religion, then the Americans cultivated Mindanao and said: “Come to Mindanao because it is a land of promise.” What is our fault, really?

My father married a Moro lady. Well, it's not my fault, my fault with the Spanish here who didn't even know this situation? Why should we kill each other? Let's just talk.

Of course now we know. But if you ask me, I am Visayan but I have never actually lived in Cebu. Lanao, just a moment.

So, I am appealing to everyone, Abu Sayyaf. Beheading, what is that? You know, if you are a warrior, just one bullet. That's why I told the soldiers not to disfigure the face, destroy the body. For what?

You think Allah would be happy to see you do like that? In the name of Allah you kill and unnecessarily, you mutilate the body of a human being. It's very… (unintelligible).

Because before, the story is, the Tausug, if you break your word of honor, that means death. But it has deteriorated into some kind of cannibalism. So my order to the soldiers is, one bullet. Once they fall, don't waste time, don't waste the bullet. Move on to fight another day.

I told them, 'Don't harbor resentment, we have a point to make. The Moro people of Mindanao, their situation is not their fault, not the fault of the Spaniards. If Magellan hadn't come here, we would all be Moro, all Muslim. What fault do the Visayans have? What fault do the Tagalogs have? What fault do the Maranao have? The Sama?

I hope they understand that. I, I really don't like, every time I see, even Abu Sayyaf… I'm really hurt, to be honest.

Now, these families left behind by the soldiers, I’d like you to know that you are automatically members of 4Ps, so there's a little money there every month, and also one sack of rice and you, as a soldier, that's automatic, the soldier gets one sack of rice now. You have rice, then the 4Ps has another one, plus a little money.

Now, you know, I've said this to everyone. We men, we don't fear death. We know that people will really die. We can’t choose where to die, where we will sacrifice ourselves or where we will die. We can’t choose because why would we sacrifice ourselves. We know if we want to know how we will die, in war or stabbed or through drug trafficking?

What we really don't know – when will we die? So everyone should accept that, not just soldiers but all of you here, my brothers and sisters. We will all die. When? That's what we don't know.

There are many soldiers who have retired, thousands of them, and many became heroes. To all those who died, I give them my salute. I never salute unless – if I don't respect a person, you will never see me salute.

That's my attitude, a bit rude. But those who sacrificed their lives for the Republic of the Philippines, where I am now the President. I consider everybody there, the fallen heroes at the back, all heroes in the Philippines.

So you families, that's automatic, out of endearments, showing love for a hero, enroll you automatically, widows, 4Ps. Then I have directed the DILG, just look for the regional office, I have a directive there.

The widow will be accepted into the government, as an employee. And all of your children, just enroll them, I will pay for it, just let me know or tell the school, President Duterte said we will enroll here then let him know and you will collect from him, I will send—Job already. Not you anymore. Them, tell them. Mayor Duterte said, let him know.

State colleges or just public school. Don't go to private schools yet because we are still working on it. Next year, if Allah wills it, then you have, I will pay for it. Kindergarten to high school. If [someone is] a loafer, just become a soldier. Doesn't want to study. We'll look for a fight if there's no fight, just occasionally. If you don't know how, we will continue the scholarship. Then that, at least you have a job, you have two sacks of rice. You are automatically enrolled in 4Ps, one sack of rice and as a soldier, I will continue that even if [someone is] dead, I will continue that for the family. And school, I will take care of it, it's mine now. Give me the problem of your children's studies.

I am sorry that this has to happen. I do not want it to happen again, if possible. And I have a request: If we can't understand each other, don't do those kinds of tactics to destroy a person's body. That's not me. We are men. We know what we are. That's probably why I didn't become a soldier because I'm afraid to die. We know that, but let's not do that—You are not a warrior if that's how… we are not Arabs. That is not our culture. Our culture before the religions came in, before Islam came to the Philippines, and Christianity, we are all Malay so we look alike with Indonesians and Malaysians. We are a Malay tribe. The customs and habits of the Malays, do not do that. That's how Arabs are. There are many Arabs – Egypt, Libya.

That's how we are, depending on who was in power at the time. My request: If it's just a fight, fight. But do not add grief to the family by destroying the body. At any time, I will never allow the government to do that. I will really not allow that brutality, cruelty like that. You said, just one bullet, leave it, once you know [someone is] dead.

So, I hope that everyone listened. There's 4Ps. That's why I'm getting your names. The spouse needs to have a job, either national or local, just find a job. But preferably, national. Because if there's nothing else, I'll tell DILG, find a program there for widows, to have a job, to have a salary. The children, follow up so they can enroll.

Now, all of your problems that you can handle, there are benefits. As a soldier, there are those. But I have a program that I'm reserving, those problems that you can no longer handle, you really have no one to turn to, I left a number, call it, tell them the problem. And whoever the person here in the government that I can call, they will find a solution to the problem.

I would like to extend – I said I share my grief, not only to everybody who died. I express my condolences for our misunderstanding. We want to end this war. I do not want to continue even for a day, I hope. No soldier here wants to die. They have families there in other… in Luzon, in the Visayas. So why would we really… why would we just insist in finding the reason, to look for a reason to kill each other. I hope, I said I implore the divine intervention of Allah so that we can all understand each other.

Thank you very much.