Can you give the order of rest and recreation? Kindly. Thank you. Secretary Delfin Lorenzana; Secretary Michael Lloyd Dino of the Presidential Assistant for the Visayas Area; General Ricardo Visaya, Chief of Staff AFP; Lieutenant General Eduardo Año, Commanding General Philippine Army; Lieutenant General Nicanor Vibar, Commander Central Command; the officers and enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police; my beloved countrymen.

I’m sorry I forgot all about it. I was doing the talk all the time and time just… I really didn't remember that I have to talk to you. I went to two military camps just to visit the soldiers. Now I’d like to… I don’t want to make you feel obligated. But it’s a fact that I need to do something for you also and you have to be informed.

That’s how it is, I went to your AFP Medical Center the other night. And I was really appalled to know that a big hospital such as yours, you don’t have the most important equipment to save lives. For example like the MRI, it is better than the CT scan. It is an improved version of the X-ray a thousand times.

So, while I was listening I was… Luckily, Secretary Diokno from DBM (Department of Budget and Management) was with me. So he said, “Okay, what else do you not have?” Then the baric, this is a tank and the best illustration of that is that it is also used by divers who would suffer the bends, that strong thing for your oxygen, the one that shakes, it’s a high pressure.

But this is very important for the soldiers so I said let’s buy it. Because it is a high-pressure chamber you go inside, then if you have wounds that take a long time to heal and maybe you are near gangrene, you can be put in there because of the high pressure, blood will remain there and it will circulate again and again in that limited area and it could save your foot or your hand or I don’t know if it’s — that’s all I know because…Anyway I’ll tell you if I have time.

Then I also give you Gamma rays, X-rays so that there is no longer, no invasive procedure needed. Then another one and I give you in your building because the old one is there from the 1950s, the plumbing is leaking. And when the waste you flush comes back up, that is no longer healthy for the soldiers to be there. That thing—what is that thing? Those germs. I’m from Visayas so I speak that way. Those germs will go back to… And then if you are there… That’s why people avoid hospitals because either — there are many germs in the hospital, you get pneumonia, you end up dying. So I said, “You have to condemn it immediately and I will give you a new building.” But do not destroy it if it can be of use to you because you can always refit the plumbing system, just fix it and there’s another building.

Luckily, no one told me that it was missing. Well, anyway I am just two months as your President so I am going around the camps. I prioritized it just to show my support to you. And we have some casualties in Mindanao. The fiercest fighting is in Mindanao. On the western side, we have the Abu Sayyaf and the other renegades there; and here in Region 11 in my city, the NPA is the strongest. In Davao City it’s not that much because — in other places but not so much in Davao City.

Now, I am here to assure you that during my presidency, you might not know that my father was a soldier. One of the earliest, Digos, Governor Llanos was a major in the Philippine Army back then. My father was in JAGO. He was one of the three prosecutors of the collaborators here in Cebu. And mind you, one of the accused back then was Osmeña, Sergio, for collaboration with the enemies…Amnesty like that… One of those involved in collaboration with the Japanese. My father was assigned here but he was from Danao.

Now, I feel strongly for the soldiers. I don't need anything from you. I do not need your personal loyalty to me. Just love your country. Obey the Constitution, period.

Don't dwell too much on…We politicians, we come and go. And now if you say that later, the year is just around the corner. But I want it that during my time, you have nothing to say that I left you hanging.

And I feel for my soldiers and Davao City really improved to what it is now because of the police and the military. That is really the truth there. Who did I even order to kill them? It was the police and the military.

I mean I had the full cooperation. And in return I was also loyal to my men. Just ask the police if they are here or the officials who passed through Davao, they also…The Secretary of Defense, he knows how I handle…And even during the times when their cannons sometimes overshoot and hit a family, a family was lost, good heavens, we have Human Rights here. But you know, I really took care of them. And no one got into trouble because I was there to protect them. So the soldiers and the police are confident.

Now, I want that to be your attitude — you adopt that attitude. Not because I abuse my authority, far from it actually, I am a prosecutor. But when I am here, I am President, I have to do something. I have to do it because nobody is going to do it for us.

Now, if I read the names now of the judges which I will — in a few hours, few days — there are congressmen, it’s not because I want to discredit them. I don't know these people. Even the police — judges, police, congressmen. But it behooves upon me, the obligation is here with me to tell the Filipino people of what is happening to this country.

Their right…That’s why those media outlets are. They are always asking for their right to be informed. And so also, not just you, the whole of the Filipino people are entitled to know what is happening in the country.

In the light that it has reached 500,000 plus, who will be held accountable for this now? There has to be somebody that I have to explain…Because if it’s a gun, you have to catch me, apprehend me holding the gun. Now if I tell you now, “Sir, General, last week, I was holding four armalites.” “Where are the armalites?” “Sir, I already threw them there…”

Shabu, they say, “Oh, why thousands?” “No one is arrested, no one is imprisoned.” You know if you read the newspaper, listen to those pretentious, pretenders, who pretend they know everything, this 500,000, if you can’t catch anyone with shabu, it’s nothing. And even if, you see during a raid, there’s no one there. You cannot even hardly…If there’s really no residue there, you can’t do anything. So you cannot put someone in prison because they call it “instant crime.” Either you are holding it or you are not.

They just need to say, “Duterte confessed to me that he was holding a Barrett, he sold it.” When they get to court, “Oh, that’s what you said?” Duterte—let me tell you when we get to court, “That’s not true. I didn’t say that to you. I didn’t say Barrett, baby, woman. I’m already weak…” Then the court says, “There, what’s the evidence? Your mouth?” But I say, no, you said…That’s what happens here, we are really uphill, our climb is vertical in this fight.

That’s why I’ve become shameless. I’m forced to become shameless because we were screwed over by animals. Right? 600…It will reach 600. Where will we find hospitals, medicine? Where will we find…? Where do I…?

That’s why I told you: Let go of a small space in your camps because the government gives you really a space because soldiers you have to have space for whatever. You play there or practice shooting, that’s why you have the space. That’s why I told you, give me even just one hectare, I’ll enclose it with barbed wire. Then I’ll put up rehab centers in every region.

Now, it’s good for you to know, what the forensics experts say, if you are into shabu for one year, incessant use, your brain will shrink. So you know…I am sure you’ve seen that, someone who is high, hollow. There’s no rehab for that because the experts say, “rehab is no longer viable.” So that’s it. So, I fixed their brains, I ask you those who are high, what, should I release them again? The court will say release them? We’ll argue. Because they’ll go back there and stab again, rob because they need money to give him the fix that he needs for the day.

That means I’m like releasing thousands of criminals. That’s why this country will be in chaos…That’s why I told you, my presidency is like this, let me clarify, I’m not desperately eager to be President. Here I am ready to bet my honor, my life, even my presidency, just don’t…I told them that.

Don’t do that to me, I’m not like the others who cling on. If you disrespect me, I will really disrespect you. Even the Bishops, they act like they’re someone, but they’re just the same. His pain is my pain too. There’s a Bishop who has two wives. I only have one. [laughter]

We in the government, don’t do that to us just because we are…We know that we are workers of government, we are paid to do what we are supposed to do but give us a little… I’m not asking for respect, just don’t disrespect us. You write, just like that.

So, truthfully, I’m here to reiterate my commitment. Let me give you… Other doctors said, “How about the satellites?” Those camps everywhere, well, we will go to that. Let me prioritize you.

So that’s why I said Kerry, Secretary and I—Delfin—we spoke with Kerry, he was okay… So Kerry came here, we ate together, and Delfin even left us with 33 million dollars. I said, “This is good.”…

My father was governor of Davao, that’s another thing. When he died it was… That’s why it’s all Davao. Davao City, Davao del Sur, Davao Oriental, Occidental, Davao del Norte. The only one missing there is Compostella Valley. Me? That’s why it’s just me because I also grew up in hardship. We arrived in Davao poor. In 1956 our house was demolished. It’s still there.

I am truly pro-poor. I really give to everyone. I will attack those in the government who have gotten rich. To Roberto Ongpin, resign or it won’t end well. All government contracts are yours. During Marcos’ time you were tough, during Estrada’s time you were there, during Gloria Arroyo’s time you were there, now during Aquino’s time, you controlled the online [operations].

No matter which house in Pasay has online [access]. So where are the taxes? Where are the taxes? Those are the oligarchs. ABS [CBN] asked, define oligarchs? All of you who are rich now, using only words and not yet paying… I will really destroy [them].

Laguna de Bay, look at that space there, it’s gone, all triangles. Where will the poor fisherman… He is supposed to enjoy the entitlements of the lake. It’s for the poor, now if the rich or if the owner is a governor, congressman, general, I say, “destroy that.”

The people are gone, they’re dead. Those are the oligarchs. When you make money at the expense of the poor Filipino you are an oligarch. You take all the space there and don’t give it to the fishermen. What am I supposed to do here? Just watch?

Like contractualization. Secretary Bello said he still needs to ask for more because inspectors—he still needs to inspect. I won’t inspect, inspect. I don’t have money to pay for that. If I catch you sometimes… I’ll shut you down or you’ll be killed.

Why should I even impose? Follow me or I'll shut you down, period. If you don't like it, then find another president. Fine, I'll give it to you, go ahead. Don't make me…Make me work like that and then the…

My duty is to everybody. This everybody, the poor, it’s about 97 percent. But you rich people got contracts with just saliva. You have airplanes and you don't pay taxes. Look what you are doing to the land of the Philippines? All holes. We are the next highly mineralized. We are second, I think one is Africa.

They really destroy anyone with capital there. Dig here, dig there. You look at the Philippines, take a chopper from Surigao to Davao City. The mountains are like soda cans, full of holes, like soda cans I'm counting them.

Go to Agusan, Tubay, look at this Gutierrez, another oligarch. He brought in airplanes without paying, he brought in helicopters without paying. He mined in Agusan and destroyed the…

Who are the oligarchs? You are the ones deceiving the Filipinos, you are the oligarchs. You Filipinos who don't pay taxes and you evade, just pay that BIR. So the calculation is 5 million, beg or okay 3 million is enough. Pay 1 million to the government, that 2 million how will it be divided there. It's difficult. I have a lot of expenses. And we are supposed to be…That's why my campaign is don't you…

I am angry at the government. I am angry at the government because it does nothing but oppress the people. As soon as they arrive at the airport, a poor OFW is planted with bullets. They can't even put bullets in my pocket. “I’ll kick you there.”

I'll let you do that to me, maybe I'll feed… I just ask who I feed. The coin, you know the barker who stabbed the driver so he wouldn't give…These barkers, they control it, even the police, that's where schools park. That's where they are like a terminal. If you don't pay, you'll be stabbed. “Eat it.” “Sir, just the smallest one.” “Ah, choose there. Eat it.” “Sir, it might get stuck in my throat — I'll die.” “Really you'll die, I don't care.”

The mayor of Albuera, it's good he reached Bato…I had him looked for “shoot on sight” like a dog. That's really how I see them, like dogs. You're treating the people like dogs. Our children are fools. You know, when you have a problem with drugs in your family, it's over.

Now, the difficult thing is, the Filipinos who have nothing, the husband is there in Kuwait, the wife is being abused in Saudi Arabia. Then their child sends money here and gets addicted to shabu. You destroy their hard work. Now, if they don't get addicted to shabu, they become victims when they come home from studying and you can't even give them a car. What is the salary anyway, they haven't even paid it off.

That's good, I remembered I have to send a plane there to get the…They aren't being paid, they're being taxed. They just sleep there by the swimming pool, I said…There were already Cabinet members there before, Moros. “Go there. Let's get them with a plane.” Because apparently their passports are with their employers. I told Yasay, “you issue travel document.” Ask them here if you are a disgruntled Filipino or not? Just speak Visayan or Ilocano.

I remember at the dormitory, we Bisayans, at the dormitory in the YMCA. There was porridge there, a mobile cart, that kind of thing. We Bisayans were eating. These Letran players passed by, all tall. We were laughing. Then what one player was eating, he did that to the back of our companion. “You're Bisayan, aren't you?” He said, “No, I'm Tagalog, I'm Tagalog.” [laughter]

The “uy”, that’s a usage in the Visayas. “Don't uy!” Don't, I don't want to. But in Mindanao Bisayan, “I don't want uy.” “Don't uy, that's Mister Uy.” I know he did that to him, he picked him up, I felt sorry for the mayor of Panabo, Davao del Norte's son, he really pulled…That six-footer said, “You're noisy, you're Bisayan aren't you?” He said, “No uy, I'm Tagalog uy.” [laughter]

We are all Filipinos. We have…You are Ilocano, you are Bisayan, you are Moro, you there are Ilonggo, we are here as one. Our ancestors decided that even if our personalities and food are different, we will be one. And they wrote it with their blood back then, that pact. So we decided because our faces are the same and even the Moro people — we decided to be just one nation. So it shall be one nation.

That's not possible, even these communists said “coalition government”, nothing of the sort. That's where we really disagree. Because before they were entering our peace talks about the distribution of…I let them in, okay, secretary of what? DSWD, no problem, Agrarian Reform.

But they wanted to take NAPOLCOM, I said, “No, you will never have it.” You take care of the mundane matters everyday. But for everything, both the police and the Armed Forces, that is really reserved. I will never agree to any coalition. If you're a woman, maybe, “relationship”. Don't coalition, that's dangerous. We'll all die.

Well, anyway, I won’t take much of your time but I have to, you know, pour out my anger there regarding drugs. Now all the governors, even those who were boastful before. Now they're trembling. I don't care. You can't catch me. Why would you arrest me? I have immunity. I can't be arrested. Go to the station in Malacañang and tell him you killed someone, “Now what.” “Sir, come with us to the station because your name was implicated.”

You know what I told the police, and to all of you: just work. You just follow the order then you don't have to worry about cases. Just do your mandate, peacekeeping, to protect the country, just do it. Just don't get personal. I will take care of everything. These people who died, we will add to that number, I will take care of it. I will destroy the apparatus. I tell you straight, give me three minutes.

They now know they will really be taken care of. They are in America, Africa, China now. And they have this digital map there, when they zoom in on our camp, they will know — and they are hearing us. And they say, “Okay, transfer them to Leyte. Or to that place where there's shabu with that mayor. Get the payment in Cebu.”

That’s why in Bohol I said, “Why are there so many drugs here and to think that — ?” The Bol-anon people are law-abiding, God-fearing. That’s their nature — the place of my grandmother, Maribojoc, they are like that. They really fear God. Why is there flooding here? Where is it? It turns out it was that mayor, so I ordered, “kill him.” That's why he's in Bato's White House, as soon as he leaves, he's dead. Then the police will say, “You're the one ordering the killings.” Then, “Why?” The police will say, “Come here, kid, what's your name.” “Sir, patrolman Mario Montes.” “Don’t worry Mario Montes.” “Type that name there, Mario Montes.” “Pardon is hereby granted to Mario Montes…” “Give that to the judge.” “Pardoned.” How many police have been pardoned? I can pardon a thousand police officers every day. Don't deceive me. [laughter]

Because I am the only President with the mindset of a civilian. Because I came from there. I mean, I'm just a poor man. The Constitution says, the President can grant pardon full or limited to those…And I can give you…What is this one? To grant pardon and grant amnesty with the concurrence of Congress.

That's what I saw as my defense. No one else thought of that. They ended up getting imprisoned instead. Imprison me. “Come here, fiscal, read the Revised Penal Code.” Go ahead and read, “That the President, the offender, upon reaching the age of 70 shall be released.” That's mandatory. Meaning, if you're old, you can no longer be in Muntinlupa. Your body is already too weak, send you home because you are overage. [laughter] Now I am your President, 71-years-old. I will finish at 77. Why would you imprison me? [laughter]

Why are the police afraid? Why are the army afraid? “Sir, just working, sir.” That's not what I said, I said, “Do not lie to me.” Do not lie to me, tell me the truth. Just do your job…He said, “Sir, we've been patrolling for three days, sir. And then we passed by and it was so beautiful, sir.” You son of a gambling lord. Don't do that. What about your other work? But this, you're really in trouble. Don't rape anyone. But if you kill 100 people with your job, that's okay. It's work.

So if you get cornered, pardon. “Oh, I thought here”…Oh Ombudsman, pardon. “Sir, we're involved in…” Pardon. So I'm like God after — “the pardoning President.” [laughter] Don't deceive me.

I was doing trial work as a fiscal for 10 years. I have seen so many cases that I have handled dismissed. When it reaches my hands, it's finished. You just don't know my frustrations with crime and law and order. I have a lot of heartaches there too, that's why I went out and acted crazy. You can't outsmart me. So these drug lords, these mayors, governors, don't trust me. I will really kill you. Pardon. [laughter]

So you're with Duterte, right? Will you just let them keep complaining? They will — rule of law, for the righteous. But the law of…Fear of the law and fear of God, that's what has Human Rights, that's what I'll get angry about if that's what you do.

But if these criminals, these kidnappers, these…They're nothing. Kidnapper, don't even ask for permission, kidnap them. If you're a police officer, kidnap them too, “Where's the kidnapped money?” “Sir, what's left, sir.” “Oh, it's not much?” “Sir, what's left, sir, is ten thousand.” “How much did they ask for?” “He said, sir, 100.” He said…That's how criminals are. They'll spend it within 24 hours. “Ask for 30.” “Sir, he said he doesn't have any.” “Oh, kill him.” If they have nothing to pay us, then kill them. Let them do that too.

That's what the, you know, Abu Sayyaf is doing. There will never be any peace negotiation. You have to destroy them. That is the order: Destroy them.

That's…I'm not…Just wait, but when I was mayor, I said: “There will be a reckoning of all of these cruel and brutal things that you are doing. We will collect someday.” Just wait because we're just assembling…But there will be a time when I say, “Go in. Finish it, to the last man, so we have no more problems.” So you've wiped out the drugs, there's no more—we're just drinking here. But I am warning you, five to ten years from now, the biggest problem would be terrorism.

That's why Secretary Lorenzana asked for 20, I said, “I'll have a hard time.” Maybe 10 additional and 5,000 policemen. I will have to prepare this Philippines. I will never go there unless my defenses are in place.

I would need about…I would be happy if I will have about five battalions of SAF and I can produce another 10,000 soldiers next year, then we're okay. The Philippines is actually okay. During my time, we're okay. You won't have any problems. You can say, “It's up to you.” You will have the best.

That's why I don't follow the lowest bidder. I don't believe in that. I hate that. That's the source of corruption. The lowest bid? You come up with the lowest quality. That's why I don't buy, I said, let's buy through negotiated contracts.

I don't like…If there's a question of quality, then it will be an issue for me. For me, quality is an issue, especially when lives are at stake here.

Even the intelligence apparatus, you will have it. I said drone, you will have it. Just give me a little time and I will…Your hospital will be…Don't be afraid of getting hit because it's gone, there's no replacement there. You are covered there.

Do not be afraid of tomorrow. Your next year I will implement it. Kindergarten to high school education for your children will be free. [applause] By December, you’d have doubled your salaries. [applause] This August — it starts this August, look at your paycheck. It's there. [applause]

You have no problem. I will give everything. As I said there, “it’s a good thing…” I’m not joking. Those there…

The one who was hit in the eye really went blind, he cried and I said, “Do not worry. I will take care of you. I will let you study Braille and then give you a new, almost natural eye. And then I’d look for work for you.” In call centers. Just for him to be able to study Braille, that’s okay, it’s fast.

I said, “Child, you are still young. There is a future. I will take care of you.” Those who were already seated, I gave them computers. I said, “You all enroll in AB. You go back to AB. And then you polish your diction and whatever the — because of the computer. And when you are trained, study voice and diction and your grammar, that’s about, okay, three years, two years, I will put you in a call center.” So there’s no problem, at least it’s lessened.

I said, “Don’t worry anymore…” But those who were really affected, I said, “I will take care of him for six years. I will reinvent you as a human being. Don't worry, minus the eyes, I will reinvent you so that you will succeed.”

What we will do first is, even if there are many blind [sightless] women, introduce them so there is inspiration. I am not trying to —I didn’t offend anyone— it’s like they have a warmth…Someone to take care of them, like a bachelor. Because of desperation, that’s why he cried. And then I said, “It’s okay. Do not worry, we will reinvent you like a new person.” And everything is not lost.

So that’s all I’ll leave you with…Pardon my language, that’s just how I am, especially when I’m angry. I carry a resentment because of what happened now. Simply too many people have been deceived by these people, that’s why I’m heated. I’m really angry.

So, those people there, you are better off hiding or – I will really go after you. If I don’t see you, I will enter your house, and four will die. Good. Let that be, papers, papers. Just papers if you are a decent person, but if…You know, if you don’t follow, I won’t follow either. Why should only I follow orders? What is this, a one-way street? I don’t care about you.

Go ahead and shout. I would not worry. When the time comes I will go to prison. Of course, that’s a thought. A prisoner at 77? By that time – you’ll realize it, you know what? When there’s nothing left, when you’re sitting next to each other in a movie theater like that, only five will be left here and we’ll still be there then shaking, it’s really time for you to go.

When the time comes, I am willingly go to prison. I will answer, I will answer personally and officially. So everybody works, no fear, nothing to worry except his duty and then he fulfills his mandate and then we are happy. When it comes, it will come. We are happy to die for our country. That’s all…

That’s the essence of our existence. We have a purpose after that, we are ready to go. That’s just it. So, we’re okay. During my time, our relationship is okay. The Filipino is okay, he is protected.

But I have to walk the extra mile. Let me, let you all let me ramble because I have to do this because I have to say it in public the right of the people to be informed.

Thank you very much.