Magandang hapon po. Wala na sanang iba, but I said I wanted to just give you a few words. Alam mo, I was elected on just three messages to the people. One, is that there will be a clean government. Second, is I will suppress drugs and control crime.

It has nothing to do with you guys. Take yourselves out of the—sometimes I just travel around the provinces, and graft and corruption are really endemic. I really do not know why other people would insist on doing it until now. I have a list there but I want to add some more.

This LTFRB, and the LTO all over, they’re still at it and to think that I placed there, General [Edgar] Galvante and [Martin] Delgra, he’s a lawyer from Davao, these people really have proven competence and integrity. But they really can’t control it from a central government down the line to those in the regions, that—it’s still the same. I was meeting the businessmen of Cagayan De Oro, was it five nights ago? And their complaint was still there – corruption in the LTFRB, and the LTO, and I suppose that this is true, universal throughout the country except for minor exceptions.

I was talking to the NDF panel and we had the discussion about how to shape up a government without necessarily going into the complicated task of coalition because I don’t think it would work. And I said that maybe, what would come out of these talks in Oslo, where that I would insist that I retain the control of the military and the police, and they can have the mundane matters of government.

As a matter of fact, nandiyan na sila. But iyong pinag-usapan natin, sabi ko iyong gobyerno, I think there is a need really to purge. I do not want to transgress Civil Service rules, I do not want to ignore due process, which I know loathe to do. Pero, apparently itong sa gobyerno mahirap tanggalin iyong nandiyan na, or you need another generation of workers really to do the job. But sabi ko, it has nothing to do with you but I would be very, maybe harsh – double the word in the coming days because it seems that my appeal, that this would be a clean government is not registering at all in the grey matter between the ears of some people in government.

So I hope that you would help me clean government. Let us just work together, and as I said for those who are working, you have nothing to worry at all. I will be the least of your trouble actually, and I know that you’ve come in with the best of credentials, of competence and honesty. Wala akong problema.

I just want to share with you the perennial problem of the Philippines about corruption. It’s still there, and I still have to show to you the list of the rest of the scalawags in government. More judges, more policemen mainly and some politicians. I have to control the drug problem, because if I do not interdict this problem now in this generation, mahirapan na po within the next—after six years. Kasi kung hinayaan ko ito just like the way it was, more or less ignored na kaya ganito umabot karamihan. It was not until after I became President, and I was also appalled by the number of addicts in this country.

Only those who surrendered, those who identified themselves, it’s just about maybe six hundred thousand. But two years ago, PDEA said that there are about three million drug addicts in this country. And considering the length of time, there must have been some incremental increase. And if you just place it at a very conservative of… probably 700 now, and with the confirmed six hundred thousand it’s really a pandemic thing. It is not an epidemic, it’s a crisis plaguing the country.

I do not want to pull my own chair, to brag to you. I was just thinking that if I hadn’t become President, and given the contamination of the police into the industry, how would it be, one of the officials, a military aide of one candidate. I said, it’s really a pity for the Philippines. And so, I might—come out here as a villain or with stained hands, maybe soaked with blood but there is no way to stop it now. There can be no stopping of the momentum until I have destroyed the apparatus.

It’s not the matter of, saying that it’s just because they are poor and these… that cannot be the excuse. Simply, I will not accept it because it would add more problems. If you accept the theory that, “this, why Duterte, those…”

I just can’t say that… I just can’t say that, ‘you just choose there.’ I’m doing everything I can to really get at them. I would not want to elaborate on it because it might ruffle the feathers of some other nations. But they know this. And I had for several times warned their ambassadors, you know, a lot of your citizens are destroying my country. And I won’t let that pass because I said, ‘simply, if I allow it, there will be no Philippines tomorrow.’

If you have the time, there is a book, Ioan Grillo—Ioan Grillo, online. And there’s a book there about a classic way how South American countries were destroyed by drugs until now. If I don’t stop this, because we are sometimes the transshipment and the drugs are being produced in the international waters, and they are dropped there. They put a GPS on it, so these operators here—you know, they’re looking for it from me, where’s the big fish? Where are the billionaires? Well, there aren’t any. Even if I show you now the matrix of the drug problem of the Philippines, you’d have five blank… frames but no faces. But we have the names, of course, there are only aliases. And they are the ones controlling the flow.

The operation is, there’s a big map there, digital, real time and they can zoom in even to the smallest barangay. They only have to do is just they direct the operation, you drop it there, get your money there. So the apparatus here, are just the lieutenants, and those—unless, I… really stop those on the sidewalk – day and night they are there, peddling openly. Until I shall have destroyed them, we can never, never have peace in our land.

The next worry of course is terrorism. ISIS, they don’t have any political ideology. They don’t have any concept of what really there is. You maimed people, you killed them; and women who refused to have sex with them, they simply burned them. So, we have seen a barbaric practice, and even cutting throats of other people in front of the world. Hindi ko malaman kung how to meet this kind of—if you do that, you also bring the worst out of me. So bale tabla tayo diyan. Because if you can do it, I can do it ten times better than you, definitely.

I wasn't… well, I’m just warning people not to go overboard because I would never, never, never allow my country to be destroyed by simply terrorism and these drugs. I really won’t allow it. As I have said, I put at stake my honor, my life and the presidency itself. If there is a circumstance where I’d be forced out, fine. I have no illusions about remaining in this… in fact, it wasn’t even my ambition to be here. I’m still asking myself, why did I end up here without a political party, without a single barangay captain in Luzon, except maybe in Ilocos. Well, because in Paoay, the Carpios are from there, my son-in-law is a Carpio from Paoay. There are many of them there, so families. But in other places I have no one.

And yet by—help me solve the riddle – six million. Fifty million all in all, six million was my sheer margin. How’s it? They didn’t even know me. I’m from Mindanao, coming in from the cold. I was not even a—I’m not trying to figure out my life before you, but what I’m trying to say is, what is the debt result of this, all of this thing. At the end of the day, why should I… what would I say… you know, it’s simply, one, my promise – I keep on repeating it – I will give you a clean government, then I will crush the drug problem and criminality. And even if I have to soak my blood, so be it. They have to stop, or else. We really don’t have…

I am as determined as anybody else who loves his country. Perhaps because they… they miscalculated me – I do love my country. We all come from different regions but we speak different dialects. We are different in character, food, everything, even the idiosyncrasies of the tribe. What keeps us is that thing — my loyalty to my—that’s why these others, I said, I told them, ‘do not ever commit the mistake of miscalculation.’ Because I, if I go down, I will go down without regrets.

This problem of ours must stop. This corruption, I will really go after them. I will make, not really examples, but bad examples for them before the Filipino people.

I hope you understand my sentiment. Just like you and me, we all crave to have service to our nation.

Thank you very much.