Kindly sit down. Salamat.

You know, I thought we nearly lost our Defense Secretary. There was a Cabinet meeting about four days ago and we were discussing the vacancy in… in the United Nations and the ambassador also to the US. They were blaming each other. I could not afford to lose anybody in the Cabinet. Especially Delfin. But I don’t know if it… he was just joking. But somebody pointed to him and he said: “Del, you’re the only one… since you’re also used to America. You’ve been there a long time. Maybe you want to be ambassador to the UN.”

He said: “I know Mayor, I’ve been there a long time. Let’s just look for someone else.” I’m looking for someone here. Who can I get now?

We need a very dynamic UN representative and of course, in our dealings with the United States, we need a very proactive ambassador. Alam mo, marami tayong… Well our relationship with the United States, as far as I’m concerned, it is going well but there are certain matters na ‘yung dynamics sa governance.

For example, in the matter of this drug crisis. They just don’t realize the number that PDEA said that we had about 3 million addicts and that was about two years ago, an assessment that was made to us by General Santiago.

Incremental increase by that number, even at a very liberal rate growth, siguro tumubo na ‘yan ng something like just add the 700 now, it has reached the 700 mark of Filipinos who surrendered and they want to be rehabilitated or those who are simply afraid of the government’s drive.

This is no easy problem. Three million or even just the 600,000 Filipinos already addicted to shabu is a huge and enormous problem for the country. And yet, as any other war, my orders to the AFP pati Police, is to destroy the apparatus of the drug problem in this city, in this province, in this region, in this country.

You cannot wage a war without killing and I simply do not take it as a punitive police action. Kaya ako, I’m losing two or sometimes three military or police officer in this drive.

Everyday, I was supposed yesterday, but I had this spinal thing going crazy again. I had a migraine that I could not… I vomited in the morning so I said I could not make it. I had this terrible headache and this is because of the misaligned somewhere in my spine when I met an accident when I was already 67 years old in a motorcycle spill.

But I usually go to places where there’s a military man or a policeman who dies in the line of duty. That’s the most honor I can give them — my presence and to be there and to give them a snappy salute for dying for their country.

Well, we have disagreements and you know they broke protocol. When I was mayor, you can really criticize me, even calling me names. But because I forgot, those fools, that I am the President and I represent a country.

You just go out… do not go out outside of the media and start blabbering your mouth because I represent a sovereign state. However you do not like it, that is not my business. My business really is to protect the people of the Philippines and to keep intact the integrity of this Republic. That is my solemn and sacred duty.

That’s what they don’t know but I really do not… They want me to go to prison, thinking that these fools I will allow myself to be arrested while alive. Oh my goodness. Let’s go to hell together.

Bato said… you know Bato is already getting ahead of me with arrogance. Pull it out there. That’s my style. His men followed. Even I couldn’t move anymore. My role is limited.

But you know Bato has my support. He has been around, I was his ninong when he married, many many years ago. He was only 2nd lieutenant here. He earned his force here in Davao City and in Mindanao. And the guy, for all of his , he’s simply loyal to the Republic of the Philippines. Not to me, because I’ve been saying to everybody: Do not nurture loyalty to me. I do not need it. You nurture the love for the country and then you are ready to die for it. Parang ganon.

So this regarding drugs, it will remain relentless. It will be sustained and for the information of everybody including the United Nations, I take full legal and official, make it private, liability. It’s mine, it’s all mine.

And for the military, in the wars that we are waging and pursuant to my orders to destroy the enemy, I take full responsibility for that. Nobody else’s blame. Dito kayo, sa akin lang. Akin at akin lang. It stops there. So that is how I protect the security forces to really also deliver what is supposed or what is expected by the people.

Not that half-baked, afraid to shoot here, and after hitting someone… Well, that’s just how war is. Just say 50,000 drug addicts, put it at 70, that’s manageable. But if it’s true… You know, General Santiago is not a liar and PDEA, especially Sid. He’s been here with us also. Again, he started here in Davao and he ended, well with a rank and I’ve been keeping him in Davao. I said stay there for now, because he’s about to retire. I said stay there, because… but I didn’t even know that I’ll become President.

So, nong na-Presidente ako, I got him as my PDEA because I trust him fully, just like Delfin Lorenzana here. I was the mayor, and he was the one who brought the battalion or the first ranger regiment dito sa siyudad ng Davao and we worked together.

And there were times when the NPAs asked for my presence in a meeting and we had a debate because I’m really used to that. Pero kasi ayaw niya sigurong may mangyari habang nandiyan siya. He really refused me to cross the Minda river. But I was ready, as I’ve always been ready to talk to the communists.

Now, shifting to another topic. We are in a best position now, there’s a window. It is not really very big but may window ngayon for us to take stock of everything.

We are not fighting the communists. They have declared a truce. In return, I also ordered a ceasefire. But I was ahead of them at the beginning to show my good faith, that my offer to talk peace truly came from the heart. I unilaterally did so very early on. The problem was when I went to the hospitals, especially at the AFP Medical Center, I was hit by… blinded, you know. So things heated up— Or was it here? Here.

I was visiting the wake of the three soldiers who were here. Sa wake, nandito ako, sabi ko I’m lifting the… wala ng ceasefire. Sabi ko: Sige, fight na lang kung gusto ninyo. But then again, I sense that they are really also, really tired of fighting, because you know why? They’ve allowed the left to join my government.

And, so that you all aren't affected… not affect the soldiers and the police, even during the discussions, it brought us together at 7 o’clock in the morning. We started at about 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. It was just a division of power.

Sabi ko: You can have the mundane departments — DSWD, Education. Everybody wants our children to be educated, you can have it, except the police and the military and that includes the Polcom. Hindi talaga.

I will not give you any position. It remains to be the commander-in-chief of whoever is the one elected by the Filipino people. Not to me personally, because I am just passing through. After six years, if I reach that point. If not, sorry. Leni will just be—

We have a window. We’re not fighting the communists. And, with the grace of Allah, MI, MN, have expressed their desire to talk. MI, I salute you guys. They even surrendered the drug addicts under their custody, which means to say that maybe the MILF, if we give them the territory they want, to which I’m inclined to give, so there will be no more trouble.

Tutal it’s a definite territory also for the ARMM, but it stretches a little bit, fine. We still have enough land in the entire Republic of Philippines to make everybody happy.

MN, I have yet to hear from Nur. But I said, Nur, if he comes out of his hiding place in Jolo, my advice to you guys, the Army and the Police, and everybody is let him be. Let him be. Si Nur, I wouldn’t say sick, I hope he is well, but matanda na ‘yan, hindi na ‘yan tatakbo. And the last thing that I would want is really, if God forbid, ‘wag sana — na kung may mangyari sa kanya — nasa custody natin.

So there’s nobody of significance in that area who has the pre-eminence like Nur Misuari. But if something happens to those in our custody, we can kiss goodbye to peace in that area. And I’m referring to the Bangsamoro and the Bangsa Tausug.

If you want a differentiation of the two, you use ‘bangsa.’ Bangsamoro, which is really with Murad and Bangsa Tausug, and the only sensible guy there is Nur. I haven't known anyone else who’d carry the influence. But definitely, Abu Sayyaf is out of control, and there is only one way to do it, especially with the beheading of a child.

I said, tell the Abu Sayyaf, if they’re listening now: Adre, I’ve lost my respect for you. I used to have respect, for your fighting for freedom. You are right. You are right. There was this historical injustice, committed against the Moro people. The Americans may want to know, that during their campaign in Mindanao they slaughtered 600,000 Moro people.

What is it to you now that you see two or three criminal shabu operators? ‘Yan ang sakit. Kaya tayo nahirapan. Unang una, bago dumating si Magellan, dala-dala niya ‘yung relihiyon niya, Islam was already ahead. I do not say one century, I do not agree with the scholars, because I found time to read the archives of Malaysia. Sa trading trading, I would put it something like 70 years. Islam was ahead in Mindanao by 70 years.

So you Abu Sayyaf back then, I somewhat saluted. But when you began to slaughter people, in front of the camera and then now you kill an innocent boy, son… I lose my respect for you.

So my orders to the Armed Forces and to the Police, destroy them. Destroy them because they are criminals. And we’ll never have peace in that area there and even if you grant them autonomy, and they maintain to be bandits, we will never have peace in that land. So we can’t do anything about… Our peace talks are useless.

There’s a segment of society, Tausug, [Yakan?] who want peace. And here you are slaughtering people as if they are chickens in front of the public. I lost my respect, I lost my belief in you. That’s why I would not hesitate to order the Armed Forces of the Philippines, kill them. Destroy them. Destroy.

Eh, pati itong droga. This will pull down this country. And I have given you the resources, the books and everything, three to seven years, the reason, I’ll tell you now for the first time.

Do you know the reason why I also agreed with Congress, some congressmen to postpone the barangay elections? Do you know why? Because I am afraid that the drug money will seep into the electoral process. You will just be adding to our headache, people, whoever wins now, those that are funded by drug money will win and you need to impose Martial Law to, to eliminate all, which I will never do in the first place.

It will be difficult for us now, the reason why, second is money. You have to spend billions. I’d rather give that to rehabs. I have to build a rehab center.

As a matter of fact, I ordered you, the military guys, to give us space there in your camp, because you have large territories given by the government. You have reservations, numbering into hundreds of hectares. Give a little space, in the mountain, not here. You cannot rehabilitate these guys there if they remain… You have to isolate them and treat them as if— And for those that cannot be repaired, because as the forensics — Americans also gave that to us — that six to one month incessant use everyday of shabu will shrink the brain of the person.

And these are really legal insanity now. Not… no longer. They become dysfunctional, with the family that’s… will just separate. You know that. Many have separated because of drugs. In the upper class, almost 90 percent if they use drugs, they are already separated.

Tell me of the upper class strata in the Philippines of 50,000, about 45,000 of their spouses are on drugs. That’s it. So the children are pitiful, the family is pitiful.

And these human rights [advocates], just what they say, they didn’t count those who died before I became President. And the children who are raped and the children who are mutilated because he is seeing the devil and he kills his father.

I was saying… A crime against humanity? First of all, I’d like to be frank with you. Are they humans? What is your definition of a human being? Tell me. Human rights. Use it properly in the right context, if you have the brains. Now, if your gray matter between the ears is melting, I cannot help you if that is how you see things.

So I have… mabuti na lang and I’m very sorry it took me time to talk to the Ambassador of China. We were there. We’re discussing for hours. Lahat na. China, about Laos, and what to say in the coming months. And you know, it always ends up with a, hindi naman lahat…There are so many contentious issues. And even just to agree on the things that we are agreeable, mahirapan na ako. Much more for the things that we disagree with.

So sometimes, we would stay up until morning. But you know, I have to sacrifice time and even if I’m really suffering, because of my headache. I have to listen to him to respond properly.

So we don’t have much conflict there. I’m trying to avoid a conflict, because I want the window to remain open for us.

So we no longer have conflict with the MN. If there is any, it’s sporadic, intermittent but very… I said it’s just a few. Not really lives, but you know, in proportion to the dimensions of the conflict. We don’t have the NPA, the MN is relatively silent, then the MI has agreed to talk. So we have this time to concentrate on the front against drugs, and also on extremism.

So we have only two and there are just a few. We can crush them, truthfully. If we unleash the firepower of the Armed Forces… the problem is, there might be— It will so inflame passions because… sometimes women and children get hit, but if we really finish them off, we can do it in a week, to the last man.

So we are lucky that we’re able to focus on, on the Abu Sayyaf and on… You do not have to kill. I can assure you. Guys, you don’t have to kill. If you can capture them, announce your authority.

You know, I’d like to respond to the Chief Justice. And as much as possible, I want to be respectful as I can ever be. Madam Justice, you are again wrong when you say ‘do not allow yourself to be arrested if there is no warrant.’

You will be… Add to the number of the dead. Because if you tell people now that there’s no warrant, but I have a gun, I have drugs here, hearing your words ‘do not allow yourself to be arrested without a warrant’ is a very dangerous statement. You will promote anarchy, the things that you really fear.

There is no anarchy under my watch. 800, even 5,000, could it cause anarchy? You know, there are ways of doing it and may I lecture the public — not the Supreme Court — ways you can arrest a person with a warrant and that is the order of the court to any security or police, military. Arrest this guy, it is directed to you. Second is an arrest without a warrant. When? When a guy is committing a crime in your presence. He’s using shabu there or shooting someone, or you catch him in the act, raping someone. That is committing a crime in your presence or had in fact committed. When you arrive, they scatter, they didn’t finish their crime— Then they run or…

You can pursue them to the ends of the world, as long as it is a continuous pursuit or a crime is about to be committed. If he says that… “Son of a bitch, I will shoot you.” And if you are there, just announce, address: “I am from the government, I am army or police, you are under arrest. That is prohibited.”

Or simply say, “Does that gun have a license?” If he’s a terrorist, holding a grenade. Does that mean you have to run to the court, get a warrant? So the judge, those are philosophers, those crazy ones. Even when I was a prosecutor, one judge here came to me… I don’t have to name them but there’s one judge here I really kicked. I kicked him in his office.

I did kick him. He didn’t want to sign. So I was suspicious. Those police officers were in a hurry. This son of a bitch, either he’s saving it for the other side. I said: “Judge, son of a bitch, I will kick you.” He said: “Go ahead and kick me.” I went to his office, and I kicked him. “Do you want me to shoot you?” He said: “No.” Son of a bitch.

You know, I was once in contempt of court. I had a case, I had no witness. Those three, they committed the crime of murder, the taxi driver. But I had no witness, not really, one of them grabbed him by the neck, the other one did something to his testicles. That’s painful, it really paralyzed the person. The other one was just watching. So I said: “Okay, you be my witness, will you agree to testify against your co-accused?” “Yes.”

So I filed the motion to drop him from the criminal complaint information. You know, when I presented it to him, he changed his mind. He started defending himself again. I kicked him. The problem is, I was the one who got arrested. Instead of him, I was the first one in jail. He even made me pay five thousand pesos, that devil. It was direct contempt.

So, it’s about to be committed, actually committing in your presence or in fact committed… “Sir, what was that commander doing, or what was that commander up to.” But they know what they’re going to do, there are pictures of it. So chase them, find them. If you don’t do it, you’re derelict in your duty. It’s really wrong.

Ma’am, I’m sorry, but do not give such statements. You will… You said you’re afraid of… this country sliding to anarchy. At no other time are the streets of Manila almost freed of criminals. Walk around Ma’am and find out.

What is your perspective? Would the military, Armed Forces and the Police agree that I will do something that will create anarchy, and then they remain loyal to me. I would be the first one they kill, Ma’am. That’s true. They have no loyalty to me. You know these guys are loyal to the Constitution and the flag.

And for as long as I’m doing right, they will support me. If I have the tendency to go ahead with anarchy and be a dictator, I know they will execute me. ‘Yan ang totoo kung gusto mo talagang malaman. These guys have only one, they have only the eyes, the flag of the Republic of the Philippines, and the written manifestation of the flag is our Constitution.

So, we are not with the NPA, we are not in the China Sea, we avoid trouble with them. We are not yet capable. I said: Mr. Ambassador, I will not talk about it but when we are in front of each other in a bilateral talk, just the two of us. Then I would state my case. That's it. I have this arbitral judgment. We will not go out of the four corners of this paper. Then, let us talk. But, not now. It’s not the right time to talk about it.

There are so many  doing it. If you start it, it’s going to be a multilateral  and that is very dangerous because pag nag-withdraw ang China sa formal talks, and it could only mean one thing.

Now, are we towards the future… Philippines is going to experience another spasm. When? I do not know. Sigurado? Sigurado ‘yan. So we prepare within our limited talent, our capacity. We cannot really produce the missiles and things. But ‘yung ating nalaman lang how to fight the war, win or lose, wala na tayong pakialam. Basta we fight. It will come, maybe sooner than later. But we have to prepare. So that also to end the small wars here because you have to focus on a new—

Secretary Lorenzana asked for 20. I said I can only give you 10 this year. I will give it to you. 10,000 more. Then I would like to be, the really younger ones, because if they don't arrive, we should thank God.

There’s always the standing army to protect us. Never mind how many, even if it really causes an imbalance in the budget. It is always good to have men there ready to fight and die, rather than having them at all and just surrender just like a meek lamb there. That cannot… Hindi ‘yan. Hindi sa… Hindi pwede sa atin as a national. Hindi natin kaya na mag-ganon lang. So, we prepare, it is up to you guys, to make the projections, how to deal with it. And in the meantime I said, we take advantage of these windows that are already open to us now.

We just talk about peaceful things, they’re doing well. We have declared the ceasefire. Just observe it please. So they can talk there without a ruckus and everything. But I said do not be too… because if you ask me and I tell you privately, it will come. When it will come, you can ask Secretary Lorenzana, we had a very serious discussion, President Ramos and some other guys. It’s good to be prepared. But I know that I can always rely on the Armed Forces to keep the integrity of the Republic, and do not be afraid. If that were my time, I would go first. Just have a uniform made for me like that, a smart one.

If that happens, it will be me. I swear to God. I will go first there. It’s better that you are buried with many saluting. There will even be a carriage. You will be pulled by a horse. But if I get old in this life, I die at 90 years old. “Duterte died.” “Who is that?” “That… never heard of him.” What did he die of?” “Nightmare.” Son of a bitch. I’ll just ride the cannonball. You know, just a joke. But just to–

When the time comes, I will be there to join you. Lead. You are more knowledgeable than me, but to be there to share with you, to defend this Republic. All of us together.

Thank you very much.