MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 195

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MALIMONO IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao, a municipality to be known as the municipality of Malimono, comprising the southern part of the municipality of Surigao, more particularly described and bounded as follows:

On the west by the limits of the marine waters which the municipality of Malimono shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code; On the north by the present boundary between the barrios of Jugban and Malimono, a line from a concrete monument at Point Agata to a concrete monument at Mt. Banderahan, common point of intersection of the boundaries of the barrios of Jugban, Malimono, and Sison; On the east by the present boundary between the barrios of Malimono and Sison and by the present Surigao-Mainit boundary; and On the south by the Surigao-Agusan provincial boundary.

(Reference used in these descriptions: Map of the Northern Portion of Surigao Province showing the proposed municipality of Malimono, etc., scale 1:125,000 submitted by Highway District Engineer Calo C. Castronuevo of Surigao.)

The municipality of Malimono, as herein organized, contains the barrios of Malimono, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Masgad, Cantapoy, and Pili, and the sitios of Cagtinai, Tinago, Cayawan, Hanagdong, Bunyasan, Dinaligan, Manhayag, Can-aga, and Karihatag.

The municipality of Surigao shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Malimono.

The municipality of Malimono shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the municipality of Surigao, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios and sitios comprised in the municipality of Malimono, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Executive Order No. 195 : Creating the Municipality of Malimono in the Province of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (9), 4161-4162.