MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 9

CREATING A NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL COUNCIL, PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL COUNCILS, CITY AGRICULTURAL COUNCILS, AND MUNICIPAL AGRICULTURAL COUNCILS

WHEREAS, in order to carry out effectively the national program of agricultural development of the Philippines, it is necessary that there be close cooperation between the Government and the Filipino farmers throughout the country;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that in the formulation of the national program of agricultural development, the Department of Agricultural and Natural Resources get the benefit of the views and experiences of those actually engaged in farming; and

WHEREAS, for the effective and speedy implementation of such program and for a close coordination of efforts designed to promote the welfare of the rural folk, it is advisable that there be consultations and mutual understanding between those actually engaged in farming and agricultural business and the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by vitrue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Agricultural Council whose function shall be to advise the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources on matters pertaining to the different phases of agriculture. The Council shall be composed of a chairman who shall be the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and 10 private individuals engaged in farming and familiar with the agricultural problems of the country to be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources and to serve for a term of 1 year without compensation.

The National Agricultural Council shall have the following functions:

1. To advise the Government in the formulation of an Agricultural Policy and a Five-Year Agricultural Program;

2. To present to the government, particularly the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the problems affecting agriculture and to make suggestions for their solution;

3. To advise the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources in the formulation of practical ways and means of promoting agriculture, including its proper financing;

4. To evaluate the field of activities and the work of said Department; and

5. To provide means for a constant exchange of information and consultation between said Department and the farmers.

In the exercise of its functions, the Council is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such information, professional consultation and assistance as may be needed.

The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources is also hereby authorized to organize a Provincial Agricultural Council in each province, a City Agricultural Council in each city where it is needed, and a Municipal Agricultural Council in each municipality, the members thereof to be appointed by him.

The Provincial Agricultural Council shall have the following functions:

1. To advise the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources in the formulation of a Five-Year Agricultural Program for the province in accordance with crop regional adaptability, taking into account the advice and suggestions of the different City and Municipal Agricultural Councils;

2. To present to said Department the problems affecting agriculture and to make suggestions for their solution;

3. To evaluate the work of the Department and its officials and employees in the province;

4. To provide means for a constant exchange of information and consultation between the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and its personnel in the province on the one hand and the farmers on the other; and

5. To induce organization of rural associations to undertake local projects with the cooperation of the Government.

The City and Municipal Agricultural Councils shall have the following functions:

1. To advise the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources in the formulation of a Five-Year Agricultural Program for the City or Municipality based on regional corp adaptability;

2. To present to the Director of the Bureau of Agriculture Extension the problems of local agriculture and to make suggestions for their solution;

3. To cooperate with the technicians and assist the extension men and other agricultural fieldmen of the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources in arousing the enthusiasm of the people in their respective city or municipality for better farming practices, and to promote wide dissemination of knowledge and sound farming practices as recommended by said Department;

4. To induce farmers in their respective jurisdiction to organize themselves into producers’ cooperative; and

5. To promote the development of rural community on the basis of self-help programs or projects.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1954). Executive Order No. 10 : Creating a National Agricultural Council, Provincial Agricultural Councils, City Agricultural Councils, and Municipal Agricultural Councils. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 50 (2), 503-505.