MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 84

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAINT BERNARD IN THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE.

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Leyte and pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Leyte a municipality to be known as the municipality of Saint Bernard consisting of the barrios of Himatagon, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Atuyan, Ayahag, Bolodbolod, Cabac- an , Cabagawan, Carnaga , Catmon, Guinsaugon, Himbangan, Hindag- an , Lepanto, Magbagacay, Mahayahay, Malibago, Panian, San Isidro, Sugangon, and Tambis, all of the municipality of Cabalian, same province.

The municipality of Cabalian shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof comprised in the barrios composing the municipality of Saint Bernard.

The municipality of Saint Bernard shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Sage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality, and that the mother municipality of Cabalian, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Saint Bernard, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-153]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.