MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 131

REVISING THE SCHEDULE OF PER DIEMS FOR PROVINCIAL, CITY, AND MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AND REVOKING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 369, DATED SEPTEMBER 15, 1941

In order that the per diems for provincial, city, and municipal officers and employees traveling on official business, when allowed, may conform with the rates of per diems for officers and employees of the National Government, it is hereby ordered that the per diems of said provincial, city, and municipal officers and employees be fixed, with the approval of the corresponding Head of Department, at rates not to exceed the following:

( a ) For officers and employees receiving a salary of two thousand pesos or less per annum, a per diem of not to exceed two pesos;

( b ) For those receiving more than two thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding four thousand pesos per annum, a per diem of not to exceed three pesos;

( c ) For those receiving more than four thousand pesos per annum, but not exceeding six thousand pesos per annum, a per diem of not to exceed four pesos;

( d ) For those receiving more than six thousand pesos per annum, a per diem of not to exceed five pesos.

Any officer or employee whose compensation is fixed at other than the per-annum basis may be given the rate of per diem authorized for that receiving compensation on the corresponding per-annum basis.

Provincial Boards and City and Municipal Councils may approve per diems at rates lower than those fixed herein depending upon their financial capacity, with the approval of the corresponding Head of Department.

Executive Order No. 369, dated September 15, 1941, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Executive Order No. 131 : Revising the schedule of per diems for provincial, city, and municipal officers and employees and revoking Executive Order No. 369, dated September 15, 1941. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 51 (10), 4906.