MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 3

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN JOSE, PROVINCE OF ANTIQUE, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF HAMTIC.

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Governor of Antique and pursuant to the provisions of Section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby organized in the province of Antique a municipality to be known as the municipality of Hamtic, which shall consist of that portion of the municipality of San Jose which is separated from the said municipality by the following boundary lines:

From a point on the south bank of the mouth of Malandog River running northeasterly in a straight imaginary line to a point on the northeast side of the San Jose-Hamtic provincial road ten meters west of the intersection of this northeast side of said road with the northwest side of the Sibalom-Piapi-Malandog provincial road; thence following approximately the same direction in an imaginary line that is parallel to, and ten meters distant from the said Sibalom-Piapi-Malandog provincial road until it touches the present boundary between San Jose and Sibalom. (Used in this description: Sketch Map of the Municipality of San Jose prepared June, 1951 by Surveyman C. Q. Tumangday and approved by the District Engineer, Drawn to Scale 1:75,000.)

The municipality of Hamtic contains the following barrios; Malandog, Piapi, Buhang, Budbudan, La Paz, Calala, Guintas, Lanag, Villavert-Jimenez, Asluman, Mapatag, Apdo, Fabrica, Songbongan,  Bandiangan, Linahan, and Hamtic which shall be seat of the municipal government.

The municipality of San Jose shall have its present territory minis the portion thereof included in the nunioipality of Hamtio.

The municipality of Hamtic shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof, and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance or the Provincial Treasurer of Antique that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of San Jose, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios comprised in the municipality of Hamtic, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all statutory obligations, and provide for essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-100] . Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.