MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 183

CREATING CERTAIN BARRIOS IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BILAR, PROVINCE OF BOHOL

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby created in the municipality of Bilar, province of Bohol, the following barrios:

1. Villa Suerte—

To consist of the sitio of Katague of barrio Owac.

2. Zamora—

To consist of the sitios of Duangon and Cadlum of the poblacion and Maslog of barrio Campagao.

3. Rizal—

To consist of the sitios of Das-ai and Datag of barrio Owac and Can-oyang, and Cantomonad (part) of barrio Subayon.

4. Bonifacio—

To consist of the sitios of Tawid, Antijon, and Cantany of barrio Cabacnitan.

5. Roxas—

To consist of the sitios of Santa Cruz, Caipa, and Tawid of barrio To-og.

6. Quezon—

To consist of the sitios of Guinlud-an and Linao of barrio To-og.

7. Riverside—

To consist of the sitios of Bunlak and Taytay of the poblacion.

8. Cambigsi—

To consist of the sitios of Cambigsi, Cambaliga, and Tinoc-an of barrio Bugang.

9. Bugang Norte—

To consist of the sitios of Luctob and Ilawod (northern part) of barrio Bugang.

10. Bugang Sur—

To consist of the sitios of Ilaya, Kumilao, and Ilawod (southern part) of barrio Bugang.

11. Yanaya—

To consist of the southern part of the poblacion from the presidencia building and the sitio of Ogpong of barrio Owac.

The barrios of Bugang, whose territory is being divide among the three barrios of Bugang Norte, Bugang Sur and Cambigsi, and To-og, whose territory is being divided between the two barrios of Roxas and Quezon, shall, as of the date this Order takes effect, cease to exist as barrios. The barrios of Owac, Campagao, Subayon and Cabacnitan, and the poblacion, all of the municipality of Bilar, shall have their present territories minus those com­prised in the sitios included in the barrios being created herein.

This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Executive Order No. 183 : Creating certain barrios in the Municipality of Bilar, Province of Bohol. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (6), 2946-2947.