MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 144

AUTHORIZING THE DESIGNATION OF PERSONNEL OFFICERS IN THE DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES, AND AGENCIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT AND DEFINING THE DUTIES OF SUCH OFFICERS

WHEREAS, the realization of the objectives of the Government depends in large measure on the enthusiasm, cooperation, and loyalty of its officers and employees;

WHEREAS, personnel management is a responsibilty not only of the central personnel agency but also of the line officials, whether in a department, bureau, offices or agency, because the latter officials are accountable for the success of the program of their organizations;

WHEREAS, to enable line officials to develop the enthusiasm and secure the maximum cooperation and loyalty of the officers and employees under them and thus improve the efficiency and morale of government personnel, it is necessary that they be assisted by competent persons who shall be responsible for personnel management; and

WHEREAS, there is necessity for placing personnel work on a more objective and scientific basis conformably with the spirit of the constitutional precept on the merit system as well as in the interests of dynamic and progressive leadership in the field of public administration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the designation of a Personnel Officer in each department, bureau, office, or agency of the National Government pending the creation of a regular and permanent position for personnel officer, as follows:

1. Each department, bureau, office, or agency of the National Government shall have a personnel officer who, subject to the authority of the head of department, bureau, office, or agency, as the case may be, and to the regulations to be promulgated by the Commissioner of Civil Service, shall be responsible for personnel management and the maintenance of effective liaison with the Bureau of Civil Service.

2. The personnel officer of the department shall be designated by the head of department concerned from among the qualified officers and employees of the department, and the person so designated shall perform the duties of personnel officer without additional compensation.

3. The personnel officer of a bureau, office, or agency shall be designated by the chief of the bureau, office or agency, as the case may be, from among the qualified officers and employees of said bureau, office, or agency, and the person so designated shall perform the duties of personnel officer without additional compensation.

4. To be eligible for designation as personnel officer of a department, bureau, office or agency, a person must be a holder of a college degree preferably in public administration or, in the absence of such a degree, must have taken courses in public administration, personnel management, organization and management, or similar courses; must have qualified in a personnel technician examination or its equivalent; and must have had experience in personnel administration for at least five years or must have been chief or assistant chief of a division or held the position of equal rank for the same period.

5. The duties of a personnel officer are as follows:

( a ) He shall perform such duties as the Commissioner of Civil Service may require in connection with examinations, investigation, appointments, promotions, and other personnel matters.

( b ) He shall assist in the development and formulation of policies and instructions in all areas of personnel management, subject to the approval of the head of department, bureau, office, or agency, as the case may be, and in accordance with the Civil Service Law and Rules.

( c ) He shall assist selecting and/or appointing officials in evaluation of applicants and process appointments, promotions, and other actions for compliance with the Civil Service Law and Rules.

( d ) He shall advise management in matters involving employee relations and morale.

( e ) He shall advise employee and supervisors on problems involving human relations.

( f ) He shall sponsor suggestion programs and other means of securing employee participation in work management; arrange for adequate health services and recreational and other activities.

( g ) He shall assist supervisors in the development and formulation of performance standards and evaluation.

( h ) He shall assist in staff training and development.

( i ) He shall inform employees of the rights and obligations arising from their employment.

( j ) He shall keep record of personnel.

( k ) He shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be required in the interest of employee efficiency and morale.

6. Copies of the order designating the Personnel Officers shall be furnished the Department Head concerned and the Commissioner of Civil Service.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARIANO YENKO, JR. Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Executive Order No. 144 : Authorizing the designation of personnel officers in the departments, bureaus, offices, and agencies of the national government and defining the duties of such officers. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 51 (12), 6033-6035.