MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 63

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF KIDAPAWAN, PROVINCE OF COTABATO, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF MAKILALA

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as the Municipality of Makilala, which shall consist of that portion of the municipality of Kidapawan which is separated from the said municipality by the following boundary lines:

From M.B.M. No. 3 on the Kidapawan-M’lang boundary line which is also on the Saguing River following the course of said river upstream to its source somewhere on Mount Apo until it touches the Cotabato-Davao boundary line.

The municipality of Makilala contains the following barrios: Lamitan which shall be the seat of the municipal government, San Vicente, Santa Catalina, Malasila, Indangan, Bulacanon, Mala-ang, Libertad, Saguing, Luna, Bulatucan, Kisante, Garsica, and Junction.

The municipality of Kidapawan shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Makilala.

The municipality of Makilala shall begin to exist upon the appoint­ment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof, and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Kidapawan, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios comprised in the municipality of Makilala, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all contractual and statutory obligations, and provide for essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippine, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.