MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 59

PROVIDING FOR FACILITIES NECESSARY TO DECLARE EFFECTIVITY OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 832 IN ALL PROVINCES AND CHARTERED CITIES OF THE PHILIPPINES ACCORDING TO A DEFINITE SCHEDULE OF DATES

WHEREAS, Section 10 of Republic Act No. 832 entitled “AN ACT TO REGULATE THE SALE, EXCHANGE, OR DELIVERY OF HOME POUNDED, UNDERMILLED, MILLED OR POLISHED RICE, AND PROVIDING PENALTY FOR VIOLATION THEREOF,” provides that the Act shall take effect upon the proclamation of the President of the Philippines when the Secretary of Health certifies that the province or provinces and cities concerned have already the facilities necessary to implement the law;

WHEREAS, actual experience in the provinces of Bataan, Tarlac and Pangasinan, where the law has been effective since February 25, 1953, has shown that the following measures are necessary to insure the successful implementation of Republic Act No. 832:

(a) All provinces and cities must be declared under the law within the shortest practicable period under a definite schedule of dates.

(b) The distribution and sales of Premix Rice must be extended and carried out aggressively and efficiently in order that all rice mills, irrespective of where they are located, will be able to procure it conveniently and readily and thus avoid any excuse for non-compliance with the law.

(c) Availability of approved feeders must be assured and their installation in rice mills must be expedited to conform to the above-mentioned schedule.

(d) The price of Premix Rice and the premiums on enriched rice must be regulated and controlled by the government.

(e) The educational campaign by government agencies must be intensified in order that all sections of the public may realize the benefits derived from the enforcement of this law.

WHEREAS, in line with the above findings, it is intended to proclaim the effectivity of Republic Act No. 832 in all the different provinces and cities in the Philippines in accordance with the schedule of dates attached hereto as Appendix A, when the facilities necessary to implement the law will have already been established;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. That the business of manufacturing, distributing and selling Premix Rice now being undertaken by the National Rice and Corn Corporation shall be transferred and entrusted to private enterprises.

2. That the NARIC Premix Plant facilities shall be leased immediately by the National Rice and Corn Corporation under reasonable terms not later than November 30, 1954, to a competent private party who, in the opinion of the Secretary of Health, can satisfactorily carry out the commercial phase involved for the successful implementation of the law, and who will cooperate with the Department of Health in the promotion of Rice Enrichment in the Philippines.

3. That dollar allocation for the importation of the vitamins and chemicals needed for the manufacture of the Premix Rice shall be set aside yearly in such amounts as may be required, and assigned to bona-fide manufacturers of Premix Rice as certified by the Secretary of Health, to be used exclusively by said manufacturers for the manufacture of Premix Rice only.

4. That the amount of P100,000 shall be immediately released from the balance of the appropriation in Republic Act No. 832 to the Institute of Nutrition, Department of Health, to be used for the purchase, transportation, sales and installation of approved feeders as facility required by Republic Act No. 832 for its implementation.

5. That the National Shipyards and Steel Corporation shall manufacture and deliver the type of feeders as approved by the Department of Health according to purchase orders issued to it by the Institute of Nutrition, Department of Health, in quantities up to 500 units per month, and that at least 50% of the invoice value shall be payable to the NASSCO in advance, and full payment of the balance thereof shall be made within ninety (90) days after delivery of each order.

6. That the Department of Health shall encouraqe the manufacture and sale of approved feeders by private firms, provided that the prices are competitive with those of the National Shipyards and Steel Corporation.

7. That the Department of Health and its agencies shall undertake the distribution and sale of approved feeders to each and every rice miller in the Philippines at actual cost under such a system as to allow rice millers to readily procure and install them not later than thirty (30) days before the dates of effectivity of the law in their respective localities.

8. That each rice miller shall, on his account and responsibility, procure and install the feeder in his rice mill not later than thirty (30) days before the date of effectivity of the law in the locality where his rice mill is erected.

9. That the Department of Health is hereby empowered to issue such orders, rules and regulations as are necessary to implement this Order and to control and supervise the price and quality of the Premix Rice manufactured and distributed by the private firms.

10. That the balance of the original appropriation of P300,000 in Republic Act No. 832 shall be immediately released for the implementation of this Order.

11. That the Department of Health shall encourage competition in the production and distribution of Premix Rice, provided that such competition will not adversely affect the universal application of the Act.

This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Reference : Appendix “A”

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.