MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 73

CREATING A SPECIAL COMMITTEE TO DETERMINE PRESENT AND FUTURE REAL ESTATE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE NATIONAL DEFENSE PROGRAM.

For the purpose of investigating and determining the most expeditious, feasible and economical method of liquidating and disposing of real estate comprising military reservations acquired or to be acquired from the United States which are not presently utilized or programmed for use by the Armed Forces and of procuring by the Government of such lands as may be required for the present and future national defense program with due regard to furthering the Philippine effort of mutual defense with the United States, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY,  President of the Philippines, do hereby create a special committee, composed of the following:

The Committee is authorized to meet with appropriate United States officials to jointly determine the present and future real estate requirements for defense installations in the Philippines for the mutual defense program.

The Committee is also authorized to call upon any Department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, or upon any officer or employee thereof, for such assistance and information as it may require in the performance of its work, and, for the purpose of securing such Information, it shall have access to, and the right to examine, any books, documents, papers, or records thereof.

The Committee shall submit its findings and recommendations to the President of the Philippines within the shortest possible time.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-153]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.