MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 67

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS COVERING DETAIL OR ASSIGNMENT OF MILITARY PERSONNEL TO CIVILIAN OFFICES AND OFFICIALS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations covering the detail and/or assignment of military personnel to civilian offices and officials:

1. The following shall be entitled to army, air force, and naval Aides-de-Samp;

a. The President, in such number and of such grades as he may determine;

b. The Secretary of National Defense, in such number and of such grades as he may determine;

c. General or flag officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in the active service in any of the armed services in such number and of such grades as the Secretary of National Defense may determine;

d. General or flag officers of the Armed Forces, whether in the active, inactive, or retired status, who may be appointed Philippine diplomatic representatives of the rank of minister or higher, in such number and of such grades as may be prescribed by the Secretary of National Defense for general and flag officers in the active service in any of the armed services.

2. a. Military Assistants may be assigned to the Office of the Secretary of National Defense, in such number and of such grades as he may determine;

b. With the approval of the President, Military Assistants may be assigned to the Office of the Vice-President, the Senate President, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives;

c. Military Assistants must be in the active service of the armed forces. They shall receive the pay and allowances of their respective grades and ranks in the armed forces and such additional allowances and per diems as the law and the rules and regulations may allow.

3. Personal Military Assistants may be assigned by the Secretary of National Defense to the Vice-President, the Senate President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, or any Philippine diplomatic representative of the rank of minister or higher who is not otherwise entitled to an aide-de-camp, subject to the following conditions:

a. Only one Personal Military Assistant may he allowed each of such officials at any one time;

b. The military made of such military assistant shall not be higher than Captain or Lieutenant Senior Grade;

c. The military assistant shall not collect from the armed forces, during the period of such assignment or detail, any allowances, traveling expenses, or per diems other than the pay and allowances (of his grade, rank and rating) he would be entitled to receive if he were on regular assignment or detail with units of the Armed Forces.

4. The Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines, may, by arrangement with the head of any government office, agency or entity, assign to or detail with such office, agency or entity an armed forces (army, air force, or navy) liaison officer.

5. The President, the Secretary of National Defense, or the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, may detail armed forces security guards to any civilian government office or official, or to any private entity or person, when such detail would be in the public interest in the opinion of the official ordering the same.

6. In addition to the assignments and details enumerated in paragraph 1 thru 5, the President may, pursuant to law, assign to or detail with any civilian government office commissioned officers of the armed forces.

7. This order does not regulate or in any way apply to the assignment or detail of army, air force, and naval attaches to the Philippine diplomatic mission abroad.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.