MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 153

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 7 DATED JANUARY 7, 1954, ENTITLED “CREATING THE PEACE AND AMELIORATION FUND COMMISSION”

The fifth paragraph of Executive Order No. 7 dated January 7, 1954, creating the Peace and Amelioration Fund Commission, is herey amended to read as follows:

Said funds shall be (1) for the purchase of loose firearms and such other arms and equipment as can be used to resist the violent elements in accordance with the provisions of Republic Acts Nos. 486 and 482; (2) for the compensation Dr additional members of the Armed Forces to be employed in the peace campaign; (3) for indemnity to the heirs of those who may die or receive injuries in line of duty; (4) for other relief and assistance to civilians who may be engaged in the peace campaign; (5) for aid in the protection of the civilian population in case of emergency; (6) for payment of cash rewards to civilians or to members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and in case of their death in action to their immediate relatives, subject in the latter cases to the prior approval of the President of the Philippines, for the surrender, capture, or killing or for information leading to the capture or killing of leaders of the dissidents and subversive organizations or for such other assistance rendered directly in connection with the current peace and order campaign and for intelligence, counterintelligence, and psychological warfare expenses of the Department of National Defense; and (7) for payment of expenses in connection with investigation of complaints filed with the Office of the President against the manner the various executive departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, instrumentalities, and government-owned or controlled corporations are performing the duties entrusted to them by law, or complaints against the acts, conduct or behaviour of any officer or employee thereof. The amounts collected shall be alloted by authority of the President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the Chairman of the Commission, the Treasurer of the Commission and the Commissioner of the Budget. All the contributions and disbursements of the Commission shall be audited by the Auditor General or his representative in accordance with law.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARIANO YENKO, JR. Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1955). Executive Order No. 153 : Amending Executive Order No. 7 dated January 7, 1954, entitled “Creating the Peace and Amelioration Fund Commission”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (1), 12-13.