MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 226

CREATING A NATIONAL CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE TO RAISE FUNDS TO CARRY OUT OBJECTIVES OF JOSE RIZAL NATIONAL CENTENNIAL COMMISSION

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 14-27 authorizes and directs the Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission to organize and undertake a national fund campaign for the purpose of raising funds to finance the construction of a National Cultural Shrine and other memorials provided for therein;

NOIV, THEREFORE, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a National Campaign Committee which shall organize, initiate and carry out a nationwide campaign to raise funds from voluntary contributions from all elements of our population in order to enable the Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission to carry out its objectives defined in Republic Act No. 1427 and Executive Order No. 52, series of 195 The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The goal of the campaign shall be fixed at a minimum amount to supplement existing government appropriations to finance the following projects:

1. The construction of a National Cultural Shrine to be dedicated to Dr. Jose Rizal, such shrine to be composed of –

a. a National Theatre b. a National Museum c. a National Library

to be erected preferably on a single site.

2. Improvement of the Rizal Monument at the Luneta and the beautification and landscaping of the surrounding areas.

3. Rehabilitation of the Jose Rizal Cell at Fort Santiago.

4. The erection of a grand monument in honor of Dr. Jose Rizal in the Capitol of the Philippines in Diliman.

5. Acquisition, locally and abroad, of all available Rizaliana materials, such as writings and works of arts of our hero, and about our hero.

6. Procurement of Rizaliana relics and materials available locally and abroad.

7. Translation and printing in the National Language, in English, and in other major dialects of the Philippines of the “NOLI ME TANGERE,” “EL FILIBUSTERISMO,” and other works of Dr. Jose Rizal, and such works of others about him as are considered necessary in the proper understanding of the meaning of his life and labors.

8. Preparation of the general program of Centennary of Dr. Jose Rizal during the week preceding but including June 19, 1961.

9. Initiate the holding of a National Congress in connection with the Centennary, to which shall be invited as official guests of the Republic of the Philippines such foreign individuals as hove become known for their love of Rizal and his works.

10. Arrange for the issuance of commemorative stamps of the centennary.

11. Create Jose Rizal Medals to commemorate the centennary to be awarded to persons and associations having juridical personality who have contributed to the understanding and propagation of the teachings of Rizal.

12. Notional contest to select a popular but simple biography of Rizal in English and Notional Language and the translation thereof into other major dialects of the Philippines.

13. Establishment, as far as may be possible, of Rizal Centers in capitals of provinces and chartered cities in the Philippines which will contain a working library and museum on Rizal.

The Committee may, in its discretion and judgment, (1) organize provincial, city and municipal and barrio campaign committees, using as a guide for this purpose Executive Order No, 163, series of 1956, and (2) adopt planning and pertinent details related to the nation-wide campaign for funds as well as the execution thereof, and thereafter report the overall program for the campaign to the Commission.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1957). [Executive Order Nos. : 221 – 300]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.