MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 180

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ACQUISITION OF TITLES TO FARM LOTS WITHIN THE MOUNT DATA NATIONAL PARK RESERVATION AND CENTRAL CORDILLERA FOREST RESERVE, BOTH IN THE MOUNTAIN PROVINCE, DIRECTING THE EVICTION OF THE ALIEN FARMERS WITHIN THESE TWO RESERVATIONS AND PROSECUTION OF FILIPINO DUMMIES TOGETHER WITH THEIR ALIEN EXPLOITERS FOR VIOLATION OF THE PUBLIC LAND, ANTI-DUMMY, AND INTERNAL REVENUE LAWS

In order to extend the policy of the Administration of providing land for the landless to the bona fide vegetable farmers presently occupying and cultivating areas, within the Mount Data. National Park and Central Cordillera Forest reservations in the Mountain Province, and at the same time to promote soil, watery and forest conservation in said areas, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations in pursuance thereof:

1. All Filipino, vegetable farmers who have occupied and cultivated farm lots within the reservations above mentioned shall be permitted to acquire title thereto in accordance with the Public Land Act upon fulfillment of the following conditions:

( a ) The claimant must completely improve and terrace the portion of land applied for by him within three years from the date of this Order, otherwise the said parcel of land, or whatever portion of it remains unimproved and unterraced at the end of this period, shall automatically revert to the public domain.

( b ) If the top or crown of a hill or mountain is more or less fiat and level, but its slopes are steep and rocky, the top shall be terraced, improved and cultivated to prevent soil erosion, while the steep hillsides shall be planted to trees and/or paspallum grass and other vegetation cover.

( c ) If the slopes of hills or mountains, are of gentle grade while the mountain or hill tops are steep and pointed, the sides should be terraced for cultivation while the peaks should be planted to trees and/or paspallum grass and other vegetation cover.

2. At any time within three years from the date .of this Order, the claimant may file the corresponding, application for the grant of title to him over the lot covered by his claim upon a form and in-the manner to be determined by the Director of Lands in accordance with the provisions of the Public Land Act. The exclusion of the areas applied for from the said reservations shall be effected before giving due course to said applications.

3. The determination as to whether any applicant for title grant to any parcel of land within the Mount Data National Park and Central Cordillera Forest reservations is legally entitled to the issuance thereof, shall be entrusted to a screening committee which shall make the proper recommendation therefor. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

A representative of the Director of Forestry A representative of the Director of Lands A representative of the Director of Soil Conservation A private citizen of the region, to be named by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources

4. Compliance with all the requisite conditions for the grant and issuance of title to the claimant of a farm lot within the two reservations above mentioned shall be exacted even after grant and issuance of title, which conditions shall be expressly stated therein. In eases of failure to do so, the lot involved shall revert to the public domain.

5. All alien occupants and/or operators of farm lots within the Mount Data National Park and Central Cordillera Forest reservations are hereby given until June 30, 1956, within which to vacate or move out of the premises presently being occupied or cultivated by them, without prejudice to their prosecution, together with their Filipino dummies, for any violation of the Public Land, Anti-Dummy and Internal Revenue Laws.

6. The National Bureau of Investigation, the Anti-Dummy Board, the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, and the Bureau of Internal Revenue are hereby directed to work jointly and collaborate in the investigation and prosecution of aliens and Filipino dummies for any violation of the Public Land, Anti-Dummy, and Internal Revenue Laws, arising from the occupation and/ or operation by aliens of farm lands within the aforesaid two reservations.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Executive Order No. 180 : Prescribing rules and regulations governing the acquisition of titles to farm lots within the Mount Data National Park Reservation and Central Cordillera Forest Reserve, both in the Mountain Province, directing the eviction of the alien farmers within these two reservations and prosecution of Filipino dummies together with their alien exploiters for violation of the Public Land, Anti-Dummy, and Internal Revenue Laws. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (5), 2463-2465.