MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 70

CREATING AN ASIAN GOOD NEIGHBOR RELATIONS COMMISSION TO PROMOTE MORE INTIMATE UNDERSTANDING OF THE AIMS AND ASPIRATIONS OF THE FILIPINO PEOPLE, BETTER APPRECIATION OF THEIR CULTURE AND PROGRESS AS A CHRISTIAN AND DEMOCRATIC NATION AND CLOSER RELATIONS WITH THEIR ASIAN NEIGHBORS.

WHEREAS, from time memorial the Philippines has had direct and intimate relations with Asian countries, even ante-dating the age of European discovery of the Archipelago;

WHEREAS, racially and geographically, we, Filipinos, belong to the treat family of Asian nations;

WHEREAS, in our own interest as well as that of the Asian family of nations as a group, it is highly desirable that not only should we know our fellow Asians better and cooperate with them more for mutual benefit hut that cur aims and aspirations as a people should also be more widely understood and appreciated by them;

WHEREAS, with our Christian religion, Occidental civilization and democratic pattern of life and prepress, we have a mission to discharge and a service to render towards cur fellowmen in Asia and, together with them, a common obligation to contribute our utmost towards the advancement and welfare of all humanity;

WHEREAS, in keeping with our democratic faith and cherished humanitarian traditions and ideals, we should consider it to be cur nation’s duty to spread the blessings of freedom in cur area and share without neighbors and racial kin the bountiful legacy which has become ours as the first independent Republic in Asia;

WHEREAS, it would be to the greater advantage of the peoples of Asia that they themselves maintain in a steady stream the exchanges of their culture, the products of their industry, the goods of commerce and even their current thoughts and views on matters of common concern to them; and

WHEREAS, it should be the aim of all Asians to pool their wisdom, their talents, their spiritual, moral ad material resources, and all their energies in a determined and coordinated effort to safeguard and advance their common heritage and interests, as a group, to contribute more and more substantially to the progress, prosperity and happiness of all mankind;

NOW, THEREFORE. I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. A Commission is hereby created, composed of nine members to be designated by the President, whose functions shall he:

(a) To promote a more intimate understanding of the aims and aspirations of our people with a view to their wider appreciation among our Asian neighbors;

(b) To adopt measures and undertake practical projects for bringing about closer good neighbor relations and more effective cooperation among Asian peoples;

(c) To encourage greater intercourse, intelligent interest in each other’s welfare, problems and potentials, and a spirit of mutual understanding and solidarity among Asians; and

(d) To establish and maintain steady media for regular exchanges of information, knowledge, experience, services and products in the various fields of human endeavor for the common benefit of all.

2. The Commission shall undertake studies, observations and surveys with which to guide itself both in drawing up and in carrying cut a program of activities in pursuance of this order.

3. The Commission shall initiate such undertakings and carry cut such projects as it may deem necessary for the attainment of the aims herein set forth and, from time to time, create such groups as if may wish to entrust with specific tasks essential to the full implementation of its program.

4. The Commission may draw from any available sources the best materials and services calculated to facilitate the realization of the purposes for which it is being created and all branches, agencies and instrumentalities of the government as well as all private individuals and entities are enjoined to render maximum assistance.

5. The Commission may, in its direction, accept, administer and make use of any donations, contributions, endowment and bequests as it may receive towards the achievement of the objectives of this order.

6. Whenever the Commission, its members and those it calls upon to render service to advance its program are in the process of discharging specifically assigned missions abroad, they shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as are normally accorded to those specially dispatched overseas on official business.

7. The Commission shall function under the immediate supervision and control of the President of the Philippines and it shall report on its activities directly to him.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-153]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.