MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 163

CREATING PROVINCIAL, CITY, MUNICIPAL, AND BARRIO COMMITTEES TO LEAD THE CELEBRATION OF THE RIZAL CENTENARY IN THEIR RESPECTIVE COMMUNITIES

WHEREAS, the First Centenary of the birth of Jose Rizal, apostle of Filipino nationlism, martyr, and hero, which is the subject of Executive Order No. 52 dated August 10, 1954, should be celebrated on a nationwide scale;  and

WHEREAS, the First Centenary of the birth of Jose Rizal, religious creeds, should be given full opportunity to take part in the celebration of said centenary;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create Provincial, City, Municipal, and Barrio Centennial Committees to lead the celebration of the Rizal centenary in their respective communities.

The Jose Rizal Provincial Centennial Committee shall be composed of the Provincial Governor, as chairman; the Superintendent of Public Schools, as vice-chairman; and the Provincial Treasurer, the District Engineer, the Superintendent of Private Schools, the members’ of the Provincial Board, and two representatives of civic or cultural associations in the province, as members.

The Jose Rizal City Centennial Committee shall be composed of the Mayor as chairman; the Vice-Mayor as first vice-chairman; the Superintendent, of Public Schools as second vice-chairman; and the following as members: the City Treasurer, the City Engineer, the City Physician, the members of the City Council, two representatives of the Parent-Teacher Association, and representatives of cultural and civic organizations not exceeding three in number.

The Jose Rizal Municipal Centennial Committee shall be composed of the Mayor as chairman; the Vice-Mayor as first vice-chairman; the Supervisor of Public Schools as second vice-chairman; the Municipal Treasurer, Municipal Councilors, and two representatives of the Parent-Teacher Association, as members.

The Jose Rizal Barrio Centennial Committee shall be composed of the Councilor of the barrio as chairman; the Barrio Lieutenant as first vice-chairman; the Principal Teacher of the Barrio Public School as second vice-chairman; and two members of the Parent-Teacher Association, and six citizens to be chosen by the other members, as members.

These Provincial, City, Municipal, and Barrio Centennial Committee shall lead the celebration of the Rizal Centennial in their respective communities. They shall coordinate their activities with those of the Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission in Manila in order that the Filipino people will act in unison in carrying out a most successful celebration and achieving a most comprehensive understanding of Jose Rizal as a man and as an ideal.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Executive Order No. 163 : Creating provincial, city, municipal, and barrio committees to lead the celebration of the Rizal Centenary in their respective communities. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (2), 558-559.