MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 203

CREATING AN AIR NAVIGATION SERVICES COORDINATING COMMITTEE (ANSCC) IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the promotion of safety, regularity and efficiency of both civil and military flights utilizing the Philippine air space depends largely on the continuous coordination and cooperation between the users and providers of the common system of air navigation services;

WHEREAS, the users and providers of the common system of air navigation services in the Philippines are various governmental and private agencies including those of a foreign government; and

WHEREAS, the desired continuous coordination and cooperation between the said agencies can be best effected through a permanent body composed of responsible representatives from the various agencies having mutual or joint interest in the air navigation services;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. An Air Navigation Services Coordinating Committee (ANSCC) in the Philippines is hereby created to perform the following functions:

(a) To determine and correlate users’ requirements of air navigation services and to coordinate with other agencies in the solution of problems on the following matters:

(1) Designation of limits of control areas and control zones;

(2) Evaluation of minimum instrument cruising levels;

(3) Installation, operation, maintenance, alteration or decommissioning of radio aids to navigation;

(4) Revision in the airways system;

(5) Assignment of radio frequencies;

(6) Aerodromes and ground aids

(7) Establishment of procedures to insure coordination of military activities affecting civil aviation with the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

(b) To investigate and study the adequacy of present air navigation services in the Philippines with the end in view of adopting ways and means of developing a truly common system for all civil and military flights, thereby promoting the highest degree of safety in the air spaces and efficiency of the system in terms of cost and quality of service rendered;

(c) To render the system responsive to the fast changing needs of aviation demanded by the ever increasing volume of traffic and the higher speeds of aircraft being developed, particularly with reference to radio aids requirements, air traffic control and communications procedures, and civil air regulations;

(d) To develop and recommend integrated policies to be carried out and actions to be taken by the participating agencies;

(e) To adopt rules of procedure for the Committee; and

(f) To deal with matters within its sphere of action not specifically mentioned herein.

2. The Air Navigation Services Coordinating Committee (ANSCC) in the Philippines shall be composed of the Civil Aeronautics Administrator or his authorized representative, as Chairman, and of representatives of the following offices:

a) Weather Bureau

b) Bureau of Telecommunications

c) Civil Aeronautics Administration

d) Philippine Air Force

e) Radio Control Division, Deportment of Public Works and Communications

f) Philippine Air Lines

g) Such other representatives as the Committee may invite to the Committee conferences as advisers or observers.

3. The Committee is authorized to solicit the regular participation as observers in the Committee of duly authorized representatives of the U.S. Air Force, Headquarters 13th Air Force; Commander U. S. Naval Forces (Philippines); Airline Pilots Association of the Philippines; U.S. CAA and the International Air Transport Association (IATA). These representatives may be invited to submit recommendations to the Committee on matters of joint interest.

4. The Committee shall have a Secretary and two stenographers to be supplied by the Civil Aeronautics Administration.

5. The Civil Aeronautics Administrator , as Chairman of the Committee, shall call a meeting at the earliest possible time to organize the Air Navigation Services Coordinating Committee (ANSCC) in the Philippines. The ANSCC shall elect such additional officers and create such sub-committees as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Executive Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of Oct., in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Executive Order Nos. : 154-243]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.