MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 165

CREATING THE NATIONAL FIRE CONTROL COUNCIL

WHEREAS, destructive and dangerous fires occur frequently in the country, rendering people homeless and destitute and resulting in serious economic loss to the nation; and

WHEREAS, the planning; study, and adoption of efficient and modern methods of preventing and fighting fires are essential for the safety of the people and the protection of their properties;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Fire Control Council composed of the following:

GROUP I (GOVERNMENT)

GROUP II (PROFESSIONALS)

GROUP III (SAFETY)

GROUP IV (FIRE INSURANCE)

GROUP V (CIVIC)

The Council, which shall meet at the call of the General Chairman, shall have the following duties:

( a ) To cause the investigation of the origin and causes of all fires and to gather statistical data on fires, for purposes of analysis; ( b ) To study ways and means of preventing fires and the spread of fires; ( c ) To study suitable fire-lighting plans and facilities; ( d ) To arouse the inhabitants of the Philippines to the necessity of combating and preventing fires by appealing to their sense of individual responsibility through the newspapers, radio, posters, or other means of dissemination and teaching of principles of fire prevention in schools and other institution; ( e ) To cooperate with the authorities concerned in the adoption of such measures as may be necessary for the effective supervision and regulation of the manufacture distribution, storage, and possession of petroleum, gas, acetyline, dynamite, gunpowder, explosives, blasting supplies, or ingredients thereof, and other highly combustible matter; ( f ) To form in every provincial capital, a Provincial Fire Board, and in every chartered city, a City Fire Board, to be composed of the district, engineer or city engineer, as chairman, the provincial Constabulary commander or chief of police, the chief of the fire department, and the provincial treasurer or city treasurer, and the division or city superintendent of schools, as members, for the following purposes; ( 1 ) to inspect factory buildings, institutions, and other structures and to recommend to the proper authorities the removal or remodeling of those which are considered fire hazards so as to provide sufficient protection against fires, and the spread of fires; (2) to recommend the adoption of suitable building codes or ordinances requiring fire walls, firebreaks, or other fire-prevention measures; (3) to encourage and check upon the implementation of existing ordinances or regulations pertaining to fire prevention; and (4) to investigate the causes of fires and to render report promptly to the National Fire Control Council; (g) To encourage the observance in every municipality and chartered city of Fire Prevention Week; (h) To dovetail its activities with those of the National Civil Defense Administration created by Republic Act No. 1190, known as the Civil Defense Law, in so far as the objectives and functions of these two organizations are compatible with each other, for the good of the civilian population; and (i) To submit from time to time to the President of the Philippines its report and recommendations;

The General Chairman and the Group Chairman, as members, will constitute an executive committee which shall be the governing body of this Council.

The General Chairman may appoint such sub-committees composed of members of the Council as may be necessary.

All officers and employees of the different departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the National Government and those of the provinces, cities, municipalities, and other political subdivisions are hereby enjoined to cooperate with the Council in the performance of its functions and, with the approval of the corresponding Head of Department, shall, when necessary, render such services as the Council may assign to them.

Executive Order No. 259 dated August 30, 1949, as amended, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Magsaysay, R. (1956). Executive Order No. 165 : Creating the National Fire Control Council. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 52 (3), 1179-1182.