MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 130

PRESCRIBING REGULATIONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 1363, AN ACT TO GIVE PREFERENCE TO VETERANS IN APPOINTMENTS IN THE GOVERNMENT, GOVERNMENT-CONTROLLED OR SEMI-GOVERNMENT CORPORATIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, specifically by Section 6 of Republic Act No. 1363, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY , President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following regulations for the implementation of the aforesaid Act:

1. The term “veteran” as employed in these regulations shall refer to: (1) veterans of the Philippine Revolution as certified to by the Board on Pensions for Veterans; (2) veterans of World War II as certified to by the Philippine Veterans Board; and (3) honorably discharged soldiers and officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines who have served therein for at least five years.

2. The term “preference eligible” means a veteran who has qualified in an appropriate civil service examination who is entitled to preference under Republic Act No. 1363 and these regulations.

3. Persons who are veterans as defined in paragraph 1 hereof who have qualified in civil service examination shall file applications for preference under these regulations on a form to be prescribed by the Commissioner of Civil Service.

4. The names of eligibles whose applications have been approved shall be entered on the appropriate registers or lists of eligibles, in the order of their respective ratings.

5. Whenever a certification of eligibles is made under the Civil Service Law and Rules, the Commissioner of Civil Service shall certify from the corresponding registers mentioned in paragraph 4 hereof, provided the veteran certified is within reach of certification under the Civil Service Rules and has the same qualifications as the non-preference eligible on the register from which certification should otherwise be made, and the appointing official shall select for appointment the veteran certified.

6. When an appointing officer prefers a non-veteran to a preference eligible, he shall file with the Commissioner of Civil Service in writing his reasons in detail for such preference and the Commissioner shall determine the sufficiency or insufficiency of such reasons.

7. Whenever a preference eligible files an application for employment to replace a non-eligible in any bureau or office or government-owned or controlled corporation, such non-eligible should be replaced within thirty days from receipt of the application of the preference eligible, unless the appointing officer objects in writing to the preference eligible for reasons satisfactory to the Commissioner of Civil Service.

8. The preference herein granted shall not apply to promotions and transfers nor shall it apply to positions which have been declared policy determining, primarily confidential or highly technical pursuant to Section 671 (1) of the Revised Administrative Code.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-five, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARIANO YENKO, JR. Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1955). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 130, July 18, 1955