MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 227

REMOVING MR. JAIME OBLENDA FROM OFFICE AS REGISTER OF DEEDS OF LANAO AND MARAWI CITY

This is an administrative case against. Mr. Jaime Oblenda, register of deeds of Lanao and Marawi City.

It appears that in a telegram dated August 28, 1956, the Commissioner of Land Registration required Mr. Oblenda to explain within 72 hours why he should not be dismissed from the service for falsification of land titles, and on August 31, 1956, he was suspended from office pending the disposition of the administrative case against him and effective upon receipt of the notice of suspension. On September 4, 1956, several other administrative charges were preferred against the respondent. Earlier, or on August 25, 1956, an information for estafa through falsification of public documents had been filed against him by the City Attorney of Marawi City.

According to the Land Registration Commissioner, the above telegram, notice of suspension and the additional charges were not actually served upon Mr. Oblenda because the latter, without applying for leave of absence, left his office on August 27, 1956, and since then has not reported for duty. His present whereabouts remains unknown. Upon verification by the City Auditor of Mr. Oblenda’s accounts, a shortage of P1 , 424.07 was discovered. Considering all the attendant circumstances, Mr. Oblenda may be regarded as having abandoned his office, which constitute a sufficient reason for his removal from the service. As held by the Secretary of Justice, abandonment of office may be deemed as constituting “flagrant violation or neglect of duty” as well as “conduct prejudicial to the best interests of the service” which, under Civil Service Rules, are sufficient cause for removal of any person in the Philippine Civil Service (Rule XIII, paragraph 6, Civil Service Rules).

Wherefore , and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Justice, Mr. Jaime Oblenda is hereby removed from office as register of deeds of Lanao and Marawi City, effective as of August 27, 1956, with prejudice to reinstatement in the government service.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .