MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 200

IMPOSING A FINE ON MR. MACARIO NAVAL, PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINE NORMAL COLLEGE

This is an administrative case against Mr. Macario Naval, president of the Philippine Normal College, who is charged with irregularities consisting of exploitation of students, electioneering, nepotism, favoritism, incompetence, condescension to falsification of records, and mental dishonesty. The charges were looked into by a special investigating committee which submitted a comprehensive report containing the following findings against the respondent.

(1) That the respondent, in his capacity as president of the Faculty-Student Exchange, was negligent in failing to see to it that the exchange pay the necessary taxes and to require it to install its own water connections and pay on time its water bills before the presentation of the complaint against him;

(2) That he violated the provisions of the executive order against nepotism by appointing his brother-in-law to a non-confidential, non-technical, and non-teaching position in the Philippine Normal College as buildings and grounds supervisors;

(3) That he failed to exercise due supervision over two of his subordinates in not discovering the violation of regulations regarding outside teaching by a faculty member and the commission by the secretary of the Board of Trustees of apparent discrepancies in the agenda of the minutes of the meeting of the board and the copy thereof furnished the Secretary of Education as chairman of the board;

(4) That he failed to exercise his functions properly in not terminating officially the complaint of a member of the faculty against another; and

(5) That through oversight he failed to give due acknowledgment for the contribution of a certain professor to his graduation thesis.

After going over the record, I agree with the above findings of the investigating committee. I am also included to agree with its observation that the infraction and failure of the respondent were not willful but attributable to his multifarious duties. His negligence, however, is not of such a degree as to warrant severe disciplinary action.

Wherefore , and upon the recommendation of the investigating body and the Secretary of Education, Mr. Macario Naval, president of the Philippine Normal College, is hereby fined in an amount equivalent to his salary for fifteen days, reprimanded and admonished to be more careful in the discharge of his duties in the future.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of June, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .