MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 207

SUSPENDING MR. PRIMITOVO A. BUGARIN FROM OFFICE AS JUSTICE OF THE PEACE OF MANGATAREM, PANGASINAN

This is an administrative case against Mr. Primitive A. Bugarin, justice of the peace of Mangatarem, Pangasinan, for immorality in that, being married to Patricia Baggao, he had illicit relations with Hipolita Pescador by whom he begot children. The case was investigated by a district judge of Pangasinan, at which investigation only the respondent appeared.

It appears from the respondent’s evidence that his illicit relations with Hipolita Pescador began in 1944, when he was still single. These relations continued after 1947, when he married Patricia Baggao, even after his appointment as justice of the peace on April 1, 1949, as shown by the birth of their child on December 4, 1952. His relationship with Hipolita was terminated only on June 17, 1953.

Regardless of how and when these illicit relations commenced, they should have been terminated before he accepted the position of justice of the peace. The respondent should know that one of the essential qualifications for appointment as justice of the peace is good moral character. He, therefore, lacked this essential qualification when he assumed office as justice of the peace. To be considered in his favor, however, is the fact that through his own efforts he succeeded in terminating his relationship with his paramour in 1953, or long before the present charge of immorality was instituted.

In view of the foregoing, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Justice, Mr. Primitivo A. Bugarin is hereby suspended from office as justice of the peace of Mangatarem, Pangasinan, for one month without pay, with a warning that repetition of similar offense will be a sufficient cause for his separation from the service.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1956). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .