MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 67

CREATING AN AGRICULTURAL TENANCY COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the enactment of the Agricultural Tenancy Act is an important milestone in the struggle for an improved landholder-tenant relationship founded on fairness, justice and equity;

WHEREAS, the policy and purpose of the aforementioned law can be accomplished only by its full and proper implementation which is primarily the mutual duty of the Secretary of Justice and the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources;

WHEREAS, the powers and duties of the two Secretaries under said Act are closely related to each other; and

WHEREAS, the coordination of the activities and functions of the two Secretaries will not only result in a uniform national enforcement policy but will also effect economy and efficiency;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Ramon Magsaysay, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create an Agricultural Tenancy Commission to be composed of a Chairman and two Commissioners who shall all be designated by the Secretary of Justice and the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources in consultation with each other:

The Commission shall be under the administrative supervision of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources.

The Commission shall advise the two Secretaries on all matters relating to the implementation of the Agricultural Tenancy Law and, when so authorized, shall act for and on behalf of either or both Secretaries. In each case, the Commission shall be subject to the control and direction of the Secretary whose functions are exercised.

The Commission shall be divided into a mediation division, a technical division and an information division.

The Chairman of the Commission shall be the chief of the mediation division.

One Commissioner shall be the chief of the technical division.

One Commissioner shall be the chief of the information division.

The Commission is empowered to request the detail of such trained and qualified personnel from the Department of Justice and the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources and the cooperation and help of other Departments, branches and agencies of the National Government as it may deem necessary for the proper and efficient operation of the Commission.

The two Secretaries are hereby authorized to create as many positions in their respective departments as may be necessary for designation in the Commission. For this purpose there is hereby authorized to be disbursed from the Contingent Fund of the President of the Philippines, under Item Y-(IV)-1, page 1017, of Republic Act No. 1150, an amount not exceeding one hundred fifty thousand pesos or so much thereof as may be necessary for sundries, salaries of personnel mentioned in the next preceding paragraph and other expenses, necessary for the operation of the Commission.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRED RUIZ CASTRO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1954). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.