MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 229

AUTHORIZING THE FIELDMEN’S INSURANCE COMPANY, INC., TO BECOME A SURETY UPON OFFICIAL RECOGNIZANCES, STIPULATIONS, BONDS, AND UNDERTAKINGS

WHEREAS, Section 1 of Act No. 536, as amended by Act No. 2206, provides that whenever any recognizance, stipulation, bond, or undertaking conditioned for the faithful performance of any duty or of any contract made with any public authority, national, provincial, municipal, or otherwise, or of any undertaking, or for doing or refraining from doing anything in such recognizance, stipulation, bond, or undertaking specified is, by the laws of the Philippines or by the regulations or resolutions of any public authority therein, required or permitted to be given with one surety or with two or more sureties, the execution of the same or the guaranteeing of the performance of the condition thereof shall be sufficient when executed or guaranteed solely by any corporation organized under the laws of the Philippines, having power to guarantee the fidelity of persons holding positions of public or private trust and to execute and guarantee bonds or undertakings in judicial proceedings and to agree to the faithful performance of any contract or undertaking made with any public authority;

WHEREAS, said section further provides that no head of department, court, judge, officer, board, or body, whether. executive , legislative, or judicial, shall approve or accept; any corporation as surety on any recognizance, stipulation, bond, contract, or undertaking unless such corporation has been authorized to do business in he Philippines in accordance wih the provisions of said Act No. 536, as amended, nor unless such corporation has, by contract : with the Govxernment of the Philippines, been auhorized to become a surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds, and undertakings; and

WHEREAS, THE FIELDMEN’S INSURANCE COMPANY, INC., is a domestic corporation organized and existing under the laws of the Republic of the Philippines and fulfills the conditions prescribed by said Act No. 536, as amended;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RAMON MAGSAYSAY, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the FIELDMEN’S INSURANCE COMPANY, INC., to become a surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds, and undertakings in such manner arid under such conditions as are provided by law, subject to the condition that the total amount of immigration bonds that it may issue shall not, at any time, exceed its admitted assets.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of January in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) RAMON MAGSAYSAY

By the President: (Sgd.) FORTUNATO DE LEON Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1957). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 234 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office .