FROM : FAX NO. : 19 Sep. 2017 @8:45PM P2

 

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
PROCLAMATION NO. 319

DECLARING THURSDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2017, ASA
NATIONAL DAY OF PROTEST

WHEREAS, Article II of the 1987 Constitution states that the prime duty of the
Government is to serve and protect the people, and that the State values the dignity
of every human person and guarantees full respect for human rights;

WHEREAS, the Martial Law era that began with the promulgation of
Proclamation No. 1081 (8. 1972) has imprinted itself in the collective memory of the
people as a time attended by the commission of gross human rights violations,
arbitrary state interventions, rampant corruption, and disregard of fundamental civil

liberties;

WHEREAS, this Administration recognizes the fear and indignation of the
people against a repetition and perpetuation of such human rights violations and all
other failings of the government,

WHEREAS, Article fll, Section 4 of the 1987 Constitution guarantees the
people’s freedom of speech and the right to peaceably assemble, as well as to
petition the government for redress of grievances;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 292 (s. 1987) provides that ‘the President
may, by way of a proclamation, declare a status or condition of public moment or
interest;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the Republic
of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and
existing laws, do hereby declare Thursday, 21 September 2017, as a National Day of
Protest, in solidarity with the people's call against all excesses and shortcomings of
the government, and with the people's desire to uphold the highest standards of
integrity, efficiency and accountability in government.

| urge all protesters to act within the bounds of the law, maintain a peaceful
conduct of rallies, marches and demonstrations, be vigilant of possible infiltrators
who may instigate violence in an effort to provoke the police and other law
enforcement authorities, and avoid causing any undue inconvenience to their fellow
citizens.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

FROM :

FAX NO. : 19 Sep. 2617 88:45PM

| hereby order all police and other law enforcement authorities to observe
maximum restraint and maintain such distance from these assemblies and mass
actions as may be necessary to allow protesters the full exercise of their rights within
the bounds of the law.

| enjoin all local government units to dispense with the permit requirements for
holding public assemblies, marches and demonstrations in areas within their
jurisdiction during this National Day of Protest.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, | have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of
the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE, in the City of Manila this19T Bay of September, in the Year of our Lord,
Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By the President:

 

rad here

MENARDO |. GUEVARRA
Acting Executive Secretary

 

PRRD 2016 - 003829

P3