MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1046

DECLARING THE LAST WEEK OF APRIL 2006 AS “BEST DIVES PHILIPPINES WEEK”

WHEREAS , Proclamation No. 758, s. 2005, declared the second week of January 2005 and every year thereafter as “Best Dives Week” and at the same time directed the Philippine Commission on the Promotion and Development of Sports Scuba Diving (PCSSD) to observe said period with appropriate activities in major dive destinations in the country;

WHEREAS , in pursuit of its mandate under the law to promote and develop sports scuba diving in the country and at the same time ensure the safety of divers and protection of our underwater marine resources, PCSSD had deemed it best that the observance of the “Best Dives Philippines Week” be transferred to a period to coincide with the onset of the summer period in the country conducive to sports scuba diving;

WHEREAS , summer season in the Philippines is the most appropriate period where both local and foreign tourists are pre-occupied in indulging in different vacation leisure activities as well as water related sports and events;

WHEREAS , transferring the observance of “Best Dives Philippines Week” to the summer season would best rationalize PCSSD and other concerned government agencies’ resources and plans and programs on scuba diving activities and safety, as well as the promotion and marketing effort of the private sector engaged in tourism and scuba diving during the peak period demand for sports scuba diving activities in the country.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby transfer the observance of the “Best Dives Philippines Week” from the second week of January of every year as provided for under Proclamation No. 758 dated January 14, 2005, to the last week of April 2006.

The PCSSD together with all the government agencies and instrumentalities, as well as the private sector in the tourism diving industry and entire citizenry mentioned in Proclamation No. 758 are enjoined to observe the said period with appropriate activities designed to ensure the success of the celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29 th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia