MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO . 204

DECLARING THE YEAR 2002 AS THE YEAR OF DIGNITY OF LABOR AND A CULTURE OF INTERFAITH DIALOGUE

WHEREAS , the ecclesiastical controversy during the Spanish period between the religious orders and the secular clergy in the administration of churches in the Philippines evolved into a struggle for social reforms;

WHEREAS , the struggles and sacrifices of Filipino secular priests, especially Fathers Pedro Pablo Pelaez, Mariano Gomes, Jose Burgos and Jacinto Zamora, helped awaken the nationalistic consciousness of Filipinos as a people and contributed a sense of mission to heroes like Jose Rizal, Graciano Lopez Jaena, Marcelo del Pilar and Andres Bonifacio who worked for the liberation of the Philippines from colonial oppression;

WHEREAS , these struggles led to the establishment of religious freedom and equality, first enshrined in the Malolos Constitution of 1899 and then honored in all subsequent Philippine Constitutions;

WHEREAS , to attain the objectives of social equality and dignity, the Union Obrera Democratica (UOD), the first nationwide labor movement in the country, was established by Isabelo de los Reyes, Felipe Buencamino and Dominador Gomez in 1902 to protect the rights of peasants, workers and laborers;

WHEREAS , the year 2002 will be the centennial year of the founding of the UOD, and, therefore, an appropriate time for the nation to commemorate its role in the forging of nationalism and dignity of labor;

WHEREAS , now, more than ever, with international and local terrorism challenging peace and harmony in the land, we as a people must advocate and safeguard peace, dignity of labor, equality and mutual understanding among peoples of different faiths, races and cultures;

WHEREAS , upon the recommendation of the Department of Labor and Employment and the National Historical Institute, the year 2002 may be declared as “The Year of Dignity of Labor and a Culture of Interfaith Dialogue.”

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the year 2002 as “The Year of Dignity of Labor and a Culture of Interfaith Dialogue.”

The National Historical Institute is hereby tasked to formulate, oversee and coordinate the implementation of the plans and programs for the celebration of the yearlong event.

All departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the national government, local government units, government-owned and controlled corporations, the private sector and the public at large are hereby encouraged to observe the activities and programs for the aforementioned celebration in the year 2002.

City of Manila, June 11, 2002.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) AVELINO J. CRUZ, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia