MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 958

DECLARING THE YEAR 2005 TO 2015 AS THE DECADE OF HEALTHY LIFESTYLE

WHEREAS , the result of the 6 th National Nutrition and Health Survey conducted in 2003 has clearly shown that 90% of Filipinos have one or more of the following risk factors, namely: physical inactivity, smoking, hypertension, obesity, diabetes and dyslipidemia. These risk factors are known causes of cardiovascular diseases, cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases and diabetes mellitus. These diseases are listed among the top 10 leading causes of deaths in the country, with cardiovascular diseases and cancer topping the list. All of the risk factors listed above are related to unhealthy lifestyles;

WHEREAS , recognizing that a healthy citizenry translates to a Strong Republic;

WHEREAS , recognizing that prevention and control of non-communicable diseases is everyone’s concern, the Philippine Coalition for the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases was organized. Composed of 41 government and non-government agencies, professional, organizations, medical societies, and the academe, the Coalition pledged to work together in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases by primarily addressing the shared risk factors of smoking, physical inactivity and unhealthy diets;

WHEREAS , recognizing the need to address the above issues, the Coalition embarked on a National Healthy Lifestyle Advocacy Campaign;

WHEREAS , in order to focus all efforts and resources, all sectors of government and the civil society must join hands to promote healthier lifestyles among Filipinos;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the years 2005 to 2015 as the Decade of Healthy Lifestyle.

The Department of Health is hereby directed to organize all concerned sectors of government and civil society to work together in planning and promoting activities to make this Proclamation operational.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia