PROCLAMATION NO. 588

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 16 TO 22, 2004 AND EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS CEREBRAL PALSY AWARENESS AND PROTECTION WEEK

WHEREAS , the determination for the total development of the sector of persons with disabilities is a state policy enshrined in the 1987 Philippine Constitution and reaffirmed by various legislations, such as the Magna Carta for Disabled Persons (R.A. 7277), the Accessibility Law (B.P. 344) and other executive issuances;

WHEREAS , in dealing justly and in establishing a barrier-free environment for persons with disabilities nationwide, the government and its instrumentalities, both national and local, take cognizance of the “RIGHTS-BASED” principle as set forth in the Biwako Millennium Framework (BMF) for Actions Towards an Inclusive Barrier-Free and Rights-Based Society for Persons with Disabilities in Asia and the Pacific which was adopted on October 25-28, 2002 by the United Nations-Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN-ESCAP);

WHEREAS , in order for the Philippine government to conform with the regional mandate prescribed by the UN-ESCAP, Proclamation No. 240 dated August 21, 2002, was issued “Declaring the Period from Year 2003 to the Year 2012 as the Philippine Decade of Persons with Disabilities”;

WHEREAS , the causes of disabilities can be prevented, and in cases when such disabilities exist, early detection and prompt and appropriate intervention can be performed by raising the state of awareness and concerns of the public;

WHEREAS , the active and meaningful participation of persons with disabilities in all levels of policy-making, planning, monitoring and evaluation are essential factors in equalization of the opportunities for persons with disabilities;

WHEREAS , by virtue of various executive issuances and proclamations focusing on particular disability groups like the White Cane Safety Day (August 1) for the visually impaired, the Down Syndrome Consciousness Month (February) for the down syndrome, the Deaf Awareness Week (The Third Week of November) for the hearing impaired, etc. are observed and participated in by such disability groups which contribute immensely to public awareness.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from September 16 to 22, 2004 and every year thereafter as Cerebral Palsy Awareness and Protection (CPAP) Week.

The National Council for the Welfare of Disabled Persons, in partnership with the Cerebral Palsied Association of the Philippines, Inc. and other concerned organizations, is hereby directed to ensure the appropriate observance of the Cerebral Palsy Awareness and Protection Week by formulating a Comprehensive National Plan of Action to fulfill the objectives of this Proclamation.

All heads of Departments, Chiefs of Bureaus, Offices, Agencies and Instrumentalities of the National Government, including officials of the local Governments, are hereby instructed to implement plans, programs and activities geared towards the development of persons with cerebral palsy based on the National Plan of Action for Persons with Disabilities.

The funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this proclamation shall be sourced out from the one percent (1%) of each agency’s total budget for persons with disabilities provided for in the yearly General Appropriations Act or from other funds to support the implementation of the National Plan of Action for Persons with Disabilities.

Non-government organizations and self-help groups among persons with cerebral palsy and other form of disabilities, as well as other organizations are hereby enjoined to take full cognizance of the proclamation and to fully cooperate in the attainment of its goal and activities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.