MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 154

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM FEBRUARY 1 TO 28, 2002 AS NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM MONTH

WHEREAS , many of our countrymen have poor health simply because they have no means of paying the often exorbitant cost of health care today;

WHEREAS , many Filipinos are not aware of the different health care benefits the National Health Insurance Program can provide for members;

WHEREAS , there is a need to fast-track the enrolment of 0.5 million urban poor families into the “Medicare Para Sa Masa” as mandated in the President of the Philippines’ State of the Nation (SONA) address;

WHEREAS , such a campaign necessitates wide and sustained multi-sectoral collaboration by every organization, agency and citizen;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby declare the period from February 1 to 28, 2002 as National Health Insurance Program month.

Active multi-sector involvement is hereby urged to ensure the success of this campaign, primarily from the following agencies, organizations and their heads:

1. Local Government Units – to primarily undertake the enrolment of indigent families in their own locality to the “Medicare Para Sa Masa” to fast-track enrolment of 0.5 million urban poor families into the program.

2. Department of Interior and Local Government – to exert all efforts to mobilize its field officers to disseminate the purposes and benefits of the campaign and the roles and responsibilities of the local government executives pertaining to the campaign.

3. Department of Health – to actively support the campaign in all aspects as required to attain its over-all objective.

4. Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) – to lead the implementation of the campaign (a) by mobilizing essential personnel, and needed resources such as Information and Education campaign materials; (b) by formulating and disseminating all the necessary detailed guidelines and procedures on various components of the campaign; and (c) by coordinating all national and regional activities pertaining to the campaign. As lead agency, PhilHealth may call on the assistance of any government and non-government agency, civic and religious groups, industrial establishments, and concern sectors to achieve the over-all goals of the campaign and ensure its success.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13 th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia