MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1152

DECLARING AND DESIGNATING THE THIRD THURSDAY OF OCTOBER OF EVERY YEAR AS “CONFLICT RESOLUTION DAY”

WHEREAS , conflict resolution encompasses mediation, arbitration, facilitation, conciliation, collaborative decision-making and other formal and informal responses to conflict;

WHEREAS , conflict resolution processes empower individuals, families, communities, organizations, businesses, and nations to foster communication and devise solutions that are tailored to their particular needs and interests;

WHEREAS , conflict resolution is being taught and practiced by children and adults of all ages in many school systems, colleges, universities and graduate programs throughout the world, not only as a way of solving individual disputes, but also as a means towards a more peaceful society;

WHEREAS , community-based programs primarily involve the fair and equitable resolution of neighborhood conflicts thereby strengthening community relationships;

WHEREAS , collaborative responses to conflicts are being used by administrative agencies, businesses, and courts to effectively and efficiently resolve disputes;

WHEREAS , professional associations of conflict resolvers are promoting the peaceful and creative resolution of disputes;

WHEREAS , the use of Alternative Dispute Resolution System has been recognized and adopted in the Philippines by Republic Act No. 9285, and its use has been institutionalized in the Executive Department of Government by Executive Order No. 523;

WHEREAS , Conflict Resolution Day, usually celebrated in various parts of the world in October, is successful in promoting awareness of mediation, arbitration, conciliation and other creative and peaceful means of resolving conflict, and in recognizing the significant contributions of peaceful conflict resolvers.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby declare the third (3 rd ) Thursday of October of every year as “Conflict Resolution. Day” for the purpose of celebration and education. Conflict resolvers and advocates in the entire country are enjoined to celebrate this day with appropriate ceremonies, activities, and educational programs.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia