Malacañang Manila

PROCLAMATION NO . 913

DECLARING 2008 AS THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES CENTENNIAL YEAR, PROVIDING FOR ITS COMMEMORATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS , the University of the Philippines is recognized as the country’s premier institution of higher learning;

WHEREAS , the University of the Philippines has made significant contributions to the knowledge, culture and intellectual life of the nation since it was founded in 1908;

WHEREAS , in 2008, the University of the Philippines will celebrate its one hundred years of existence;

WHEREAS , in order to enhance awareness of its contributions in national development and its leadership and achievements in higher education, culture and the arts, it is fitting that the occasion is marked and commemorated by appropriate activities and festivities in all its twelve campuses throughout the nation and in other venues, here and abroad, where UP publics are present;

WHEREAS , to ensure continued financial support needed to build and sustain a modern world class university, a fund campaign needs to be undertaken to generate resources for faculty development, research and modernization of its facilities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 2008 as the “University of the Philippines Centennial Year.”

A Presidential Commission is hereby created to formulate and implement a plan of activities for the occasion. It shall be composed of twelve (12) members, who shall be alumni of the university to be appointed by the President, upon the recommendation of the President of the University of the Philippines. The Commission shall choose from its members its chairman, vice-chairman and executive director.

The Postmaster General is hereby directed to design, print and issue a special stamp commemorating the occasion.

To provide funds for the affair and the preparations therefor, the Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to release the sum of One Hundred Million Pesos (P100,000,000.00) for centennial projects such as (1) the development of UP regional units, including UP Cebu College and UP Mindanao, and (2) other projects under UP Plan 2005-2011. The said sum shall be released in three tranches: P35 Million in 2006, P35 Million in 2007 and P30 Million in 2008, subject to the provisions of pertinent laws, rules and regulations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia