MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 27

DECLARING THE YEAR A.D. 2001 AS THE CENTENNIAL YEAR OF THE GEODETIC ENGINEERING (SURVEYING & MAPPING) PROFESSION

WHEREAS, the year A.D. 2001 marks the Centennial Year of the Geodetic Engineering (Surveying & Mapping) Profession, with the establishment of the Bureau of Lands and the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey in the year 1901;

WHEREAS, there is a need to commemorate the one hundred years of the Geodetic Engineering (Surveying & Mapping) Profession and acknowledge the valuable contribution of said profession to the national development by spearheading the survey of the uncharted areas and frontiers of the country, the establishment of new settlements and the delineation of their original metes and bounds;

WHEREAS, the role of surveying and mapping in the titling of land under the Torrens System of property registration continues to be of vital importance to Philippine development;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to promote national awareness of and dedication to the doctrine of the intrinsic geographic unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Philippine Archipelago based on the 1982 United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) through the delineation of baselines and the provision of accurate and reliable maps and charts;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to instill among the youth of the land love of country, sensitivity to environmental issues, and awareness of the important place of the Philippines among the leading nations of the world by making available to schools and educational institutions updated maps and geographic information on the entire country;

WHEREAS, there now exist excellent opportunities to develop and apply the latest technologies on surveying and mapping which have been transformed into the dynamic field of GEOMATICS, an integrated technology and service sector that contribute to the rapid collection, computerized storage and updating of digital data and maps for the modernization of the entire Philippine Archipelago;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and in order to recognize the vital role that Geodetic Engineers and other mapping practitioners play in the development of the country as well as to promote and upgrade the professional practice of the profession, do hereby proclaim the year A.D. 2001 as the Centennial Year of the Geodetic Engineering (Surveying & Mapping) Profession. The professional associations of geodetic engineers shall form a Geodetic Engineering Centennial Committee to organize and undertake appropriate programs, projects and activities befitting the centennial celebrations. All sectors, organizations, educational institutions and agencies concerned are hereby enjoined to participate meaningfully and support actively all the programs, projects and activities to be undertaken during the centennial year and such subsequent follow-up activities as may be conducted.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16 th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and one.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) RENATO S DE VILLA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia