MALACAÑANG Manila BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

PROCLAMATION NO. 1313

DECLARING JULY 8, 2007 AND EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS NATIONAL ALLERGY DAY

WHEREAS, allergy is an abnormal reaction to ordinary harmless substances that causes the immune system of an allergic person to react when an allergen is absorbed into their body, treating the substance as a harmful invader leading to such symptoms as watery eyes, itching, sneezing or a runny nose;

WHEREAS, allergic symptoms last as long as the allergic person is exposed to the allergen and beyond, that may lead to fatal asthma;

WHEREAS, the medical cost of relieving allergic symptoms and asthma continue to rise;

WHEREAS, Filipino children aged 13-14 years old exhibited one of the highest incidence rates for allergic diseases in the International Study of Allergic and Asthma in Children (ISAAC) involving 38 countries in Europe, Africa, and Asia Pacific;

WHEREAS, the findings have placed the Philippines on top of Asian countries with high prevalence rates of common allergies like rhinitis and asthma higher than that of Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea;

WHEREAS, there is a worldwide effort to reduce the medical impact of allergies and asthma which aims to educate those who deal with allergic disorders and provide a sound basis for practical action to be taken by the governments, health care professionals, lay organizations, and patients at a national level.

WHEREAS, a major step to address the problem of allergies is the celebration of National Allergy Day on July 8, 2007 and every year thereafter.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare July 8, 2007 and every year thereafter as “National Allergy Day”, and order the following:

SECTION 1. DOH, Lead Coordinator. This “National Allergy Day” celebration shall be coordinated by the Department of Health, assisted by all Government Organizations, Local Government Units, through the League of Provinces of the Philippines, League of Municipalities of the Philippines, League of Cities of the Philippines, Liga ng mga Barangay, Academe, Civil Society Groups, and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs). The Department of Health shall formulate and disseminate guidelines and procedures for the implementation of this Proclamation. Other duly recognized government organizations shall issue and disseminate memorandum circulars to all their subordinate offices or entities, provide financial and technical assistance thereof, and execute the contents of the said memorandum circular.

SEC. 2. Participation of the academe, non-government organizations, civil societies. The academe, NGOs, civil societies are encouraged to contribute to the success of the observance of the National Allergy Day through promotional campaigns and mobilize other health personnel under their jurisdiction.

SEC. 3. Role of the Philippine Society of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. The Philippine Society of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology shall provide technical and human resources to the Department of Health to assure the implementation of the guidelines and procedures issued by the Department of Health.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27 th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary