MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 994

DECLARING THE PERIOD OF FEBRUARY 8 TO MARCH 8, 2006 AS NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM MONTH

WHEREAS , many of our less privileged countrymen do not seek medical assistance in hospitals even under the most trying times because they cannot afford the exorbitant cost of health care;

WHEREAS , through the National Health Insurance Program (NHIP), more than 30 million indigent Filipinos were granted access to quality health care services;

WHEREAS , health insurance coverage must be brought to as many Filipinos as possible, including Overseas Filipino Workers, so that quality health care can be made more accessible;

WHEREAS , with the recent transfer of Medicare program administration to PhilHealth, there is a need to strengthen the communication efforts towards the OFWs to ensure that they are updated on the developments affecting their PhilHealth membership;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation, the government corporation that spearheads the full implementation of the NHIP, needs all the support it can get to push the NHIP further, especially as it celebrates its 11 th year on February 14.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, hereby declare the period February 8 to March 8, 2006 as National Health Insurance Program Month .

Active multi-sector involvement is hereby urged to ensure the success of this campaign, primarily from the following agencies, organizations and their heads:

1. Department of Health – to actively support the campaign in all aspects as required in attaining its over-all objective;

2. Department of Labor and Employment – to include in its orientation programs and collection of premium payments both local and in its Philippine Overseas Labor Offices;

3. Local Government Units – to primarily undertake the enrolment of indigent families in their own locality into the Sponsored Program;

4. Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA) – to include in their Pre-departure Orientation Seminars (PDOS) the IEC module in PhilHealth which is mandatory and to be attended by all out-going OFWs;

5. Philippine Overseas Employment Administration (POEA) – to include PhilHealth’s premium payment in their issuance of Overseas Employment Certificate (OEC)/E-Receipts to ensure the all out-going OFWs are PhilHealth members;

6. Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) – to lead the implementation of the campaign by:

(a) mobilizing essential personnel;

(b) undertaking intensive information, education and communication (IEC) and marketing activities;

(c) formulating and disseminating all the necessary detailed guidelines and procedures on various components of the campaign;

(d) encouraging associations, charitable institutions, cooperatives, private non-profit health insurance organizations/associations or individuals to mobilize funds for enrollment of as many persons who cannot afford to pay premium contribution; and

(e) coordinate all national and regional activities pertaining to the campaign.

As lead agency, PhilHealth may call on the assistance of other government and non-government agencies, civic and religious groups, industrial establishments, and concerned sectors to achieve the over-all goals of the campaign and ensure its success.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of February, in the year of Our Lord Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia