PROCLAMATION NO. 1676

DECLARING THE FOURTH WEEK OF APRIL AND EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS HEAD AND NECK CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK

WHEREAS, spearheaded by the Philippine Society of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery and the Department of Health which aims to increase awareness of the cancer of the head and neck region and to promote prompt diagnosis, correct management and early prevention;

WHEREAS, Head and Neck Cancer which includes nasopharynx, oral cavity and larynx and thyroid diseases ranks as the third most common cancer sites here in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, there is an increase in the number of cases of head and neck cancer as we are exposed more to environmental toxins, chemicals, pollution, smoking and alcohol, and improper nutrition. According to the 2005 Philippine Cancer Facts and Estimates by the Philippine Cancer Society and Department of Health, there are 12,150 new cases, ranking head and neck cancer as number 3 next to lung and breast;

WHEREAS, Head and Neck Cancer will have an enormous impact on the person, family, community and country as a whole as it translates to loss of income and loss of productivity on the part of the patient and the immediate family. The social aspect as well is affected as depression and anxiety comes into the picture;

WHEREAS, intensive information dissemination campaign regarding the prevention, early diagnosis and prompt treatment of Head and Neck Cancer should be proactively implemented and dynamically pursued to contain the disease and prevent further social and economic effect.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the fourth week of April of every year as “HEAD AND NECK CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK.”

The Department of Health and the Philippine Society of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery are directed to take the lead in planning and organizing activities for the Head and Neck Consciousness Week. All other government and non-government organizations, private and local government units, academic institutions and civil society groups are enjoined to take an active role and participate in the celebration and conduct of activities.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila this 21 st day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary