PROCLAMATION NO. 1832

DECLARING 2009 AS THE CENTENNIAL YEAR OF THE RECONSTITUTION OF THE TOWN OF SAN NICOLAS, ILOCOS NORTE AND DIRECTING THE CHAIRMAN OF THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE (NHI) TO LEAD THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM OF ACTIVITIES FOR THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, the Year 2009 marks the 100 th anniversary of the reconstitution of the town of San Nicolas, Province of Ilocos Norte as an independent pueblo;

WHEREAS, Augustinian missionaries founded a Visita or Spanish settlement at the site now known as San Nicolas which was previously named as Caluntian, with reference to the “lanuti” tree that grew abundantly in the place;

WHEREAS, the Augustinian friars stationed at Vigan periodically ministered to the spiritual needs of the people at the Visita and when the adjoining missionary settlement of Ylaua (now Laoag City) became a pueblo, the administration of Caluntian was transferred from Vigan to Ylaua;

WHEREAS, the Spanish Mapa of 1848 sets 1584 as the founding of San Nicolas, as a settlement of Visita for the Libro de Govierno cites as “private definitory” ordering the separation of Caluntian from its Laoag matrix in the year 1617, thus on the said time, it became an independent pueblo under the name of San Nicolas, after the inhabitants’ favorite saint and acknowledged protector from natural calamities;

WHEREAS, the pueblo (San Nicolas) was then classified poor so that from time to time it was fused to Laoag as a mere village;

WHEREAS, when the pueblo’s economy improved through the people’s sheer hard work and perseverance, dedication and devotion, with the pottery industry being their major source of income pursuant to Executive Order No. 101, dated October 22, 1908 issued by the then Governor-General James F. Smith in reference to Act No. 946 and Executive No. 35, San Nicolas was separated from Laoag on January 1, 1909 and its territory was reconstituted;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to recognize the role of San Nicolas in Philippine history and national development and to mark this momentous year with fitting commemorative activities which will promote the diverse manifestation of San Nicolas’ rich cultural heritage and creative industry related to collaborative programs with Hispanic heritage-linked countries;

WHEREAS, the centennial celebration will not only regenerate but will also strengthen the San Nicoleño’s preservation of their rich cultural heritage and keep the passion and love burning which is one relevant factor in solidifying a community.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare:

SECTION 1. The year 2009 as “The Year of Centennial Reconstitution of the Town of San Nicolas, Province of Ilocos Norte”.

SECTION 2. The National Organizing Committee shall be composed of the NHI, as the lead agency, the National Commission for Culture and the Arts, the Department of Education, Department of Trade and Industry, Department of Agriculture, Department of Tourism as members; and the Representative of the Second District of the Province of Ilocos Norte, the Provincial Governor, and the San Nicolas Town Mayor, as ex-officio members.

SECTION 3. The branches of Government are enjoined to actively participate in the celebration of the centennial reconstitution of the town of San Nicolas, Province of Ilocos Norte, as well as to enlist the participation of the private sector and non-government organizations, so that the commemoration of its 100th anniversary will truly demonstrate the spirit of patriotism, unity, and national identity of the Filipino people.

SECTION 4. The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to provide the necessary funding support for the expenses in connection with the centennial celebration, chargeable against appropriate funds for the purpose and subject to existing and pertinent budgetary, auditing rules and regulations.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6 th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary