PROCLAMATION NO. 1495

DECLARING 2009 AS PHILIPPINES-REPUBLIC OF KOREA FRIENDSHIP YEAR AND MARCH 3, 2009 AS PHILIPPINES-REPUBLIC OF KOREA FRIENDSHIP DAY

WHEREAS, the enduring friendship between the Philippines and the Republic of Korea is based on similar aspirations for liberty, justice and democratic values;

WHEREAS, the Philippines and the Republic of Korea share common goals for a dynamic, peaceful and prosperous future for the East Asia region;

WHEREAS, the Philippines and the Republic of Korea have close historical ties and both countries enjoy a strong, vibrant relationship in trade, business, investment, tourism, and people-to-people linkages;

WHEREAS, 2009 is a most fitting time to celebrate and commemorate the diplomatic relations of the Philippines and the Republic of Korea that officially began on March 3, 1949;

WHEREAS, the 60 th Anniversary of Philippines-Republic of Korea relations merits appropriate observance and official commemoration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 2009 as Philippines-Republic of Korea Friendship Year and Tuesday, March 3, 2009 as Philippines-Republic of Korea Friendship Day.

The Department of Tourism (DOT) is designated as the lead agency to coordinate and monitor the execution of programs, ceremonies and activities to be undertaken for the whole year of 2009 to commemorate the Philippines’ and the Republic of Korea’s 60 years of strong partnership and diplomatic relations with the support and participation of government agencies, local government units and non­governmental organizations involved in the tourism industry.

The Secretary of Tourism is hereby authorized to create the appropriate committees/task forces; promulgate such guidelines as may be necessary in the execution of this proclamation; allocate the necessary funds for the programs, ceremonies and activities of this event; solicit donations, grants, contributions, sponsorships and/or any form of assistance from private and government entities, subject to the approval of the Office of the President.

The Secretary of Tourism is hereby authorized to call on any government agency, instrumentality, including government-owned and controlled corporations to extend their full support and assistance for the successful celebration of the 60 th anniversary of Philippines-Republic of Korea diplomatic relations.

I call upon all tourism establishments and businesses in the private sector to give their full cooperation to ensure the successful celebration of Philippines-Republic of Korea Friendship Year.

This proclamation shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7 th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary