MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 286

DECLARING THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER 2002 AS THE “WOMEN & SPORTS MONTH”

WHEREAS , Section 17, Article II of the 1987 Constitution declares that: “The State shall give priority to education, science and technology, arts, culture, and sports to foster patriotism and nationalism, accelerate social progress, and promote total human liberation and development”;

WHEREAS , Section 19 (1), Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution provides that: “The State shall promote physical education and encourage sports programs, league competitions, and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry;

WHEREAS , all instrumentalities of the government are directed to formulate a Gender and Development Plan, designed to empower women and address gender issues;

WHEREAS , there is a clear need to overcome any bias which makes it difficult for any group, women in particular, to reap benefits and rewards of playing, coaching, officiating and administering in sports;

WHEREAS , the 1 st Philippine Congress on Women & Sports is set in Tagaytay City from 21 to 24 November to discuss issues and concerns on gender equity in sports and formulate policies and practices to address the same;

WHEREAS , to ensure the success of the 1 st Philippine Congress on Women & Sports, the cooperation of both the public and private sector is essential.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of November 2002 as “Women & Sports Month” and direct the Organizing Committee of the 1 st Philippine Congress on Women & Sports as the lead group in planning, disseminating information and conducting the congress.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, local government units, government-owned and controlled corporations and instrumentalities of the government, particularly the Philippine Sports Commission, Philippine Amusement and Gaming Commission and Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office, are hereby directed to give full assistance to the Organizing Committee of the 1 st Philippine Congress on Women & Sports. The cost of operations of, and participation to the Congress may be drawn from the Gender and Development (GAD) fund for FY 2002.

Non-governmental organizations, the Philippine Olympic Committee and the private sector are hereby requested to lend their cooperation and support in making the 1 st Philippine Congress on Women & Sports succeed as the main forum for discussing and addressing issues and concerns relating to gender equity and the needs of female athletes and leadership, as well as the role of women in sports, whether for the purpose of sports excellence, wholesome recreation or health promotion of high standards.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of NOV, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia