MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1140

ADOPTING THE PHILIPPINE STATISTICAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (PSDP) 2005-2010

WHEREAS , the Philippine Statistical Development Program (PSDP), a mechanism for charting the direction, strategies and priorities of the Philippine Statistical System (PSS), defines the priority statistical programs and activities for the medium term;

WHEREAS , the PSDP 2005-2010 was designed to provide vital information support to the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan (MTPDP) 2004-2010 and to promote efficiency of statistical operations through optimum use of available resources and adoption of cost effective measures;

WHEREAS , the PSDP 2005-2010 envisions a Philippine Statistical System with greater capacity to provide excellent service and high statistical information for better use in policy analysis and decision-making to meet the changing need of the stakeholders, data users, society and the international community;

WHEREAS , through an inter-agency Steering Committee and sectoral inter-agency committees, task forces and working groups, the National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB) as the policy-making and coordinating body on statistical matters, spearheaded the formulation of the sectoral statistical development programs;

WHEREAS , by virtue of its powers and functions under Executive Order No. 121, Series of 1987 and through NSCB Resolution No. 13, Series of 2006, the National Statistical Coordination Board has approved the PSDP 2005-2010.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the adoption of the PSDP 2005-2010.

Pursuant to the Proclamation:

1. The PSDP will serve as statistical support to the MTPDP 2004-2010.

2. The National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB), as coordinator of the PSS, shall coordinate and monitor the implementation and periodic assessment of PSDP and is hereby authorized to issue such memoranda, circulars and other orders as may be considered necessary in the coordination and monitoring of the Program’s implementation.

3. All agencies in the government shall fully implement the statistical programs and activities in the PSDP 2005-2010 and prepare budgets for statistical activities in accordance with the three-year budgeting cycle.

4. The Department of Budget and Management shall include a budgetary provision for the PSS in the annual appropriations based on the budgetary requirements of the PSDP in support of its implementation and monitoring. Likewise, budget for the PSDP shall be included in the annual updating of the Medium Term Expenditure Plan (MTEP) of the government.

5. The private sector and civil society are enjoined to support the PSDP and to actively participate in the activities of the PSS especially as respondents to censuses and surveys.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of September , in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Six.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia