MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 125

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM SEPTEMBER 2001 TO SEPTEMBER 2002 AS PHILIPPINE GOLDEN HOSPITALITY YEAR

WHEREAS, hotels and restaurants assist greatly in providing substantial economic benefit to the country by way of generating foreign exchange, jobs and taxes for the national economy;

WHEREAS, the construction of major hotels and restaurants of world class standards all over the country began almost 50 years ago which corresponds with the establishment and organization by pioneering investors in the Philippine hospitality industry of the Hotel and Restaurant Association of the Philippines (HRAP);

WHEREAS, in recognition of the role played by HRAP in projecting a positive image of the Philippines among their tourist clientele, it is fitting to declare the period from September 2001 to September 2002 as Golden Hospitality Year, to commemorate the celebration of the 50 th founding anniversary of the HRAP with a series of events and activities highlighting on the Philippine hospitality industry as a partner for economic growth and progress;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from September 2001 to September 2002 as Philippine Golden Hospitality Year. All major hotels and restaurants are enjoined to mount a series of marketing events, festivities and culinary festivals focusing on local and regional cuisine and the skill of Filipino chefs and other hospitality employees.

The above series of events and activities shall be assisted and promoted by the Department of Tourism (DOT) and its regional offices and shall be incorporated in the preparatory programs of the Visit Philippines Year 2003.

I enjoin the HRAP, DOT and the local government units concerned to coordinate and pool their efforts and available resources to upgrade the Philippine hospitality industry including the provision of necessary training to employees of small and medium enterprises, owned and operated by Filipino entrepreneurs.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26 th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and one.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia