PROCLAMATION NO. 1276

DECLARING APRIL 22, 2007 AS “PHILIPPINES’ EARTH DAY”

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 553, signed by former President Corazon C. Aquino proclaimed April 22, 1990 as “Earth Day 1990”, to raise the level of awareness on the gravity of environmental degradation and destruction in the country that threatens the quality of life of many Filipinos;

WHEREAS, the Earth Day celebration has become an annual event up to the present;

WHEREAS, there is an exigent need to mobilize all sectors of society in order to ensure the success of measures directed to the improvement and conservation of our environment;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare April 22, 2007 as “ Philippines’ Earth Day “.

The theme for this year’s celebration shall be “ Stewardship-in-Action “.

The Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) shall be the main convenor for the celebration.

All agencies of the executive branch, including but not limited to national government agencies, local government units (LGU’s), state universities and colleges, government-owned and controlled corporations, in cooperation with other private sectors of society, i.e., the Church, Industry, Civil Society and other Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) are hereby enjoined to campaign for the seven (7) Eco-battles namely: a) clean air; b) clear water; c) water security; d) sustainable resource extraction; e) biodiversity conservation; f) climate change reversal; and g) garbage-free communities.

The concerned agencies and private sectors aforementioned shall provide listings of their environmental activities to the DENR which shall correspondingly make a nationwide list of environmental activities that would engender cooperative endeavors with interested parties.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20 th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff