MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 161

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM FEBRUARY 28 TO MARCH 6, 2002 AND EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER AS NATIONAL PEACE CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK

WHEREAS , Executive Order No. 3, s. 2001, mandates the continuing pursuit of a comprehensive peace process along six major peace-making and peace-building components, otherwise known as the Six Paths to Peace, to wit:

1. Pursuit of social, economic and political reforms to address the root causes of armed conflicts and social unrest;

2. Consensus-building and empowerment for peace through consultations and people participation.

3. Peaceful, negotiated settlement with different rebel groups and the effective implementation of peace agreements;

4. Programs for reconciliation, reintegration into mainstream society and rehabilitation of former rebels and their communities;

5. Addressing concerns arising from continuing armed conflicts, such as the protection of non-combatants and the reduction of the impact of armed conflicts on communities; and

6. Building and nurturing a climate conducive to peace through peace education and advocacy programs and confidence-building measures.

WHEREAS , there is a need to instill greater consciousness and understanding among the Filipino people on the comprehensive peace process to strengthen and sustain institutional and popular support for and participation in this effort, as well as in the global movement spearheaded by the United Nations to promote a Culture of Peace based on non-violence, respect for fundamental rights and freedoms, tolerance, understanding and solidarity;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from February 28 to March 6, 2002 and every year thereafter as National Peace Consciousness Week.

All concerned Government agencies and instrumentalities, including local government units, government-owned and controlled corporations, as well as members of the private sector and civil society groups, are hereby enjoined and encouraged to initiate and participate in relevant and meaningful activities in celebration of the National Peace Consciousness Week to instill greater consciousness and understanding among the Filipino people of the comprehensive peace process and the culture of peace agenda.

The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP) shall be the lead Government agency to coordinate and monitor the observance of the National Peace Consciousness Week.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28 th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia