MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 1309

DECLARING EVERY SECOND WEEK OF AUGUST AS THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH SYSTEM WEEK

WHEREAS, health research plays a vital role in facilitating the development of national health policies towards an equitable, efficient and effective health system;

WHEREAS, the Philippine National Health Research System (PNHRS), as a concept and strategy in health research management, is part of a global movement which ensure that national health research systems create and sustain an enabling environment for health research to contribute to evidence-informed health policies and actions;

WHEREAS, the Department of Health (DOH), Department of Science and Technology (DOST) and Commission on Higher Education and Development (CHED) agreed to steer the PNHRS in order to promote and enhance cooperation among research organizations and network; to share and pool resources; to develop capacities for knowledge production, use and management; and, to conduct health research following ethical standards;

WHEREAS, the achievement and fulfillment of the strategic goals and objectives of the PNHRS necessitate the participation and commitment of its members, partners and advocates to make significant contribution on health outcomes;

WHEREAS, other government organizations, the private sector, non-government organizations and civil society, academic institutions, research organizations, researchers and health professionals participate in the PNHRS as producers, users, funders and advocates of research;

WHEREAS, holding regular forums promote better exchange, sharing and use of research and related information among health research stakeholders redound to better support to health policy and program development;

WHEREAS, holding a nationwide event, with parallel activities in various sites in the country, on a specific time of the year, harmonizes event organizing by different stakeholders and rationalizes use of resources, while contributing to increased visibility and value of health research;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare every second week of August as the Philippine National Health Research System Week.

To make this Proclamation operational, DOH, DOST and CHED are directed to take the lead in planning and organizing activities for the PNHRS Week. All other government organizations, the private sector, business and industry, non-government organizations and civil society, academic and research institutions are enjoined to participate and take an active role in the celebration and conduct of PNHRS Week activities.

IN WITNESS THEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of June, in the Year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Published in the Official Gazette, Vol. 103, No. 33, p. 5282, August 13, 2007.

Source: CDAsia

Proclamation No. 1309, June 21, 2007