MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 129

CONDONING THE BACK RENTALS DUE FROM TENANTS AND OCCUPANTS OF THE BUENAVISTA ESTATE IN THE PROVINCE OF BULACAN

WHEREAS, the Buenavista Estate in the province of Bulacan was purchased by the Government with the end in view of subdividing the same for distribution to bona-fide occupants or tenants and other qualified landless individuals of this country;

WHEREAS, the acquisition of said landed estate was in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and laws authorizing the acquisition by the Government of landed estates for subdivision into lots and resale at cost to qualified persons;

WHEREAS, the imposition of rentals to occupants and tenants of said estate has resulted in the institution of landlord-tenant relationship which is not in accordance with the intent and spirit of the Constitution and laws;

WHEREAS, the failure of the tenants and occupants to pay the rentals was due partly to their justified conviction that they were to pay for the cost of the land and not for the use thereof, since the estate was precisely purchased by the Government in their behalf, and also to the past Huk incursions and crop failures; and

WHEREAS, the collection of the tremendous arrearages in rentals beyond the limited capacity of the tenants and occupants to settle constitutes an insurmountable obstacle to the execution of deeds of sale in their favor and the ultimate issuance of titles to them, thereby defeating the primordial policy and objective of the Government of land for the landless.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and the best interest of the Government so requiring, do hereby order;

That the outstanding rentals of lessees, bona-fide tenants and occupants found qualified under the law, rules and regulations to acquire lands in the Buenavista Estate, as well as rentals in arrears of promisees in agreements to sell, are hereby condoned and said persons relieved therefrom.

Done in San Rafael, Bulacan, this 29th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.