MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 93

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL SCHOOL BUILDING COMMITTEE.

In order to solve the nationwide problem, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Presidential School Building Committee.

1. The Committee shall be directly under and responsible to the President and shall be composed of the following:

2. The Committee shall have the following specific functions and responsibilities:

a. It shall study, formulate and implement a nationwide, school building program b. It shall coordinate activities of various government agencies, offices, and instrumentalities engaged in the construction of school houses. c. It shall formulate rules and regulations to standardize planning and construction of public school buildings. d. It shall recommend to the President such legislation as may be necessary to implement effectively a schoolhouse building program. e. It shall receive and disburse funds appropriated for the construction of school buildings. f. It shall perform such other functions as the President may direct.

3. The Committee shall designate any government official as its Executive Officer.

4. The Chairman is authorized to issue directives, rules, and regulations, approved by the Committee, to carry out the purposes of this Order. He is empowered to secure the detail of officers and employees from any department, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government to assist the Committee in the performance of its functions.

The President’s Committee on Schoolhouse Program (PCSP) created under Memorandum dated July 28, 1954, is hereby abolished. All assets, liabilities, and equipment of the PCSP shall be turned over to the Presidential School Building Committee (PSBC) effective this date.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-191]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.