MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 134

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON FREEDOM FROM HUNGER CAMPAIGN

WHEREAS, fully one-half of the world’s population is either illnourished or underfed;

WHEREAS, to fight this state of malnutrition and undernourishment, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, of which the Philippines is member, launched on July 1, 1960, a world-wide Campaign for Freedom from Hunger and invited Member Countries to join in the collective effort to remove the threat of hunger by the establishment of National Committees on Freedom From Hunger Campaign; and

WHEREAS, to give this campaign a wider base on which to operate, the FAO has suggested to Member Governments and Associate Members that membership of the National Committees should include governmental and non-governmental or civic organizations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by, virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine National Committee on Freedom from Hunger Campaign which shall (1) act as a counterpart of the FAO of the United Nations and the Philippine National FAO Committee; (2) bring before the people the reality of hunger Which confronts all developing countries including the Philippines; (3) stimulate and support nation-wide action programs for the purpose of bridging the gap between available and optimum food supplies through informational education, cooperative efforts and research; and (4) adopt such other measures as will achieve a better understanding of providing adequate food for the present and fture population of the world.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Committee may from time to time recommend to the President of the Philippines the designation of additional members.

Unless otherwise directed, the Committee shall continue to function until June 30, 1970. It shall have power to raise funds by voluntary contributions according to law to meet its financial obligations.

The Committee shall render special and annual reports of its activities and achievements to the President of the Philippines, furnishing copies thereof to the Director General of FAO.

This Administrative Order supersedes Administrative Order No. 26 dated October 3, 1962, and the records, property, assets and liabilities of the Committee created thereunder are transferred to the Committee herein created.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) I. SANTOS DIAZ Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.