MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 174

CONDONING BACK RENTALS DUE FROM TENANTS AND OCCUPANTS OF THE DINALUPIHAN ESTATE IN THE PROVINCE OF BATAAN

WHEREAS, the Dinalupihan Estate situated in the municipality of Dinalupihan, province of Bataan, was purchased by the government for subdivision and distribution to bona fide tenants, occupants and other qualified landless individuals;

WHEREAS, the acquisition of subject estate was in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and Commonwealth Act No. 539 authorizing the acquisition by the government of big landed estates for subdivision into farm and residential lots for resale at cost to qualified persons;

WHEREAS, in the computation of the selling price of farm and residential lots, rentals and interests thereon from the date of the acquisition of the estate were added to the cost of the land;

WHEREAS, in view of the huge amount of accumulated rentals and interests, many tenants and other qualified persons were unable to buy the lots occupied by them;

WHEREAS, the imposition of said rentals and interests on the tenants and occupants of the estate has resulted in the institution of landlord-tenant relationship which is not in accordance with the intent and spirit of the Constitution and Commonwealth Act No. 539; and

WHEREAS, the failure of the tenants and occupants to pay the rentals and interests was due partly to their justified conviction that they were to pay for the land at cost and not for the use thereof, since the estate was purchased by the government in their behalf.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the best interests of the government so requiring, do hereby order:

That the outstanding rentals of bona fide tenants, occupants and other qualified persons under the law, rules and regulations to acquire farm and residential lots in the Dinalupihan Estate and rentals in arrears and interests thereon of promisees in agreement to sell are hereby condoned and said persons relieved therefrom.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGA L President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.