MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 127

CREATING THE COMMITTEE FOR LAND REFORM EDUCATION

WHEREAS, it is imperative to effect as soon as possible the implementation of the Joint Communique dated October 6, 1964, between the President of the Philippines and the President of the United States, particularly as regards Land Reform Education;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Government has decided to take all necessary measures to effect its program of Land Reform Education; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to create a Committee to discuss with the United States Government Land Reform Education;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee to represent the Philippines in the Philippine-U.S. Joint Committee for Land Reform Education, to be composed of the following:

The Committee shall be assisted by a Technical Group composed of representatives from the National Land Reform Council, Department of Foreign Affairs, Department of Education, National Economic Council and Program Implementation Agency who shall be designated by their respective offices. The Chairman of this Group shall be the representative of the Land Reform Council.

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To negotiate with the United States Government on the implementation of the Joint Communique as regards Land Reform Education;

2. To guide and direct the development of the Philippine program concerning Land Reform Education, more particularly to achieve the following objectives:

a. To arouse greater public awareness in the land reform program as embodied in Republic Act No. 3844, otherwise known as the Agricultural Land Reform Code, in order to win public support, maintain goodwill and, in general, gain acceptance of the broad philosophy and concepts of the program;

b. To harness all available resources, human and material, at all levels of Philippine community life, towards a balanced development of programs for land reform;

c. To enable it to cooperate with public and/or private institutions working along the same objectives of rural development, locally or abroad;

d. To provide situations which would enable the farmer to desire for himself and work towards the needed changes in his own group structure, the barrio;

e. To enable the farmer to recognize his own role in effecting changes and to accept the responsibilities that go with changed patterns of doing and thinking; and

f. To achieve, through this program, a truly viable society for the country;

3. To facilitate the establishment of the administrative and organizational machinery that would ensure the effective coordination of organized programs on land reform education:

a. Farmer Education b. Teacher Institutes on Land Reform c. Land Reform Technician Training d. Community Education and Information e. Landowner Re-Orientation; and

4. To perform such other functions as would effect the proper implementation of the Joint Communique concerning Land Reform Education.

For this purpose, the Committee is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance and information as it may require in the performance of its functions and shall have such other powers consistent with the execution of its duties.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and shall submit from time to time reports on the progress of its activities to the President.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.