Address of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines On the occasion of his 67th birthday

[Broadcast by shortwave to the United States over the nationwide network of the Columbia Broadcasting System, September 9, 1945]

GREETINGS TO ALL OF MY FRIENDS IN AMERICA:

I welcome this opportunity to speak to you again from this battleground of freedom, where our people are rising out of the ruins of the war that is now ended.

In a struggle as terrible as the one we have survived, a nation shows its true mettle. You in America have prevented the aggressor nations from carrying out their evil purposes against you. We in the Philippines have regained our freedom. These victories were won because our two nations—together with all the other United Nations—were able to achieve the common goal.

To me, the friendship between the American people and the Filipino people is one of the most inspiring developments of our time. And having faced the same danger, fought the same enemy for survival and struggled for the same ideals, this friendship will endure forever.

American-Filipino collaboration was not born in this war. Rather, it was matured in this war. It was the product of a long period of mutual understanding, mutual confidence, mutual help.

I am proud that, throughout my lifetime, I have been able to witness the growth of this bond between my people and yours—and that I have been able to help foster its growth.

In the year 1907, the United States permitted us to establish the Philippine Assembly, of which I was the Speaker. This was the first popularly elected national legislative body in the Philippines—indeed in any of the colonial territories of the Far East. It was our first great step toward representative, democratic government, a step taken with the assistance of America, a step that has led to our Commonwealth Government of today and will lead to our independent Republic of tomorrow.

At the time of its establishment, I expressed my confidence that the Assembly would “cement the relationship between the already closely related Americans and Filipinos”. And the first official act of the Philippine Assembly was to adopt a resolution, addressed to President Theodore Roosevelt, thanking the American people for permitting us to establish the Assembly and thereby to participate directly in making the laws by which we were governed.

That was thirty-eight years ago. In the time that has passed since then, the bond between us has grown stronger. The political actions which bound us together in the past were recently welded into military action which bound us even more closely.

It was my privilege, during all these years, without interruption, to support the principle of cooperation between the Philippines and the United States. I was convinced this policy was both sound and wise during the time I was Speaker of the Philippine Assembly. I saw this policy ever more highly vindicated as the years passed. The closeness of our understanding was very evident to me during my many talks with your late very great President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, as well as with your new and also great President, Harry S. Truman.

Now, we in the Philippines are approaching the great day of our independence. For you, the independence of the Philippines is a symbol of the health and strength of your democratic ideals. For us, our independence marks our emergence as a free and sovereign nation.

When our independent Republic is established, there will of course be a new political relationship between our two nations. But this I want to say, as strongly as I know how. When the Republic of the Philippines is established, I shall consider the friendship and collaboration between my nation and yours to be the essential feature of this new political relationship. That is my policy now. I am sure it will always be the cornerstone of Philippine foreign policy in the future.

I know that I speak in the name of eighteen million Filipinos when I give this message to our friends in America:

We have been loyal to you in peace and in war, and you have been loyal to us in peace and in war. We both stand today upon the threshold of a new era. Whatever happens, the bond between us shall remain firm, the cooperation between us shall continue, the intimate friendship between us shall become ever closer. In that spirit, we face the future.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Address of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, on the occasion of his 67th birthday. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (6), 489-490.