Address of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines Before the Executive Session of the Tydings Committee

[Held in Washington, D. C., November 5, 1945]

I am very thankful to you Mr. Chairman and to the members of your committee for the privilege of meeting with you once more on the eve of my departure for the Philippines. I am especially grateful for your keen interest in our problems.

Soon after my arrival here last month I conferred with your distinguished chairman and the next day the Senate approved the Bill making available to the Commonwealth Government the amount of $71,000,000 for general purposes in the Philippines. Without these funds it would have been difficult for the Philippine Government to function.

A week later I was given the opportunity of meeting with you in this Committee Room. I pictured for you the distressing condition of my people as a result of the war and the urgent need for rehabilitation. Without losing time you started discussing our needs and as a result a few days later Senator Tydings introduced the Philippine Rehabilitation Bill of 1945.

I understand you are now ready to report this Bill out of the Committee. Through this Bill when finally approved the Filipino people will be materially assisted in the rebuilding of their homes and the restoration of their industries.

I am informed that the members of the Committee are of one mind on this Bill. I hope that when the Bill is favorably reported it will be passed with the least possible delay. The element of time is essential in this matter. The lives of my people depend on your action. Indeed the life of the nation depends on it. Once again the world will see that America always makes good on her promise. As for the Filipino people I know you will have their undying gratitude.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Address of President Sergio Osmeña before the Executive Session of the Tydings Committee. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (1), 113-114.