Radio Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines To the Latin-American Republics

[Released on June 8, 1945]

From Malacañan Palace, historic residence of Spanish captains-general, later, of American governors-general and now, of the President of the Philippines, I greet you most cordially. The Philippines has always regarded the Spanish-American nations as brother nations, and knows that they feel for her the same reciprocal sentiment of affection and sympathy. Within the bonds of this spiritual union that binds us, nothing is more proper, at this transcendental moment in our national existence, than to communicate with our brother nations on that side of the Pacific Ocean.

A new chapter in our checkered history is about to begin. Tomorrow, our Congress will convene, and for the first time since our country was invaded more than three years ago, the voice of our people, speaking through their duly elected representatives in the Legislature, is to be heard again.

In this part of the world, the war is not yet over; as a matter of fact the thunder of front line artillery is still audible in our Capital. The enemy has been routed in every engagement, but though incapable now of organized resistance, he has fled to the hills and will have to be hunted down one by one. In spite of these difficulties, however, I, as Chief Executive, have convoked the First Philippine Congress, because I am sure that our people are anxious to see the democratic procedures, which obtained before the war, fully restored. Now that the formal proclamation of our independence approaches, the eyes of the world are focused on us and we must prove our capacity to discharge those responsibilities which must come with the freedom we have so dearly won on the battlefield.

In the great task of liberating the Philippines, Americans and Filipinos again fought side by side as they had done in Bataan and Corregidor. When that great soldier and statesman, General of the Army Douglas MacArthur, made good his pledge to return, he found that the Filipinos too had stood by their word and kept faith with the United States. The Philippine campaign has been a joint undertaking, the fitting climax of a policy of cooperation which has characterized Filipino-American relations for nearly fifty years.

The military partnership between the Philippines and the United States will continue until Japan sues for unconditional surrender. Last week I offered General MacArthur a full division of Filipino soldiers, led by Filipino officers, to take part in the campaign for the complete defeat of Japan. That offer has been accepted and our volunteers, most of whom have fought in Bataan and Corregidor, stand ready to join their American brothers-in-arms in the fight against Japan. Soon the militarists of Japan will realize how futile their efforts have been to poison the mind of the Filipinos against the Americans. Very soon they will know that they cannot break asunder, by force of arms or propaganda, a friendship founded on faith, good-will and mutual understanding.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Radio Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, to the Latin-American Republics. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (3), 246-247.