Speech of Honorable Tomas Confesor Secretary of the Interior In a popular meeting held under the auspices of the Manila Civilian Anti-Japanese Association

[Delivered at the Lotus Theater, Manila, April 1, 1945]

MY FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

During the last three years we Filipinos lived under a regime of brutality and terror. Nevertheless, our faith in the ultimate victory of America never faltered. Today that faith has been fully vindicated. As the Psalmist said, “In our times of distress, we cried unto the Lord and He heard us.” Today we have been emancipated from the clutches of the savage Samurai.”

We, therefore, owe America an eternal debt of gratitude. We have contracted a moral obligation the magnitude of which transcends the bounds of our capacity to show our great love and affection for her. Nevertheless, we can indicate our gratefulness by continuing to be deeply and firmly loyal to her and to her democratic institutions.

This loyalty is a precious legacy that we should pass on to future generations of Filipinos. We should keep and preserve this beautiful heirloom so that our children and our children’s children may enjoy its glorious blessings. Through this heritage our people is bound by an abiding link of friendship to America and her Christian ideals of justice and democracy. No Filipino who truly loves his country and believes in liberty under a constitutional government can be disloyal to America.

Our loyalty should not be only by word of mouth. It should not be merely a burning but fleeting passion. It should abide deeply in our hearts and souls. It should manifest itself in concrete deeds and action, as it did express itself on the bloody fields of Bataan and on battle-scarred hills throughout the Philippines under the banner of our heroic guerrilleros. We should translate it into a concrete program or national platform to guide us in our everyday life.

The other day, in a radio speech broadcast to South America, I enunciated such a program. I declared that we should enter into a close partnership with the American people in formulating and putting into effect a program of national security. I said that we should count on the cooperation and guidance of America in working out our national destiny.

From this national platform, we should steer our course in the years to come. From this platform, we should set the course of our ship of state, if we envision, as we do today, a glorious destiny for our race.

Today, more than ever before in the history of American-Filipino relationship, there has come to obtain a state of closer and more cordial amity and mutual understanding between the two peoples. Today America is giving all that she can for the security and well-being of our country. America’s sons are in our midst, fighting our battles, that we may enjoy the blessings of liberty under a democratic government.

The American soldier has restored democracy to the Philippines. He stands today as the bravest and most loyal defender of our democratic institutions. He is shedding his blood and dying for us that we may live as free men free from terror, free from tyranny. Moreover, he is an ambassador of goodwill to us Filipinos. Through him we feel the heartbeats of the American people.

Through him we learn that America is sincere in establishing in our land a regime of liberty under which we Filipinos may live in peace and security. We find in him the ultimate expression of the spirit of America—a spirit of altruism, a spirit of humanity and brotherhood among men.

It is, therefore, the duty and responsibility of every Filipino to make the American soldier feel at home in the Philippines. It is our duty and responsibility to see to it that he is cheerful and happy amongst us. It is our duty and responsibility to inspire in him a high regard and respect for the Filipinos as a race. We should preserve and maintain his friendship. We must deal with him in such a manner as to keep high and inviolate his esteem and appreciation for our people.

America does not merely profess love and affection for our people. She translates this feeling into concrete deeds and action. I have already shown how she is fighting our battle for freedom. At the same time, she is providing us with food, clothing, medicines, and even shelter. She is repairing our roads. She is reconstructing our bridges and she is putting back in operation our locomotive means of transportation. She is building hospitals for the sick and the wounded. She is providing relief for our homeless and indigents. Besides all these, she is providing work at good wages for our laborers. There is so much work that the United States Army cannot find enough men for employment in Manila and in the neighboring provinces. And yet the Army is paying a minimum daily wage of P1.25, which is more than the pre-war minimum wage.

Despite the fact that the enemy has devastated our fields and taken away the produce of our lands, we do not now find people dying of hunger on our streets as they did a few months ago. Today we do not see the poor picking crumbs from garbage cans and left-overs from the floors of restaurants and other eating places in the City, as they did during the enemy regime, while those who were engaged in the buy-and-sell business wallowed in millions and in luxury. Today you are not eating dogs, cats and rats as many of you did three months ago, while the buy-and-sell people, the puppets, the collaborators, the spies were enjoying ham and eggs, tenderloin steaks and appetizing adobo In other words, the American people, through their forces of liberation, aside from dedicating themselves to the task of annihilating the enemy, are at the same time looking after the welfare and well-being of our people.

We should not expect our government to produce miracles in a period of two months. The enemy destroyed everything that the Commonwealth had. He deprived us of our revenues. He robbed our people. He ruined our industries. He paralyzed our commerce. He flooded our country with worthless “Mickey-Mouse” currency. He emptied our national treasury. He looted our country and our people. He enthroned graft, corruption and immorality in the government and in all phases of our national life.

We cannot, in sixty days, cure the evils which the enemy has planted to poison our political and social institutions and deaden the soul and spirit of our people. We cannot, in sixty days, rebuilt and reconstruct what he has destroyed. We cannot restore the sound and sane functioning of our government and laws in so short a period of time.

Notwithstanding the magnitude of the task, we have made a good start. Our first concern has been the rehabilitation of the civil government, under the laws of our Commonwealth, in the liberated provinces and municipalities. The people lost their confidence in government during the last three years. But now we are slowly but surely restoring that confidence.

We have already begun the reconstitution of civil governments in Nueva Ecija, Bulacan, Cavite, and the City of Manila. Very soon we shall inaugurate civil governments in Pampanga, Pangasinan, La Union, Rizal, Bataan, and Zambales. Very soon, too, civil governments will be set up in the Provinces of Iloilo, Capiz, Antique, Romblon, Negros, and Cebu, as well as in the provinces of Mindanao.

As fast as the American forces turn over to us the liberated areas we shall reconstitute civil governments therein under the laws of the Commonwealth. In reconstituting these provincial governments, we shall provide them with administrative officials. We shall reconstitute their judicial tribunals. We shall reestablish the health service. As far as facilities warrant, we shall reopen the schools.

In a few days the Commonwealth will open and operate a government bank with a capital of thirty million pesos to provide banking facilities for commerce, agriculture and industry. Very soon private banks will open their doors to allow withdrawals of deposits and to help revive commerce and industry in our country.

The government has already filed a requisition for supplies, merchandise and equipment of immediate necessity to provide relief for our people and agricultural tools and raw materials for certain vital manufacturing industries.

We are seriously concerned with the task of reviving our trade with America as early as possible. We have already requested for the assignment to the Commonwealth of five vessels under Philippine registry, which are now in the service of the United States Government. These vessels will bring in relief supplies and equipment and take our products to the American market.

As soon as we can prepare it, we shall submit through the United States Government a requisition for equipment, machinery and materials for the rehabilitation of our major industries. Among these industries, I might mention mining, lumber, sugar, cordage, transportation, rice milling, electric lighting, soap manufacturing, shoe manufacturing, building construction and textiles. These and other industries should be rehabilitated immediately in order to bring about the early economic reconstruction of the country.

We are also trying to devise ways and means to provide a transportation system to serve the City of Manila and the neighboring provinces.

In other words, we are doing now what is humanly possible, not only in meeting our pressing problems, but also in preparing and equipping ourselves to meet the problems of post-war rehabilitation.

We are also reorganizing the Philippine Army. We have already formulated a program to take care of giving recognition and reward to legitimate guerrilleros. We are organizing a national police force for the maintenance of peace and order.

Here in the City of Manila experts of the American Army in health administration are now at work, building up a public health service that would be second to none, our resources permitting.

We are drawing up plans for a new Manila, wherein the best interests of the common man will be served. We shall have parks and playgrounds for the poor and for the children of the laboring class. We shall provide modern sites for schools. We shall establish a sewage system and other sanitary facilities to make the entire City a healthful place to live in, for the poor as well as for the rich. We shall provide the City with civic centers, well distributed and accessible to all the elements of its population. We shall have a new Manila free from slums. We shall have a new Manila, where everybody will have a decent home to live in. In other words, the new Manila will not only be a beautiful city, for the rich and well-to-do, but it will be a healthful metropolis, where even the poor and indigent will be free to breathe fresh air and bask in sunshine on their own little yards.

But all this work of reconstruction calls for patience. It requires courage and enterprise. It demands confidence in the future. I wish to assure you that this, our dream for a great and beautiful Manila, shall come true. It shall come true because this war, and the devastation it has inflicted upon this capital, instead of depressing our people, instead of breaking down our spirit, has spurred us to greater effort. The sufferings, the hardships and the tortures we have undergone have put more iron in our blood. The annihilation of the enemy has released in our people a new vigor and an abiding confidence in our own capacity to reconstruct and to rebuild a city far greater and far more beautiful than the one that the enemy has destroyed.

The vitality of the Filipino will manifest itself once more in the reconstruction of this capital city. The integrity of his character will once more be demonstrated in his courage and in his resourcefulness in accepting the challenge to rise from temporary defeat to a glorious victory. In the rebuilding of a new and greater Manila over the ashes of the old he is put once again to a severe test. However, God helping, I feel confident that he will succeed.

We are now engaged in the reorganization of the city police force. Much to our unhappiness the police organization of the City has gained an obnoxious reputation during the last three years. Upon the appointment of Colonel Jones as Chief of Police for the City, I told him that he should be ruthless in purging the organization of its undesirable elements. By all indications, he is mustering out of service the unreliable elements. He has already discharged from the police roll many undesirable characters. I want to assure you that more dismissals are forthcoming, and I am going to back Colonel Jones to the limit in this regard, should such support be necessary in the interest of good government.

In the meantime, Colonel Jones is putting under training the best available elements for the police force. He assures me that by the time he is through, we shall have a police organization that is clean and honest, a police force possessing plenty of punch. The people of Manila have been praying for a clean police service. I want to assure you that you are going to have it. All that I ask of you is that you be patient. Give us a chance and eventually you will get the police service that you have been clamoring for.

I wish to speak now of the rising prices of commodities. Here again I want to plead for patience on the part of our people. During the last three years, a system of graft and corruption flourished especially in the price control office of the puppet government. This corrupt tendency has impregnated the minds and hearts of our people. We cannot, therefore, eliminate the evils of black marketing in sixty days. You should bear in mind in this connection that all hours of the day we still hear the explosions of shells and the detonations of bombs within a few miles from our City. We are still working under war conditions. We still lack transportation facilities. The agricultural conditions in the provinces have not as yet returned to normal. Many people are still away from their farms. The production of our prime commodities has hardly been restored to fifty per cent of its pre-war normal volume.

In my inspection and investigation trips to Central Luzon, farmers and rice producers informed me that the 1944-45 rice crop is hardly 50 to 60 per cent of the normal rice crop of that region. Consequently, we have a tough problem at hand in providing the City of Manila with rice from that section of the country. During normal times, we consumed 6,000 cavans of rice every day in this City. Today, the American army is selling and giving out, as free rations, rice, corn and wheat Jour, in quantities equal to, if not more, than the total quantity of rice that was being sold every day during the pre-war years.

In this regard, I would like to tell you that there are PCAU stores all over the City selling rice at P0.32 a ganta. There is enough rice to sell to everybody at that price. And yet you may ask me the question: Why is there a black market for rice in the City? All that I can tell you is this: You can blame neither the Government nor the American army. Most of the blame should be placed on the people themselves for lack of cooperation.

There seems to obtain a feeling amongst us that we should resort to tricks and illegitimate schemes to fool one another. There are still amongst us people who have been accustomed to making money in the illegitimate and corrupt way. They are now doing everything they can to revive the old way with all its evils.

I hear all kinds of complaints, all kinds of protests, that there is unjust discrimination on the part of the people who sell PCAU goods. I hear charges that PCAU dealers and retailers hoard merchandise sold to them for resale. I hear charges that those who are handling PCAU goods are the same profiteers and black marketeers who thrived under the Japanese regime. If all these complaints were true, I would like to ask that those who are affected by these irregularities in the resale of PCAU goods should fearlessly come forward with definite information. For example, they should specify the number and location of PCAU stores and the names of those who are committing irregularities. They should inform us when, where and how those irregularities were committed. We cannot act on vague, general complaints. We want specific cases, supported by facts presented at the same time. Only in this way would we be able to act in an effective manner on all complaints. But so long as complaints remain on the gossip stage, nothing can be done to remedy the irregularities.

We hear from certain quarters the cry for national solidarity. Why? Does serious national dissension exist today? Not that I know of. But who are those who are crying for national solidarity? Nobody but the enemy collaborators.

We inquire: Why are they crying from the top of their voices for national solidarity? We venture to state that they still want to continue in power as they were in power under the enemy regime. In other words, national solidarity means to these people that they be retained in positions of power and influence in the economic and political life of the nation.

These enemy collaborators at one time wanted us surrender and take our oath of allegiance to the puppet republic in the name of national solidarity. Those who resisted Japanese tyranny were called bandits, in the name of national solidarity. These same collaborators issued to us threats of death by enemy guns and bombs in the name of national solidarity. Many of these collaborators played the role of spies to destroy the resistance movement against the Japanese regime, in the name of solidarity. Now they are using the same battle cry of national solidarity that they may continue to hold public positions, that they may once more have in their hands the power and authority of government, and that they may continue to live in comfort, in luxury, and in ease.

What do they mean when they issue the call for national solidarity? Do they mean that the Filipino people should again rally around them? Do they wish to follow the sinking sun of Nippon so they may find that their dream of co-prosperity ends in futility? Why should these false prophets of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere have the temerity to call upon the country for national solidarity when they have even renounced their citizenship under the Commonwealth of the Philippines and have foresworn their oath of allegiance to the United States of America? What a nerve these collaborators possess that they should dare propound the need for national solidarity when they have just fallen from their false pedestals as promoters of the Nipponese Greater East Asia! If I were in their place, my sense of personal decency should compel me to stay at home and accept defeat.

To me, their cry for national solidarity is nothing more nor less than an attempt to put a serious obstacle in the effort of the American people, through the American army, to completely annihilate the enemy. Their purpose is evident: to create division among the people. Their objective is to divide the people, create misunderstanding among them by bringing about conflict and dissension. They are again playing their game of treachery, in a manner more sly, more clever, and, therefore, more dangerous than ever. They are again playing their game of disloyalty. They are again trying to create a situation whereby they may point out that democracy has failed in the Philippines, for it has broken up the country and its people into hostile camps.

It is strange that the same individuals who readily accepted the totalitarian system of government, the same individuals who accepted the futility of the freedom of speech, are the very ones now who are invoking that right under a constitutional government. They invoke it, not to promote harmony and unity, but to spread dissension and disunity.

I would like to tell this group, these collaborators, these pro-Japanese agents, that they cannot fool the Filipino people. They should realize by this time that, in every nook and corner of this country, their leadership has been repudiated. They should clearly and definitely understand that by their leadership they have cast their country and their people into tragedy and disaster.

At this time, when during every minute of every hour of the day American guns are firing and American bombs are exploding in several sections of our land in the decisive campaign to destroy every vestige of Japanese power and influence, every enemy collaborator should refrain from doing or saying anything that might interfere with the successful operation of the American army in the Philippines. In other words, they should realize that America and the Commonwealth of the Philippines are still at war against Japan and that the Japanese forces are still offering resistance in Luzon, in the Visayas, and in Mindanao. Consequently, they should not put an obstacle to the effort of our forces to completely annihilate the enemy.

The task of reconstructing our country, the responsibility of rehabilitating our people, and the duty of solidifying our varied elements, rest on those who remained steadfastly loyal to the Government of the United States and the Commonwealth of the Philippines. In their hands have been placed the formulation of plans and the execution of programs that are designed to rehabilitate this country and to place her on a sound information for her development and progress. The collaborators have had their opportunity to charter the destiny of our people. They have failed. Consequently, they should accept defeat graciously and retire being repeatedly humiliated.

I understand, however, that the enemy collaborators are organizing themselves. Why?—I ask this question. What is their purpose in so organizing? Do they wish to unfurl once more the banner of enemy collaboration? Do they intend to engage once more in a campaign to convince the people that totalitarianism is the best system of government for the Philippines? Do they sigh for the return of “co-prosperity,” and do they wish to continue their fight for the Nipponese Greater East Asia?

Are the collaborators, in organizing themselves, proposing to revive the idea that the Orient is for the Orientals, that Oriental culture should replace Occidental culture in the Philippines? Do the collaborators desire to revive Nippongo in the Philippine schools? Will they now reiterate their belief that the Yamato race is a superior race and should be the master race in the Orient?

Are the collaborators organizing themselves so that the rest of the people may again eat dogs, cats, and rats in Manila and in other parts of the Philippines while they, the collaborators, remain comfortable, healthy and well-fed? Is it their intention to revive the terrors of Fort Santiago and the brutality of the kempitai ? Do they want to see Manila and other cities of the Philippines again transformed into gambling dens and centers of immorality and espionage? Is it their desire that bribery, corruption and graft again be enthroned in the government and sip the vitality of our national life?

Are the collaborators organizing themselves that the “Mickey-Mouse” money again be allowed to circulate as legal tender? Would they now try to frustrate the rapid annihilation of Japanese forces and influence in the Philippines? Do they wish to restore their buy-and-sell enterprises that they may enrich themselves once more by selling war materials to the Japanese?

Are the collaborators organizing themselves that the Filipino people may accept the dogma that the Japanese emperor is God? Would they have the Kalibapi constitution become the supreme law of the land? Do the collaborators propose to put into effect the treaty of mutual alliance between Japan and the puppet republic? Do the collaborators seek to prevent the influence of American and Occidental cultures from shaping the life and future of our people?

In any of these, or all of these, are the objectives of the collaborators in organizing themselves, we accept the challenge. Not only do we accept the challenge, but we also defy the collaborators to organize themselves to these ends. We challenge them to organize themselves on the issue of “co-prosperity,” or of Orientalism, or of totalitarianism.

We want to tell the collaborators that we are not afraid of them. We were not afraid of them when they were being backed up by Japanese military might. Why should we be afraid of them now that Japan is on the run?

I understand that the collaborators desire justice. Our answer is that they deserve justice. But the guerrilleros, those who resisted Japanese tyranny, brutality and misrule, deserve more justice than the collaborators. We want to be charitable to the collaborators, but we want to tell them that charity begins at home. If the collaborators are entitled to charity, then those who have suffered and who suffered terribly, in sustaining their convictions and in defending the principles of liberty and democracy under a constitutional system of government, are entitled to charity and more.

We want to unify the people, if unification should be necessary. But unity must be achieved under the banner of liberty and democracy. National solidarity should be built on the foundation of individual freedom as we knew it to be built under a democratic system of government.

The collaborators unfurled the banner of national solidarity under the shadow of “co-prosperity.” We, the guerrilleros, we who resisted Japanese military might and terrorism, call upon the people for unity and national solidarity under a régime of justice and democracy. We have no doubt as to whose side the people will rally. Their exultation, upon the landing of the American forces of liberation, is the most compelling evidence that the people are united in their desire to live the democratic way of life.

Many collaborators have tried to explain their position to us, submitting that they collaborated to save the people from Japanese atrocities. In answer to this argument, we ask the question: Did the collaborators save the people from Japanese iniquities? I challenge any impartial observer for an affirmative answer. During the last three years, not a day passed without an innocent noncombatant becoming an object of Japanese iniquity. Every home in the Philippines today has its share of woe inflicted upon it by the Samurai. Not a barrio in the Philippines was free from the wickedness of Hirohito’s armed forces. No community of our country however small and isolated failed to witness the application of horrible methods of torture. In the Philippines the armed agents and promoters of the so-called co-prosperity sphere were bestial as no civilized people had ever been. Where in the world did a soldier of a civilized country rip open the womb of a prospective mother except in the Philippines during the Japanese regime, while collaborators were singing paeans of praise elevating unto the heavens the goodness of the Samurai? When was rape elevated to the category of military necessity except during the Japanese regime in the Philippines as the collaborators sat smugly and comfortably in their offices professing loyalty to the Japanese flag and to the Japanese emperor?

Today, thousands of Filipinos in the towns and in the barrios are being massacred in cold blood—shot, machine-gunned, and bayoneted to death, irrespective of health condition, age and sex of the victims. Why have not the collaborators stopped such cold-blooded murder? Hundreds and thousands, including women and children, the aged and the sick, the defenseless and the innocent, have been killed in Manila in a way more brutal than if they had been attacked by wild animals. What did the collaborators do to save them?

Thousands of women were raped and abused at the same time. What did the collaborators do to save them from the clutches of the beastly Samurai?

Three-fourths of the City of Manila, where public buildings, churches, schools, beautiful homes, libraries, works of art, and historic and ancient landmarks were situated, have been razed to the ground. What did the collaborators do to prevent this wanton destruction?

Hundreds and even thousands of innocent men and women were tortured and killed in the dungeons of Fort Santiago and in other prisons in the country. What did the collaborators do to save these innocent people from death through infernal methods of torture?

Could the tragedies that had befallen Manila and those that are even now befalling many communities in the Philippines, where fire and steel are mowing down the population, be more tragic if there had been no collaboration? Could the collaborator conscientiously affirm that the rape of Manila would have been more hellish if there had been no collaborators?

If I were a collaborator, I would not for a minute cross the gates of Malacañan to whisper to someone therein that I did collaborate because I wanted to save my country from catastrophe. What I should do would be to hang my head in shame and recite the confiteor. In this manner, I would ennoble myself and perhaps win the respect of my fellow men.

I repeat that we are still at war. Under the circumstances, we have solemn duties and obligations to perform. For the collaborators to be organizing themselves now, would be to show that they are conspiring to put serious obstacles to the war efforts of the American people. It would also show their desire to save the vestiges of Japanese totalitarian influence in this country from all-out annihilation. If that is not treason, then we who resisted the enemy must have suffered in vain.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Confesor, T. (1945). Speech of Secretary Tomas Confesor in a popular meeting held under the auspices of the Manila Civilian Anti-Japanese Association. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (2), 161-172.