Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines Before a demonstration of the people of Manila on the grounds of Malacañan Palace on the occasion of his 67th birthday

[Released on September 9, 1945]

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

After three years of absence from our country under painful and tragic circumstances, you can imagine my joy at being able to celebrate my birthday with my family and with our people, of whose kindness, sympathy, and affection I have received so many proofs. Having reached the age of 67 years, I thank God for His protection and for having preserved my life, and I thank our people for the opportunity they have given me to continue to serve them.

It will hardly be denied that the condition of the Philippines today does not justify any celebration. With many of our cities and towns in ruins, with thousands of families homeless and half-clothed, with our agriculture, industry, and commerce paralyzed, with public works and essential public services dislocated, with a government beset with financial difficulties—in a word, with the pulse of the country’s life weakened by three years of war without precedent in its destruction of material as well as moral and spiritual values, the panorama before our eyes does not lend comfort to the heart.

But with all this, my countrymen, I feel exceedingly happy because, in the midst of all this pain and misery, I am still with you, sharing your fate and, above all, satisfied that our liberation from the enemy more than compensates for nil the losses which we have suffered. And what is more, I am thrilled at the manifestation of good will from so many friends and compatriots from all parts of the country. I thank them all for their kindness as also those friends from abroad who have felicitated me on this day.

On a day like this, which marks one more lap, one more milestone, in the long and arduous journey of life, it would not be amiss to pause and cast a retrospective glance, not so much to indulge in a natural satisfaction over distances covered and achievements made, as to draw inspiration from the past, the better to trace a firm and secure path into the future. This retrospective glance becomes more important and useful when it is considered that we are on the threshold of independence and, as such, at the end of an epoch and the opening of a new.

Our time is brief and the recapitulation must be swift. In examining the history of our country for the last 45 years, the phases which project themselves into the observer’s view are the following: firstly, the final convergence on the ideal of independence, and secondly, the constructive achievements of Filipino nationalism and the tactics and methods that made them possible.

In the general exhaustion and discouragement produced by the defeat of our arms in the war against America at the beginning of the century, the Federal Party emerged with its Utopian policy of annexing the Philippines to the American Union. In part as a reaction to this dream, which for a time fired some imagination especially among the conservative elements, there sprang up various independist groups which, differing in their procedures and battle tactics, nevertheless were united in one common aspiration—independence as soon as possible. Coinciding with the organization of the First Philippine Assembly in 1907, these groups consolidated themselves into the Grand Nacionalista Party.

After 1907, in one election after another, the nationalists defeated their adversaries and the time came when the strength of opposing political parties became so negligible that it had to be conceded that no’ election could be won except on a platform of immediate independence. Nationalism had definitely triumphed and had brought all parties to blazon independence on their banners.

It cannot be doubted that this unity of aspiration gave a tremendous impetus to our libertarian campaigns and paved the way for the Independence Law through which our efforts will reach a glorious culmination on July 4, 1946, with the establishment of the Philippine Republic. The conclusion is now inescapable that our fight for independence is definitely won, and that, as a political solution, it admits of no revision or backward step. This is because that solution is founded not only of our peaceful struggles for liberty during the last 45 years, but upon all of our revolutions up to the end of the last century.

Hardly less important than this great success, to my mind, were the methods which made its achievement possible. When, after the war with America and the establishment of civil government, the restrictions placed on political action were lifted, there were organized, as I have already said, the various independist groups which drew their ideals from the Revolution. The temptation then was great to follow a policy of systematic and aggressive resistance to American sovereignty. The so-called dollar imperialism was a very suggestive theme, lending itself readily to dramatic declamations. As a slogan it could be exploited at public meetings to excite the emotions of the populace.

On the other hand, we had the positive assurances of the Americans and their representatives in the Philippines, to the effect that America had not come to conquer and colonize us in the manner of the European powers, but to help us Filipinos to form a democratic government, teach us its liberties, educate our youth and our common people, reconstruct our economy, establish public sanitation, build good roads, organize our agriculture, industries and commerce—in a word, to teach us the art of self-government.

Placed at these crossroads, so to speak, what were we to do? The moment called for a transcendental decision which, for better or for worse, would affect and influence the whole course of our destiny. Such a decision some of us independists made, choosing to meet the challenge of the Americans, that is, work out a government and collaborate with them in the realization of their program, but without ceding one point in our historic and traditional demand for liberty and independence. Instead of adopting a purely negative, critical and declamatory attitude, or one of at least passive resistance, we resolved to submit to the test of proving our capacity to govern ourselves.

It must not be assumed that this policy was unanimously accepted in the beginning; on the contrary, it was squarely opposed by certain sectors of public opinion. As the man most responsible for the Filipino strategy of those days, I was criticized, at times bitterly, and it was even insinuated that I had sold out to the Americans in exchange for prerogatives and advantages for the Nacionalistas in the government. The ultra-radicals charged that we were sacrificing liberty to soft comforts and the power and privileges entailed in cooperation with the sovereign. That, however, was false. Never had we been more free, and never were we more firm in the pursuance of the fundamental program of independence. With less noise and truculence, we merely put the emphasis on the necessity of proving our capacity for self-government by positive acts. As a matter of fact, we continued a step by step advance toward the independence law which crowned our efforts.

Is the work of Filipino nationalism now over? Has its role ended with the winning of that glorious victory? Roundly I answer no. Filipino nationalism, embracing the people’s deepest aspirations, satisfactorily discharged a historic task as the first architect of our nation. Filipino nationalism must now inspire and conserve and perpetuate it.

The tasks before us are of such character and magnitude that the Filipino people could find no greater challenge to that genius for leadership and that capacity for construction of which it has given so many brilliant and eloquent proofs under Nacionalista leadership. The problems which demand our attention may be divided into two categories: first, those calling for solutions which cannot be postponed, and, second, those which are of a long-range nature and permit of more time.

The immediate problems are those relating to the satisfaction of the basic and primordial needs of the people, like housing, clothing, food, and medicine. Included in this category, among others, are the problems of sanitation, public education, land and maritime transportation, peace and order, essential public works, banks and other credit establishments, and public finance. In one word, they are problems which have to do with the immediate reestablishment of at least that order and such conditions as prevailed in the pre-war period.

Involved in these problems is the great debt of gratitude we owe to those who fell in the night of oppression, victims of the enemy, both those who lost their lives on the front lines as defenders of their land and of the principles of democracy, and those who succumbed in dungeons and torture-chambers, paying, with their lives for their unbending loyalty. This debt the nation must pay, not in lip-service alone, but in terms of substantial and tangible help for their widows, orphans, and other dependents.

In remembering the widows of so many martyrs, many of them unknown, I believe I voice a universal sentiment when I express the profound gratitude of the country also to the Filipino woman for the loyalty and patriotism sire demonstrated during the years of the Japanese occupation; silently but effectively, she, too,’ served the cause of the Resistance. I am sure that in the tremendous tasks of the post-war period, in the formidable work of rehabilitation and reconstruction, that same woman will do honor to her legendary patriotism, placing at the service of her country and her government the genius and constructive capacity of which she has given such abundant proofs in the past.

Nor must we, in dispensing legitimate recompense, forget those who have survived the disaster—the Philippine Army soldiers who faced death on the front lines, the heroic men who slugged it out with the enemy in mountains and jungles, the patriots who withstood the tortures of the military police, and last but not least, the civilian volunteers who at every opportunity risked their lives to sabotage the enemy. To all of these men the nation owes the duty of recognizing and rewarding their valor.

There are also the long-range problems. Our objective is not only to reestablish pre-war conditions but to improve those conditions. This will require a vast national program, covering all the phases of our economy. It will be necessary for us to develop our immense natural resources, under the restrictions and safeguards provided in our Constitution. Those resources are the patrimony of our nation, and should only be exploited rationally and for the benefit of each and every Filipino. They must not fall into the hands of a privileged few, foreign or native. In developing these resources, our objective should not merely be to create wealth, but to see to it that that wealth goes to the benefit of the common man. Our aim is not to make millionaires, but to create for the citizen every opportunity in the form of work which will be sufficiently rewarding to permit him and his family to enjoy the essential comforts of civilization.

Concomitantly, it is our duty to expand our program of social legislation, making it more liberal and progressive. Without doing away with the system of free competition and free enterprise based on private property rights, we should endeavor to extend to the maximum, the benefits of a sound and efficient system of social and economic security. We cannot live in a little world of our own that refuses to move forward. The signs of the times are clear: the masses no longer consider the political bill of rights as the alpha and omega of any constitution, but also demand an economic bill of rights and its enforcement.

Such is the great adventure in reconstruction which faces the Filipino people. The question naturally arises: How should we accept a challenge of such magnitude? What methods should we adopt to undertake the mighty task ahead, and how attack the problems that must be solved? Success or failure will largely depend upon the manner of approach.

It is of primary importance that we adopt no prideful attitude in the face of this challenge. It would be unpardonable to pretend that we can accomplish everything by our own efforts alone. While indeed the basic effort must be ours, still it is evident that without the assistance of the United States no degree of success is possible. We shall also need the help of the international agencies created by the United Nations for the rehabilitation of world economy and finance. But the principal aid, I repeat, must come from our noble ally—the United States of America.

It is therefore absolutely essential that our conduct now and in the future be guided by the fundamental principle that we must retain the confidence, the great and constructive sympathy, which America has always shown toward us, and particularly during these last few years which have culminated in our liberation from Japanese tyranny.

The same policy which in the past, under nationalist leadership, won the confidence and good-will of America in the joint enterprise of building our nation, should be followed now and in the future, with such modifications as the circumstances may require, particularly the circumstance that America will soon cease to exercise suzerainty over our affairs.

Our conduct must be such as to give no room for doubt regarding our adherences and loyalty. Nothing should be done to detract from the magnificent conception which America and the world have formed of our country in the war’s role of honor. This does not mean that, already independent, we should be subservient to influences from the outside world, or that we should tolerate interferences in our internal affairs. Neither America nor any other liberty-loving country, I believe, would take any action impairing our sovereignty. But it is evident that our Allies in the great crusade against the forces of oppression will have the right to expect of us such conduct as is in keeping with the great ideals and principles for which so many lives have been sacrificed. In no other way can we continue to hold their friendship and respect.

And we should never lose sight of the fact that our collaboration with America after this war will not end with the accomplishment of the task of reconstruction and rehabilitation. America and the Philippines are bound to protect their integrity and interests mutually, securing also the peace in the Pacific through the creation and maintenance of bases in this country. Aside from this, even after the bonds of our political dependence are severed, America and the Philippines will have common aims to promote, which are not only of a material, but of a moral and spiritual character. In the material sphere, it will interest both countries to promote commerce and the exchange of goods and services to an extent and under such terms as their respective economies will permit. On the cultural and spiritual side, America leaves here a language, a culture, and certain institutions through which, notwithstanding the cessation of our political dependence, America will exert a permanent influence over Filipino life.

We have, therefore, a Filipino-American collaboration not for ten, twenty, or fifty years, but for all time—so long as there is such a thing as Filipino democracy, the fruition on this side of the Pacific, of American democracy.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, before a demonstration of the people of Manila on the grounds of Malacañan Palace on the occasion of his 67th birthday. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (6), 483-488.