Speech of Hon. Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, on the occasion of the assumption to office of the members of his new Cabinet in Manila, March 8, 1945.

Today I have taken the oath of office of the members of my new Cabinet. I would like to take advantage of this occasion when the heads of our different executive departments assume office to broadly synthesize the events of the war during the past three years as they affected the functioning of the Government of our Commonwealth, as well as the realization of the program of independence as had been agreed upon between the United States and the Philippines. I would also like to establish the basic principles that will guide us as we restore the Government of the Commonwealth in our Capital.

I would like my colleagues in the Government to always keep two cardinal thoughts in mind: 1st. That there should always be close relations between the people and the government, and to achieve this the government must earn the trust of the people. 2nd. That our Government as it is today is the product of Filipino-American collaboration, and that every effort must be made to maintain and foster closer relations between the two peoples.

The occupation of the Philippines by Japan was not merely a military invasion. It was also ideological and cultural. It has been an attempt to deceive our people with the totalitarian ideas of the invader, with its spirit of conquest and exploitation, its theories of the superiority of the Yamato race, its way of life.

The Filipinos soon realized this and, turning a deaf ear to the seductive promises of the enemy, presented valiant and determined opposition. They continued the fight even after the organized military resistance, so heroically maintained by American and Filipino soldiers, had to cease in the face of the enemy's overwhelming numerical superiority.

Now that the secrecy with respect to the Philippines, maintained at the demand of the military, has been exposed, the outside world has glimpsed the brave and heroic feat of our guerrillas, the intrepid exponents of popular resistance. All honor be given to those soldiers of freedom who so brilliantly continued the fight of the heroes of Bataan. It would be a mistake, however, to believe that the effort was confined to the sphere of action of the guerrillas. The sources were broader and deeper—they were in the very soul of the people. Coming from the ranks of the people, the guerrillas actually constituted the army of the people. For this reason, the enemy, inherently despotic and cruel, violently laid its hands on the people. But despite its repressive measures, resistance persisted throughout the country—in the plains as well as in the mountains, in population centers as well as in remote barrios, on the northern borders of the islands and in the extreme south of the country. It was the common will of the people; it was the entire nation, determined to oppose domination by the invader at all costs.

For three long years of misery and suffering, of persecution and sacrifice, the Filipinos remained faithful to their ideals. The military control of the enemy exercised in certain areas, especially near the coasts, could not, for a moment, break the absolute and complete moral resistance of the people, from one end of the country to the other.

To demonstrate this determination of the people and to represent it abroad, and especially in the United States, the highest officials of your constitutional government accepted the invitation of the President of the United States to leave Corregidor, transferring the seat of government to Washington, D. C. This step was authorized by a law of the National Assembly. The Commonwealth officials understood that as long as we maintained the core of the Commonwealth Government abroad through its leader, the President and his Cabinet, and by virtue of the emergency powers granted to him by the National Assembly, our legal status under international law would not change, even if the enemy managed to occupy all Filipino territory militarily. It is well known that the mere military occupation of a territory does not give the invading army the rights of sovereignty. Thus, despite the Japanese invasion, our Constitutional Government not only survived destruction, but continued to function in Washington, D. C. It was officially recognized by the United States and the other 42 members of the important international group known as the United Nations.

Working closely with the Government of the United States, your Government, during its stay in that country, set out to achieve the following objectives:

All of these objectives have been substantially achieved.

The happy landing of the liberating forces under General MacArthur in Leyte, Mindoro, Lingayen, Zambales, Batangas, Bataan and Corregidor, followed by the complete occupation of the City of Manila, represents a partial but eloquent reply to our appeal to the United States to help us in our redemption. The power of America that has destroyed in a few weeks all the might built up by Japan for years, will continue to be employed until the last vestige of the invasion has disappeared from our soil.

We were on the road to independence in accordance with the program agreed upon between the United States and the Philippines, when Japan attacked us treacherously, determined to deprive us of that freedom. The leaders of your government have taken the necessary steps in the United States to ensure that the realization of this independence program does not suffer delay despite the war. Not only is the prompt realization of this program already assured, but we have also obtained a new and important concession from the United States, namely: the formal promise that our independence will be guaranteed.

Having been a member of the various Philippine missions that in the last twenty years were sent to the United States, I can say that during our negotiations for independence with the leaders of the main political parties in the United States, we never found any interest on their part regarding the protection of our independence, once granted. The best we could hear from our sympathizers was that, since we wanted to be independent, and since independence had been promised, it would be granted to us; but once given, our connection with the United States would definitively end. This aroused serious concern in many minds regarding the future of our independent Philippines. Living in the Orient, surrounded by countries with enormous populations, some of them possessing a spirit of aggression and conquest, we were never able in the past to find a completely satisfactory answer to the question frequently asked of us about how we could ensure the inviolability of our territory against the aggression of a first-rate power. It should be remembered in this regard that after our revolutions of 1896 and 1898, when our people succeeded in establishing a republican government in Malolos, the main officials of that government opened negotiations with the United States for an independence of the Philippines under American protection. The proposal failed in its acceptance. It should also be remembered that throughout the long period of our peaceful campaign for independence, all our political parties had in their platforms clauses expressing the desire of our people to obtain guarantees for our independence, once granted by the sovereign power. In those platforms, especially that of the Nationalist Party, the idea of the neutralization of the Philippines was repeatedly included.

On December 28, 1941, President Roosevelt promised that our independence would be established and protected. That was the first time that a high American official gave the promise of protection after independence. This promise, which gave great encouragement to our soldiers in Bataan, who were then fighting together, shoulder to shoulder with the Americans, was an important factor in our decision to transfer the seat of government to the United States, in order to continue there the campaign for independence that seemed to be on the verge of defeat in the Philippines, despite the loyalty and heroism of our people. With our setbacks on the battlefields, the next phase had to be fought in the field of diplomacy. If the leaders of the Commonwealth Government had made the grave mistake of placing themselves within reach of the enemy's power, not only would all semblance of constitutional government have disappeared, but at the same time, such a step would have given rise in the United States to the belief that our people renounced their independence for a long time desired, the real independence promised by America, and that they had resigned themselves to the status of a mere vassal of the Japanese empire.

I find great satisfaction in informing our people that the promise of independence with American protection, made by President Roosevelt on December 28, 1941, and reiterated by him on August 13, 1943, received legislative sanction when Congress approved Joint Resolution No. 93 and which became law on June 29, 1944. This joint resolution was presented to the Congress of the United States at our request. We gave it our firm support when it was being considered by both Chambers of Congress, and finally it was approved without any party division. In fact, the approval in both chambers was unanimous.

In this way, the lengthy negotiations for our independence that had been initiated in 1922 by the first parliamentary mission to the United States, under the presidency of Manuel L. Quezon, then President of the Senate, reached a happy conclusion under the authority of the Commonwealth Government that functioned in Washington, D. C., from May 13, 1942 to October 3, 1944. The independence dreamed of by Rizal and all the other martyrs of our history, and for whose achievement the heroes of our revolutions gave their lives, will not only be a reality, but will also have the positive securities existing today to the effect that the blessings of freedom that that independence will bring, will be permanent and lasting.

Foreseeing the grave problems that the ravages of war bring and the imperative need for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country, your Commonwealth Government urged the approval of the necessary legislation by the Congress of the United States. Such legislation was approved on June 29, 1944, and under its provisions a Philippine Rehabilitation Commission has been created composed of nine Americans and nine Filipinos. It now has its seat in Washington and is investigating all damage caused by the war and other rehabilitation needs for appropriate action, and is formulating plans for our future economic relations with the United States.

Among its most urgent tasks, which at the same time constitutes an unavoidable duty of the Commonwealth Government as a whole, is that of providing all possible assistance to the victims of the war in our country—the war veterans, especially those who are disabled or maimed; to the widows and orphans who lost their loved ones in this holocaust of war and misery: to desolate fathers and mothers who sacrificed their beloved children for the sake of freedom and democracy; to the peasant family who has lost their work animals and has seen their productive fields devastated by the enemy; to the artisans and factory workers who are now unemployed and in destitution; to the citizens now homeless, to the victims of the fire who live in ruins and in rooms crowded with people unfit for human habitation; to the survivors of the massacres in Manila and in other parts of the Philippines.

The attitude of the Filipinos in Bataan and throughout the country has constituted a vital factor in the realization of the ideal of independence guaranteed by the United States, whose roots originate from the glorious days of the Philippine Revolution. And it is so, because this attitude has inaugurated a new era in Filipino-American relations. It has forever sealed the bonds of friendship and understanding that unite the two peoples. In the American people it has created a permanent interest in our welfare, in our freedom and in our security. In our people it has had the virtue of instilling a new spirit of high responsibility and has strengthened the friendship and goodwill towards the United States. For the other democracies of the world this attitude has brought the conviction that the Filipino people have already reached their maturity, and as a result of this, these nations, anticipating the date of independence, have treated the Philippines as an independent nation in such a way that during our stay in Washington, D. C., our representatives met with the representatives of those nations on a basis of complete equality.

It is for this reason why in the first words I uttered upon setting foot on Philippine soil in Leyte, in October 1944, I affirmed that we had come not only to restore the functions of the Commonwealth Government existing at the time of the Japanese attack on December 8, 1941, but also to re-establish the Commonwealth Government in a more advanced and progressive form. With this advanced status, we will enjoy new powers that we intend to exercise with care and having as our sole guide the welfare of our people. It is obvious that this new situation imposes in turn broader responsibilities that we, without hesitation, should take upon our shoulders.

At this moment when we are re-establishing our Government in the capital of the Philippines, it is appropriate that we make known the ideals and principles that will guide our actions.

We hereby affirm our faith in and our adherence to the principles of freedom and democracy—faith and adherence born in the early days of our free history, nurtured by four hundred years of contact with the West, consecrated by our revolutionary fathers, invigorated by the teachings of America, ratified in the constitutional processes of our Commonwealth, and now sanctified with the blood of thousands of Filipino martyrs and heroes of the present war.

We condemn the totalitarian ideology that the enemy has sought to impose upon us under a government of self-proclaimed or “chosen by God” sovereigns, and we hereby reaffirm our devotion to the principles of popular sovereignty, of a government of the people, for the people and by the people.

We believe in the superiority of a responsible, peaceful and law-abiding democracy, loyal to its institutions and determined to fight for its way of life, over a degenerate fascism and totalitarianism with its regimented lives, devoid of one’s own will.

We shall reestablish in our country a social and political system founded on mutual faith, honesty and trust, and not on suspicion, corruption and fear, a system in which government officials and employees are not the masters of the people but their servants, acting as necessary instruments through which the common good and individual well-being can be promoted and safeguarded.

We denounce the barbaric doctrine of collective responsibility for individual acts, a doctrine under which thousands of innocents, men and women, met their death.

We stand for individual liberties, guaranteed by our Constitution, and proclaim the right of every man and woman to enjoy life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

We reject the theory of the existence of chosen or superior races; we adhere to the self-evident truth that no particular race has a monopoly on the capacity to progress and for self-government.

We believe in the universality of culture, and we will seek the tools of progress from any source where they can be found.

We reaffirm our faith in the principle of Filipino-American collaboration, whose effectiveness has been successfully proven both in times of peace and war. This principle has been the cause of the unparalleled progress of our people during the last 46 years. It is a guarantee for the permanence of Christian civilization in the Orient.

We reiterate our adherence to the Atlantic Charter signed by the United Nations, of which we are members, since in that document they express their desire not to effect any territorial change that is not in accordance with the freely expressed will of the people concerned, and to “respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they shall live.”

We believe in the effectiveness of the principle of collective security as a guarantee of world peace and as the best security for the settlement of international disputes, not by the arbitrariness of arms but by the processes of peace and justice. A concrete example of the application of this principle is the legislation providing for, after the independence of the Philippines, the use by the United States of naval and air bases here for the mutual protection of the Philippines and the United States. This is a mutual agreement with the design not only to protect both nations but also to contribute to the peace of the Pacific region and to the collective security of the nations of the world.

We declare ourselves for a new world free from want and fear, provided with greater safeguards for lasting peace, and which offers broad opportunities for friendly negotiations and the judicial settlement of international disputes and the proper development of nations. We are willing to participate, closely associated with the United States, in any international pact based on justice and aimed at the organization and preservation of world peace.

On these principles we proclaim our attitude.

For the miseries, sufferings, and sacrifices endured by our people during their long night of captivity;

For the smoke that still rises from our cities, towns, and villages in devastation;

For the Filipino and also American blood that has been shed so selflessly and abundantly in Bataan and Corregidor, in the hills of Leyte, in the mountains and plains of Luzon and throughout the Philippines;

We invoke the God of Nations to witness, for ourselves and for a people amalgamated into one in the crucible of fire, this solemn promise to dedicate to the determined prosecution of the war until final victory, our lives and what our fathers bequeathed to us and without which life itself would have no meaning—our sacred honor.

Source : University Archives, University of the Philippines Diliman Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Osmeña on the induction of office of the members of the new Cabinet (Spanish Version), March 8, 1945. Speech of the Hon. Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines : on the occasion of the assumption of office of the members of his new cabinet in Manila on March 8, 1945 . Bureau of Printing : Manila.