Speech of His Excellency President Osmeña President of the Philippines On the occasion of the opening of the first library in Manila by the Office of War Information of the United States Army in the Philippines

[Released on September 26, 1945]

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

The opening of this library amid the ruins of our devastated capital should gladden every Filipino heart. As the first tangible evidence of America’s interest in our cultural rehabilitation, this library is a landmark in Philippine postwar history.

The vandalic Japanese did not only rob us of our possession, but they also tried to tyrannize us culturally. It was part of this policy of cultural tyranny to destroy the sources of our democratic ideas, in the hope of controlling our minds and dominating our lives.

The Japanese had to extirpate free thought in order to make room for totalitarian doctrines. They had to institute here a sort of mental blackout in order that the Filipinos might obey unquestioningly the decrees of the self-styled master race of Asia.

Almost the first thing, therefore, they did upon setting foot on our soil was to mutilate our books and destroy all forms of literature which had to do with democratic ideas. Every vestige of American influence was erased from the pages of our textbooks, as if by doing so they could kill the Filipino child’s love for America. This vicious attempt to suppress freedom of thought reached its climax with the Battle for the Philippines when, in their characteristic vandalic way, the retreating, defeated Japanese burned schools and libraries.

Needless to say, the Filipinos resisted this cultural aggression, and won: far from giving up their democratic ideas, they only felt a greater repugnance for Japanese thought and Japanese doctrines. It was a complete Filipino victory over the pretensions of a perverted Fascist way of life.

In depriving us of the means of free thought and free expression, the Japanese merely taught us to look for such things more eagerly. The lack of reading matter did not kill, but rather sharpened, the natural Filipino thirst for ideas. And now that America has returned we can slake that thirst again in the great literature of the American people.

This library—this treasure-house of democracy—is the symbol of free America. The Office of War Information is to be congratulated for opening it to our people. Heretofore the OWI has done excellent work in the Philippines. It has been a staunch friend and supporter of our people. It has given us reliable news in the press and over the radio. It comforted us through the dark days of our enslavement under the Japanese. And now it sets up this library as further positive proof of its usefulness as an agency of America’s cultural genius.

I voice a nation-wide sentiment when I say that the OWI, which has served us faithfully and well, deserves the deepest gratitude of the Filipino people. I wish it all success in the new information service to which it will shortly be dedicated.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Sergio Osmeña on the occasion of the opening of the first library in Manila by the Office of War Information of the United States Army in the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (7), 691-692.