Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines Over the Voice of Freedom

[Released on November 23, 1944]

Since my return to the Philippines a month ago it has been my good fortune to meet a number of guerrilla leaders. The world will long remember the epic stand of the guerrillas. After the fall of Bataan and Corregidor and the tragic defeat of the Allied armies in Asia, our people found themselves pitted against the might of Japan. Then the guerrilla movement came into being. It was the people’s continued fight against the invaders. The guerrillas, almost without arms at the beginning, hungry and unclothed, gave battle to the enemy from every nook and corner of the land. For three seemingly interminable years and despite unbelievable hardships, they carried the torch of freedom, confident that America would not fail them and that MacArthur would fulfill his pledge to return.

Our nation is justly proud of the guerrillas and the Philippine Government shall see to it that they are properly rewarded. We have taken the initial step of incorporating all guerrillas recognized by the Military Command into the Philippine Army, with United States Army pay.

But in our praise of the guerrillas we should not be forgetful of the loyal civilian population that was left behind to face the ire of the invader and support the guerrillas. It was not possible for all to evade the enemy: the fate of the immense majority was to bear the manacles of enslavement. Unfortunately, this has given rise to different attitudes and actions in relation to the Japanese rule causing some misunderstandings among our people. This state of affairs has cheated one of the most serious problems with which our Government is confronted.

We cannot close our eyes to the realities of the Japanese occupation. It is cruel and harsh. An arbitrary government has been imposed on the Filipino people by the sword and the initial misfortune of American and Filipino arms left the majority of eighteen million Filipinos no other recourse but to submit to a despotic régime if they were to survive. Not all public officials could take to the hills to carry on the heroic struggle. Some had to remain in their posts to maintain a semblance of government, to protect the population from the oppressor to the extent possible by human ingenuity and to comfort the people in their misery. Had their services not been available, the Japanese would either have themselves governed directly and completely or utilized unscrupulous Filipino followers capable of any treason to their people. The result would have been calamitous and the injuries inflicted to our body politic beyond cure.

The problem under consideration must be solved with justice and dignity. Every case should be examined impartially and decided on its own merits. Persons holding public office during enemy occupation, for the most part, fall within three categories; those prompted by a desire to protect the people, those actuated by fear of enemy reprisals, and those motivated by disloyalty to our government and cause. The motives which caused the retention of the office and conduct while in office, rather than the sole fact of its occupation, will be the criteria upon which such persons will be judged.

Those charged with giving aid and comfort to the enemy, whether office holders or private citizens, with being traitors and disloyal to the governments of the Philippines and of the United States will be dealt with in accordance with law. But for the common good and our national welfare, I appeal to all the citizens of the Philippines to support their government in meeting its responsibilities by lawful procedures. Persons in possession of information on acts of disloyalty to the Commonwealth Government or that of the United States should report it to the authorities. But under no circumstances should any person or group take the law into their hands.

Ours is a constitutional government, ours is a community educated in the norms of a Christian civilization. Due respect for the law, rigid adherence to those principles established in civilized countries, complete obedience to the decisions of the courts—all these involve forms of character and high moral attributes that are the possession of enlightened countries like ours. On the threshold of occupying a sovereign place in the concert of free nations, we must live up to our responsibilities. We must prove our ability to maintain domestic peace and our capacity to mete out justice. Precisely when the eyes of the civilized world are focused on our country, we cannot allow acts of personal revenge and misguided zeal to cast a reflection on our civilization and our ability to maintain an orderly government. Ours is a government by law: the splendor of its majesty must never be dimmed in our land.

The dignity and courage of the Filipino people in the face of calamity have elicited the admiration of the world. With a long tradition of peace, the Filipino nevertheless faced war bravely. He died heroically when death was demanded of him by the exigencies of battle. Under the tyranny of the Japanese he toiled to survive. But when the forces of redemption were compelled to rain death on his home and destroy his property in order to dislodge the enemy, he was never heard to complain. He realized that the price of freedom is high and was ready to pay the cost. Today he labors on the wharfs of Tacloban, tills the fields of Leyte and renders war service everywhere without hesitation or regrets, with the enthusiasm of a human being who is again free to shape his destiny.

As a people we have come of age. We must move forward, just and firm but merciful and humane, closely united, animated by the same social aspirations to happiness, bound together as a political state by the wise dispositions of our Constitution and our laws. God helping me, I shall strive to this end.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1944). Speech of President Sergio Osmeña over the Voice of Freedom. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (1), 101-103.