Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines In the Herald-Tribune Forum

[Delivered in New York City, October 29, 1945]

I am delighted to be able to participate in the Herald-Tribune forum which has done so much to help inform and crystallize American public opinion on the vital problems confronting your country. With your indulgence I propose to discuss briefly the future of Philippine-American cooperation—a subject which has a direct bearing on the whole problem of “responsibility of victory.”

Thirty-eight years ago, this month, in the year 1907, there convened in Manila the first popularly elected Legislative Assembly of the Philippines. That assembly faced many problems. Our country was emerging out of centuries of Spanish rule and everywhere we had to cope with the tasks of education, economic development, political growth. One of the most pressing questions at that time, strange though it may seem to us now, was to what extent were we Filipinos willing to cooperate with the United States.

Remember, if you will, the background of our history. For three and a half centuries, we had been under the rule of Spain. Spain had brought us many good things—our Christian religion, our Western orientation, our familiarity with European government systems, but it had not brought us liberty. We had to get that for ourselves. We had to rebel against Spain. By the time Dewey’s squadron sailed into Manila Bay for the battle that was to end Spanish rule in the Philippines, the Filipino revolutionists had overthrown Spanish control of the whole country with the exception of Manila itself.

Our leaders had assumed that after the American victory Philippine independence would be recognized at once by the United States, but your country preferred to establish its sovereignty over the Philippines and give us only a promise of future freedom. Since there had never been in all history a case of a powerful sovereign voluntarily assisting a weak colonial people toward self-government and liberty, many Filipinos did not believe your promise and there followed the bloody years of war between Americans and Filipinos.

After the conflict, the American policy of increasing self-government for the Filipino people began to unfold. It was a new and revolutionary policy. It was an experiment, a common adventure—indeed, a promise to all the submerged millions of this world.

When the Philippine Assembly first met in 1907, there were still some Filipinos who did not fully trust the American intentions in our country. I had the honor to be elected Speaker of that Assembly and the burden of decision on the question whether or not to cooperate with the American government in the Philippines fell largely upon me. I helped make the decision to cooperate.

The first resolution of the Philippine Assembly was addressed to President Theodore Roosevelt, thanking the American people for permitting us to establish the Assembly and thereby to participate directly in making the law by which we were governed, and the first law that we passed was an appropriation of a million pesos for the construction not of armaments but of schools where the people could learn the English language and American democracy.

All of us in the Philippines know now that this decision to work with you and grow with you and fight by your side was a wise decision. The record is there for the whole world to see and it is a record of which both your people and mine may well be proud.

There is another and equally important fact to remember about this record. It is the fact that, although the Philippines was under American sovereignty when Japan invaded the Philippines, we Filipinos fought in defense of the American flag. In other areas, under similar circumstances, the people chose not to defend the sovereign power whose flag flew over their country. As you know, in some places they actually welcomed the Japanese. We did not do that. We chose not to do that.

Our struggle by your side was a deliberate decision made by the people of the Philippines. We decided to defend your sovereignty, not as slaves fighting for their masters, but as a free people making a free decision to join in defense of the free way of life which your country represents.

Now, we in the Philippines, on the eve of our independence, face the same issue that we faced in 1907, when our first Philippine Assembly convened—the same issue that we faced in December, 1941, when the enemy attacked your sovereignty in the Philippines. We must decide whether after independence Philippine-American cooperation should continue and how close it should be.

My own position on this matter is well known. I see no reason why the cutting of our political ties when independence comes need make any change in the close relationship between our two nations. My predecessor, President Quezon, and I have assured our people that Philippine-American friendship is a two-way passage. We have offered our most sincere cooperation to your Government. We have gladly consented to the building of bases on our soil for the protection of the Philippines and the United States even after our country is independent.

Now, as in the past, we are willing to assume our full responsibility to the United States. I hold to that policy of taking for granted that the United States, for its part, will discharge its full responsibilities because of your commitments to the Philippines. You did so not only because you are the kind of liberty-loving people that you are, but also because you will receive something in return.

You made a commitment to the Philippines when your late and very great President Franklin D. Roosevelt told the Filipino people in the very earliest days of the war that “your freedom will be redeemed and your independence established and protected” and that we would be “assisted in the full repair of the ravages caused by the war.” President Roosevelt’s worthy successor, Harry S. Truman, reaffirmed the promise when he said, “The Philippine people whose heroic and loyal stand in the war has won the affection and admiration of the American people will be fully assisted by the United States in the great problems of rehabilitation and reconstruction which lie ahead.”

You made a commitment to the Philippines when, in 1909, the Congress of the United States decided to establish a free-trade relationship between our two countries. Our Philippine Assembly adopted a resolution petitioning you not to do so, expressing the fear that free trade “would in the future become highly prejudicial to the economic interests of the Filipino people” because it would orient our entire economy in your direction, but you decided to establish free trade in spite of our protest. We have made the best of this and the best has been very good indeed.

We had achieved before the war the highest standard of living of any nation in the Orient. Our economy before the war was prospering. The truth today is that unless some such relationship is restored and maintained for a reasonable time, we shall not be able to rehabilitate our country.

You made a commitment to the Philippines when you undertook to protect our independence and when we agreed on the establishment of American air and naval bases for mutual necessity in the Philippines. That commitment involves for your own safety as well as for ours something more than the mere building and maintenance of bases. It involves a network of roads and communications to make those bases worthwhile and it involves the assurance of a peaceful, prospering hinterland to make those bases firm.

President Truman has always borne these commitments in mind. Only a few days ago, he made public a series of directives to various United States agencies and officials covering many problems of the Philippines. Most of the specific points he made arose out of the conversations which I have had with the President and other high officials of your Government.

I want to make it clear, however, that neither President Truman nor I consider the concrete steps taken last week to be anything like a complete program for the solution of our problems. They do not cover many of the overall questions of full rehabilitation and reconstruction in the Philippines. I believe that American responsibility to the Philippines will not have been fulfilled until these problems are settled.

When I speak of the pressing need for America to carry out her responsibility to the Philippines I am thinking of very specific matters. We are asking for twenty years of quota limited free trade with the United States on the basis of the 1940 level and not a strangulating graduated tax on such trade. We are asking for fair treatment on war damages providing just compensation to those who suffered when the war came to Philippine soil protected by American sovereignty. We are asking the United States to help us pick up again from where we were when the Japanese attacked American sovereignty in the Philippines.

The past half century of gigantic progress in the Philippines, brutally interrupted though it was by the war, is one of the brightest pages of human history. Your inspiration, your guidance, your help has been tremendous and the United States of America will always be respected for her role in the Philippines. But do not forget that Filipinos, too, had something to do with all of this. Our progress was achieved by us largely through our efforts and entirely without money.

Check back over the appropriations voted by your Congress through all these years, and you will find no item for the operation of our Government, the building and maintenance of our school system, the construction of our roads and public works, the development of our public health program. The costs were not borne by you; they were borne by us. We do not ask for your charity anymore than we have asked for it in the past. What we do ask for as we have in the past is your help, your understanding, your willingness to fulfill the obligations which you yourselves have assumed.

I know how warm and friendly is the American sentiment toward the Filipino people. Every person I have talked to in this country, whether public official or private citizen, has revealed his heartfelt sympathy for our present distress and his sincere desire to help us get back on our feet. There is a very special American feeling for us just as there is a very special Filipino feeling for you. Nowhere in the world is there a relationship between two peoples that resembles the relationship between the American people and the Filipino people.

But today we must make up our minds on the basis of this relationship about the future strength of the ties that bind us together. President Truman in his recent directives has shown to the world that he gives a very special priority to the problems of relief, reconstruction and rehabilitation in the Philippines. He has for himself made the decision and it is a good decision, but our trade relations, our war damage claims, our overall rehabilitation needs are not for him alone to decide. These questions come before the Congress of the United States and they come before the intelligence and the conscience of the American people.

This is a period when your people must decide whether or not the Filipino-American brotherhood that existed before the war and was sealed in blood during the war, will continue now that the war is ended. And even after independence, we of the Philippines cannot make that decision for you; we can only tell you that for our part we want to continue our close cooperation with you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Osmeña in the Herald-Tribune Forum. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (8), 950-954.