Speech of Honorable Maximo M. Kalaw Secretary of the Department of Instruction and Information On inaugurating the Commonwealth Hour over Radio Manila

[Released on March 15, 1945]

I am very happy to inaugurate this Commonwealth Hour. During this hour, we shall present news and describe activities pertaining to the Commonwealth Government, and we shall give, besides, musical programs.

Over the ruins of Manila, formerly the pride of the Orient, we have reestablished the Commonwealth Government, and in all the other ruined cities and villages in the Philippines, the various branches and political subdivisions of this government are being set up again.

By the very fact that our cities and villages have been done to waste, by the very fact that innocent Filipino men, women and children have been massacred, by the very fact that our homes have been violated and destroyed, the enemy has simply shown his utter inability to subdue the spirit of resistance of our people.

As President Osmeña established the Commonwealth Government and administered the oath of office to his newly formed Cabinet, he set down certain basic principles and ideals which I would call the new Philippine Ideology. They were enunciated by the undisputed leader of the Filipino people of today.

President Sergio Osmeña is, as you all know, not a newcomer in the political life of our country. During the early years of American Occupation, when our capacity for self-government was under a question mark and serious doubts existed as to whether we could produce leaders of state, President Sergio Osmeña was elected Speaker of the National Assembly. That was in 1907. As such Speaker, Mr. Osmeña was immediately recognized by the Washington administration as the leader of the Filipino participation in the government, next in rank only to the Governor-General. He retained that leadership until 1923, and the progressive legislation that was enacted at that time as well as his participation in the Administrative Council of the government as Vice-Chairman of the Council of State since 1916, are already indestructible monuments to his political career. From 1923 until last year, President Osmeña was the collaborator of President Quezon until the latter’s death.

When the Filipino people elected the President of the Philippines in the general elections of 1941, they chose really two presidents: President Quezon for the first two years, and President Osmeña for the succeeding two years; and it is of record that President Osmeña received a greater number of votes than President Quezon. Their terms of office were extended by the Congress of the United States in order to give President Quezon a chance to serve longer during the American regime. During the Emergency, President Quezon died and so President Osmeña succeeded him. President Osmeña, therefore, holds his office on two legal bases—first, by virtue of the election of 1941; and, second, by virtue of the extension of his term of office by the Congress of the United States. It can be truly said therefore that when President Osmeña assumed the presidency in 1944, he simply came into his own. As the undisputed leader of the people at this stage of our history, it would therefore be of interest to know the principles and ideals he has set down to guide him in his administration of the affairs of his people.

I shall read to you the new twelve-point Philippine Ideology. This new ideology embraces four cardinal points which may be termed the principles of democracy, the principles of freedom, the principles of the new cultural orientation of the Philippines, and the principles embraced in the Filipino-American collaboration. Here is the new Philippine Ideology:

“We hereby reaffirm our faith in, and adherence to, the principles of freedom and democracy—a faith and an adherence born in the early days of our Malay history, nurtured by four hundred years of Western contact, consecrated by our revolutionary fathers, invigorated by the teachings of America, ratified in the constitutional processes of our Commonwealth, and now sanctified by the blood of the thousands of Filipino martyrs and heroes of the present war.

“We condemn the totalitarian ideology which the enemy has sought to impose on us under a government by self-constituted or God-chosen rulers, and we hereby reaffirm our devotion to the principle of popular sovereignty, of a government of the people, for the people, and by the people.

“We believe in the superiority of a responsible democracy, peaceful and law-abiding, loyal to its institutions and determined to fight for its way of life over a degenerate fascism and totalitarianism with its regimented lives, devoid of wills of their own.

“We shall reestablish in our country a social and political system which is founded on mutual faith, honesty and confidence and not on suspicion, corruption and fear.

“We denounce the barbarous doctrine of collective responsibility for individual acts under which thousands of innocent men and women have met their death.

“We stand for the individual liberties, guaranteed by our Constitution, for the right of every man and woman to enjoy life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

“We reject the theory of the existence of chosen or superior races. We hold to the self-evident truth that no particular race has a monopoly on the capacity for progress and self-government.

“We believe in the universality of culture, and we shall seek the implements of progress in whatever source they may be found.

“We reaffirm our faith in the principle of Philippine-American collaboration, which has worked successfully both in peace and in war, which has been responsible for the unparalleled progress of our country and which is a guarantee for the permanence of Christian civilization in the Far East.

“We reiterate our adherence to the Atlantic Charter signed by the United Nations of which we are a member.

“We believe in the efficacy of the principle of collective security as a guarantee of world peace and in the settlement of international disputes not by the arbitrament of arms but by the processes of peace and justice.

“We stand for a new world free from want and fear, provided with greater safeguards for lasting peace and offering ample opportunities for friendly negotiations and the self-development of nations.”

After stating this pledge, President Osmeña concluded his address as follows:

“On these principles we take our stand.

“By the miseries, the sufferings and the sacrifices undergone by our people during their long night of captivity;

“By the smoke that even now rises from our ravaged cities, towns and villages;

“By the blood, Filipino as well as American, which was poured out so unstintedly at Bataan and on Corregidor; in the hills of Leyte, the mountains  and plains  of  Luzon,  and  all  over the  Philippines;

“We call on the God of Nations to witness, for ourselves and for a people welded into one in the crucible of fire, this pledge to consecrate to the determined prosecution of this war until final victory is achieved, our lives, that which our fathers have bequeathed to us and without which life would be meaningless—our sacred honor.”

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Kalaw, M. M. (1945). Speech of Secretary Kalaw on inaugurating the Commonwealth Hour over Radio Manila. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (1), 99-101.