Speech of Honorable Sergio Osmeña Vice President of the Philippines On relinquishing his right to be President

[Released on November 11, 1943]

My Countrymen:

A joint resolution was passed by Congress continuing President Quezon in office for the duration of the war.  Under this resolution, which has been approved by the President of the United States, my right to succeed to the presidency on November 15, 1943, has been postponed until constitutional processes shall have been restored in the Philippines, Congress acted on this matter upon the request of the Philippine Government in exile and this action of the Philippine Government was taken on my own initiative. I owe it to my people who gave me their confidence in the last elections to state the reasons for my action.

If we were in normal times, my duty would be clear and simple:  I would have to assume the presidency on the 15th of this month as a matter of right. Put these are not normal times. Our country not only is at war, but also is occupied by the enemy.

Under these circumstances, our principal concern and primary consideration is to win the war, liberate our people from the invaders, and establish the independence of our country. The question naturally arises: What is the best thing to do in order to help accomplish these aims?

It is unnecessary for me to remind you that President Quezon was the head of our government at the time of the outbreak of the war and that it was his lot to lead our people by the side of the United States. Faithfully and courageously, he has complied with his duty even with his health greatly impaired, His voice continues to encourage our people to resist the enemy and to keep faith with the United States. It was he who signed for us the Declaration of the United Nations. Due to his efforts the Philippines has been given a seat in the Pacific War Council.

Moreover, those responsible for the prosecution of the war on the part of the United States have expressed to me their concern over the possible effect of the change of leadership at this time. They said that the enemy would take advantage of President Quezon’s retirement from active leadership by telling the Filipinos that President Quezon had withdrawn from the fight and that he was no longer interested in this war. They added that the morale of the Filipinos still fighting the enemy in the mountains of Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao and receiving inspiration from him might weaken if President Quezon retired. Furthermore, they told me that in their opinion, based on recent information from the front, the unity of our people in general would be better maintained and secured with the retention of President Quezon in office since that would mean that both of us would continue working together.

The presidential succession therefore ceased to be a domestic matter involving only our own interests and desires. Related, as it was, to the war, it became a matter that concerned not ourselves alone but also the United States.

With the redemption of our country uppermost in my mind and with the conviction that this objective cannot be achieved without the full support, much less without the leadership, of the United States, I prepared the letter which the Philippine Government approved and sent to Congress. In that letter, the matter of the presidential succession was placed before Congress with the request that they review the whole situation and take such action as in their wisdom will best serve the interest of the Filipino people, their constitutional government and the government of the United States during this emergency.

Congress, after thorough consideration, passed the joint resolution providing for the continuance in office of President Quezon for the duration of the war. This resolution expresses the considered judgment of the American people. I accept it without reserve and I urge every Filipino, whether in the home land, in continental United States, in Hawaii or anywhere else, to accept this congressional action which is intended to safe guard the best interests of the two peoples.

As for me, I consider it my inescapable duty to continue giving to President Quezon’s leadership my utmost support and cooperation so that the Commonwealth Government now in Washington may render the greatest service to the Philippines and the Filipinos. It is my desire to assist the Commonwealth Government in its endeavor to make every Filipino, wherever he may be, feel that he is close to his government which is always solicitous of his interest and welfare.

Fellow Countrymen: These are critical days for individuals as well as nations. Our sense of responsibility as a people and the strength of our national solidarity have once more been tested. We have again proved our unity. With this action, we have shown the world that when the freedom of our country and the validity of our commitments are at stake, there are no differences among us and selfish considerations carry no weight in our decisions.

Osmeña, S. (1943). Speech of Honorable Sergio Osmeña Vice President of the Philippines on relinquishing his right to be President. Miscellaneous Publications , [pp. 109-113].