MANUEL L. QUEZON PARANGÁL

OF

President SERGIO OSMEÑA

A year ago now, at Lake Saranac, in the state of New York, Manuel L. Quezon, the first President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, passed away to a good life. It was his sad fate not to witness the redemption of his country from the clutches of the enemy, but it is undeniable that it is etched in his mind that the freedom he devoted his whole life to would not be long in coming and would arrive, as indeed it did. He also knew that as soon as he was freed from the Japanese, his country would no longer be in danger in the future, because the independence he devoted the best of his life to would finally be established, under the protective wings of the United States.

President Quezon rendered many important services to his country in various high positions: as provincial executive of Tayabas in his youth, as guide of the majority in the First National Assembly, as resident commissioner in Washington, as president of the Philippine Senate, and finally as president of the Commonwealth. But none of those services, brilliant as his brilliance, can surpass the due to providing lasting benefit to his country, unlike those accomplished by his administration in the War in the United States.

Since the war broke out in the Philippines in December 1941, the problem that occupied his mind was whether, as Chief Executive, it was his duty to remain with his people and share their fate. Only after long and careful study did he finally decide to separate himself from his people, temporarily, and accept President Roosevelt's invitation to establish his government in Washington. This decision was not only the most intelligent and patriotic thing to do, but the only thing that could be done in the face of events. And so, after repeated consultations with his government colleagues, first in Marikina before leaving Manila, and then in Corregidor, Negros and Mindanao, he finally decided to proceed.

Why did his colleagues unanimously believe that he should leave the Philippines in the face of the events at that time? First, because they believed that nothing could be done to prevent the invasion and occupation of the Philippines. Second, it was clear to them that in order to continue and succeed the resistance movement, it must be guided from outside the territory occupied by the enemy. And third, it emerges in the face of international law and the measures that will happen in the army, that the independence of the Philippines can only come from the United States, and therefore only in the United States can we continue the work of establishing sovereignty.

The belief of some that President Quezon should not have left the Philippines to prove his desire to share the fate of his country, is a sentiment worthy of dangerous appreciation. Under the brutal administration of the occupier, President Quezon would have been placed in a position where he could not refuse to help and perhaps would have met the horrific fate of José Abad Santos—a loss truly great for our country—or else he would have surrendered to the enemy and led the list of puppet leaders. I firmly believe that President Quezon would have chosen death over serving under the hated enemy. But suppose that instead of continuing his duty as leader of the Resistance, he had chosen to be an instrument in carrying out Japan's insidious intentions, he might have done even greater damage to the Philippine issue in the United States, which would never be remedied.

Due to his role in the government as leader of the nation and due to his explicit actions and statements before the war, President Quezon needed, and rightfully so, to be the high guide of our national resistance. In the Philippines and also in America, until his death, he was the symbol of the Filipino aspiration for freedom and independence. Our nation, in general, and our soldiers and guerrillas, especially, agreed with his guidance and supported him to the utmost. Thus, spurred by the courageous stance of his countrymen, before and after the fall of Bataan, President Quezon had no choice but one decision: to place himself beyond the reach of the enemy and to work in the United States for the speedy redemption of the Philippines and the early attainment of its independence. Through this decision, our late President demonstrated courage and a spirit of sacrifice that is unparalleled. He was ill, years before the war broke out, and for many months before 1941 he was required not to attend his office on the advice of his doctors. In the face of these obstacles, he also traveled by airplane and submarine—two vehicles he truly avoided—to escape the invaders and maintain in America the entirety of our constitutional government.

The events are still very fresh to explain in detail. It is sufficient to say that under the guidance of President Quezon, the Commonwealth government was transferred to Washington, not only securing the recognition of the United States, but also of other nations allied with America in this war. The Commonwealth, in a single sentence, achieved an advanced status in the community, because, in anticipation of the promised recognition of our sovereignty, the American government took steps to grant us the prerogatives we deserve in dealing with other nations. President Quezon had the privilege of signing the Declaration of United Nations, as if he already represented an independent nation. We were accepted as a member of the United Nations, and we were given a seat on the Pacific War Council. The result of his communications with the government in Washington, his repeated interviews with President Roosevelt, and his eloquent speeches within and outside Congress, was that he secured the concern of the people of the United States for the problems in the Pacific, a concern that before his arrival in Washington, was focused only on the European theater, on the field where America invested all its wealth and resources. And thus, even before Germany surrendered, the problem of recovering the Philippines was addressed and General MacArthur returned to Philippine soil to carry out his brilliant campaign for redemption, earlier than originally planned. These triumphs of the American army, effectively aided by the long-suffering Filipino guerrillas and the spontaneous civilian population, are a reminder of the far-reaching vision and faith of President Quezon.

However, the greatest achievement of the Quezon administration in Washington, surpassing any of the achievements of this great leader who long struggled for our independence, was the ratification by the American Congress on June 29, 1944 of the law providing for the opening of bases on Philippine territory for the mutual benefit of the United States and the Philippines and for the preservation of peace in the Pacific. The benefit to the stability of this law, known as Joint Resolution 93, which provides for our independent life and the entirety of the nation, cannot be overstated. As far as the eye can see, this care ensures, for our present and future generations, the peaceful enjoyment of the blessings of independence. If President Quezon, in his long and fruitful life, had done nothing else but this, it would be enough to secure for him an unforgettable chapter in our history and be sufficient to rank him among the greatest benefactors of mankind, such as one of the architects of lasting world peace, which the United Nations sincerely desired and diligently and intelligently sought after the bitter experiences of this war.

As soon as the necessities of war permit—which I assume will be in the near future—the remains of our beloved President will be brought to our land to remain here forever in the heart of his people. How he would have wished to see his beloved country again and to have the sight of our mountains in his eyes, even if he then closed his eyes forever, as he once said in the last days before his death!

He will no longer return to us, as he usually did, from his travels abroad during the triumphant days of his remarkable life—ardent and full of the heat of patriotism in the discussion of discussions, in the matter of his country's freedom. The days of his struggle are over. But now the nation is preparing to offer him a great expression of love and admiration. Like Rizal, Bonifacio, Mabini and our other national heroes, we will erect for him a memorial worthy of his greatness. The recognition of the debt of gratitude of the people will manifest itself in countless other ways, because that is the custom of our people—always ready to recognize those who have served them faithfully and well. The Filipino nation is a nation that knows how to recognize gratitude; great, honorable and with a good heart, and has never failed to recognize and respond to all that needs to be recognized and responded to.

And because that is the custom of our people, its expression of gratitude, I am sure, will not be limited to its beloved late guide, but will also extend to his beloved, especially to his noble and self-sacrificing companion in life who sympathized with him, not only in his triumphs and honors, but also in his disappointments and sufferings. I believe I sincerely feel the sentiment of our people in saying that it is our duty to provide Mrs. Quezon with a lifetime pension to maintain her condition and to meet her needs. I intend to make a recommendation on this matter to Congress at the upcoming special session, similar to the provision in the United States for the granting of pensions to the widows of American Presidents. And after we have done all this, we are only repaying a part of our debt of gratitude that we must forever cherish for the great and noble statesman—MANUEL L. QUEZON.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman

Osmeña, S. (1945). Parangal ng Pangulong Sergio Osmeña : Manuel L. Quezon. Manila : Bureau of Printing.