Speech of the Honorable Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, at a Commemoration in Honor of President Quezon's Birthday

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

When President Quezon was still alive, it was always a blessing and pleasure for me to participate in programs dedicated to celebrating his birthday. Now that he is no longer with us, I even more strongly desire that same blessing, in order to dedicate a few memories to my beloved friend.

This occasion also happens to refresh my mind with many memories, and I only feel that there is not enough time and it will not be possible to fully cover a past that was a whole life and a companionship of more than half a century.

I first met Quezon in 1893 when we began studying law at the University of Santo Tomas. We lived at that time under one roof in a room of the aforementioned University. We had as classmates—in Law and Philosophy and Letters—several who later became prominent in public life, in teaching, in commerce and in other endeavors. To spare you a long list, I will only mention to you a few names more well-known: Felipe G. Calderón and Enrique Mendiola; Juan Sumulong and Fernando Salas; Vicente Singson Encarnación and Vicente Madrigal; Rafael Palma and Jaime C. de Veyra; Simeón Mobo and Mariano Yengco; Vicente Albert and Gregorio Agoncillo. We also had as classmates the poet Cecilio Apóstol, crowned with “laurel,” and the guiding intelligence of Andrés Bonifacio, Emilio Jacinto, rightly called the brain of the Katipunan. Even then, Quezon showed a lively intelligence, a sharpness of mind and a skill in impromptu situations that we truly admired later in his time as a legislator and always in the midst of the tangled field of politics.

Our association while studying at the University of Santo Tomás was not something fleeting, temporary, but became the foundation of a companionship that lasted a lifetime. Our association was hindered by the events of the revolution against Spain and the war against America afterwards, but we met again when the war was just ending and we were preparing to take the bar exams at the Supreme Court. When we became lawyers, it seemed our companionship would continue in life: he was appointed Fiscal of Mindoro and I accepted my appointment as Fiscal of Cebu.

After several years, he was elected governor of his province, Tayabas, and I too was elected governor of my province, Cebu. Thus, we met again working together in the unforgettable Assembly of Governors in 1906, the first convened in Manila, where, one might say, the framework of the aspirations and actions of Filipino patriotic politics was laid, which later became the guide and rule of the work and history of the Assembly. In that Assembly of Governors, there were a few of us governors who were nationalists, all very young, and among them were the passionate Quezon of Tayabas, the measured Jaime C. de Veyra of Leyte and the astute Isauro Gabaldón of Nueva Écija. The majority at that time was the Federalists, who held sway in the Assembly. Nevertheless, we were also able to revive the patriotic aspiration in that assembly of governors, which, having experienced a brief lapse in the heat of our weapons in confronting America, remained in the hearts of the people and began to sprout and regain vigor under the guise of the new movement for redemption, carried out in the field of peace and enshrined in law.

After that came the Assembly of 1907. There, my personal association with Quezon, and even in politics, was strengthened and became even closer. He was elected “floor leader” of the Assembly and I was his Speaker. And when it was necessary to broaden the scope of our struggle for independence and bring it to America itself, Quezon was sent to Washington as our envoy and there the Filipino flag was truly raised high. This did not ruin our association. The distance between us was not an obstacle to helping each other even more tightly in the arduous task of defending the cause of our freedom. And when our efforts were finally crowned with success and envoy representative Quezon brought the Jones Law regarding Filipino power in 1916, we continued to work together to implement the new challenge and reach the final stage that still lay between reaching the most desired goal: independence.

In the beginning, the Philippine Senate was established. Quezon believed that the leader of Filipino participation in the government should already be the president of this upper legislative chamber, and so he offered me the presidency at that time. However, after careful consideration, I came to a contrary belief; therefore, I declined the offer and preferred to remain as Speaker of the House of Representatives, and I believed at that time (although I thought it was wrong, as events later showed), that the House of Representatives should be the guide of the people in the government because it was the chamber that most represented the people, and for that reason it was more sensitive to the strength and flow of public sentiment. Quezon was then elected President of the Senate.

The bond of this long and fruitful association was not seriously disturbed until 1922 when some disagreements arose, leading to the split of the Nationalist Party. However, since this disagreement was not significant because it concerned only the method of guiding and supervising Filipino participation in the government, it was easily resolved and the reconciliation of the groups that had separated for a short time took place. But if one analyzes carefully from this distant time the political turmoil at that time, I believe that what paved the way for the easy and smooth resolution of the conflict, and the re-bonding of the exploding groups, was the loss of self-esteem, the loss of what I would call the component of a self-respecting person. Even in the midst of the intensity of the conflict, when the struggles were truly acute, Quezon and I never forgot our friendship, we never abandoned our mutual consideration and respect. Personal interests never allowed the clash of opinions to escalate.

That situation, more clearly, that state of mind ready for reconciliation and understanding, allowed me to give Quezon my full support at times when he needed it most. It will be recalled that the cause of the split in 1922 was that the nationalists were divided in the election of that year over the “issue” of “unipersonalism” and “collectivism.” The outcome of the election meant that Quezon could not establish the House of Representatives through the votes of the “collectivists” alone. Many of my allies, still feeling the pain of resentment from the split, strongly opposed a compromise with the Senate President. They preferred, rather, a compromise with the Democrats who had gained significant strength in that election. Clearly, if our intention at that time was to take revenge on President Quezon and overthrow him, the most appropriate step would be to accept the tempting offer of the Democrats to establish a blood pact with them, or even go further, form a coalition and establish a new party. However, I thought that the cleaner, the more appropriate, and the more patriotic thing to do was to help repair the broken wings of the Nationalist Party; therefore, I drowned the temptation of revenge, did not listen to anything but the voice of what I considered my duty in the face of the general welfare of the people, and openly placed myself with the group that was moderate in my faction and favored a renewed compromise with their former allies. This immediately paved the way for the establishment of the House of Representatives through the election of a Speaker who was a “collectivist” and the result of the re-organization of the Nationalist Party.

It will be recalled that from then on, Quezon and I worked together again as if nothing had happened, he became my leader and I gave, without reservation, the support that he also gave me for the fifteen years that I was his leader and leader of the Nationalist Party. I think it can be said frankly, without boasting or arrogance, that thanks again to our unity, the country was able to continue its relentless and forward march on the path towards its goal, even experiencing and overcoming obstacles, which, that was the most serious and undeniable, was the turmoil of 1923-1927 under the administration of General Wood.

The stability of my political association with Quezon experienced no other major upheaval except in 1933, when, after a difficult trip to the United States, the Independence Mission publicly known as the OSROX Mission (Osmeña-Roxas), returned to the Philippines bringing with it the Independence Act known as the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act. After the Act was rejected by the Philippine Legislature as requested by President Quezon, he led a mission to seek a new law in the United States, but found in Washington that the only law that could be obtained was one similar to the one his request had been denied by the Legislature. Once again, the problem of whether we Filipinos were capable of undertaking a new sacrifice was put to the test, setting aside disagreements and criticisms that could jeopardize the discussion of our independence. It seems redundant to repeat, as these were very recent events, that fortunately our national spirit passed gloriously through the test. I decided to remain in the Philippines instead of accompanying President Quezon, as he earnestly requested of me, in order to prepare from here the provision of the necessary support for him at the appropriate and final moment. That moment arrived when Senator Tydings requested the opinion of the OSROX Mission regarding the proposed Tydings-McDuffie Act, which was then being pursued in Congress and was almost the same as the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act we had worked to obtain. The report of the hotheads in my group insisted on rejecting the new proposed law. This was not surprising considering that the report still felt the pain they considered an oppression accepted by President Quezon and his allies. However, because I explicitly placed myself with the group of moderates, the OSROX Mission and the group assisting us in the Philippines decided to support President Quezon and accepted the Tydings-McDuffie Act. This moderate course of action later allowed for the acceptance of the Tydings-McDuffie Act, not only by the Legislature, but by the entire nation.

Once again, the Nationalist Party was reorganized, after a lull that seemed permanent. Once again, Quezon and I set aside temporary disagreements in order to find the salvation of the nation. Once again, we saved unity at a moment that was necessary for the good and welfare of the country, setting aside self-interest and the vanity of men. Once again, we reorganized an association and a collaboration humbly begun in our days of study in the halls of the University of Santo Tomás and happily continued over the long years. Thus, at the height of his prestige and name in politics, Quezon, in the candidacy of the bloodied party for the Presidency of the Commonwealth on a ticket where we were both present, he for the Presidency and I for the Vice Presidency, could accurately say the following in his acceptance speech, referring to our joint work:

“The paths we have traversed in these years need not be recounted; but when I look back and consider the efforts we have made to reach the destination we are striving for, I am glad to see that at the end of a long journey we can face our people, standing on the same ground, having fulfilled our promises, cherishing a close friendship and esteem that is even greater, and I believe also inspires continued trust and support from our people.”

Another event that could have caused a disagreement between Quezon and me was when he was due to end his term as president on November 15, 1943, and I was to take over the leadership of the Philippine Government. The situation was clear. According to the law, I was to ascend to the presidency on that day. Due to circumstances, this matter could have caused a division in the Philippine government abroad. To preserve unity in the face of fighting the enemy, I went to the White House and Congress to request a legal procedure that would allow President Quezon to continue to perform his duties as President during the time of crisis. Congress responded to my proposal and I was pleased to see President Quezon continue to lead, so that if the opportunity arose, he could be with us in the Philippines with the liberating armies and achieve with him the redemption of the nation. God decided otherwise. Upon his passing to a better life, I had to fulfill his duty in launching in Tacloban on October 20, 1944. With sincere loyalty and humility, I said the following:

I feel that our departed and beloved President Quezon is not here with us today and we cannot share with him the consummation of the great undertaking he devoted his life to, the independence of the Philippines. However, I know that you feel, as I do, that he is with us in spirit to mingle with our people and inspire us to accomplish the important task that lies before us.

In mentioning all these events and things, I feel a particular joy in remembering that President Quezon and I were able to maintain a personal and political camaraderie, which began under the happy roofs of our youth, fought through more difficult trials, and was not ended except by his death. As you have seen, like all things of men, that camaraderie had its bright spots and its dark spots—more of the former than the latter—its dawns and its storms, but in the most important sense, it always floated, despite the obstacles and the intrigues of adversaries. Above all, I feel happiness when I recall it all, because I believe that all the sacrifices we made to save the unity of the country in those delicate moments in the history of our nation in the years that we were entrusted with its affairs, were not in vain and helped, even in a small way on my part, for the country to reach what it has achieved today. The important thing in that camaraderie was the subordination of all personal interests to the great welfare of the nation, to the point, at times, of a limit of sacrifice that was no longer fathomable. With all humility, but with firm faith and a clear conscience of a man who believes he has fulfilled his duty, I offer to history the following statement: My association with President Quezon paved the way for the Philippines to offer to the world one of the examples of selflessness, imbued with high responsibility, an unbreakable unity that is truly rare in the history of democracies.

In celebrating for the first time in the Philippines the birth anniversary of the late President, after we have been redeemed, I want to reiterate my intention to base my administration on the patriotic goals outlined by my predecessor. A truly essential part of that work for the good of the nation is the restoration of the life of the Philippines, to achieve recognition of its sovereignty and to ensure its integrity against all external aggression.

I firmly believe that if we are united and under the protection of the Benevolent Heaven, we will reach the full realization of those goals.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech delivered by President Osmeña on August 9, 1945, at a celebration honoring the birthday of President Quezon. Manila : Bureau of Printing.