I am privileged in this return trip of mine to bring home with me the distinguished family of the late President Quezon. Mrs. Quezon and her children accompanied their illustrious husband and father in March, 1942, when he was asked by the President of the United States to temporarily transfer to Washington the seat of the Commonwealth Government. He was sick and burdened with the heavy cares and responsibilities of the affairs of our country at war. This family constantly and with solicitude took care of him and gave him the comfort and consolation which he much needed during his long illness. And when the inevitable came, they were at his bedside. Their return to the Philippines at this time carrying back with them only the memory of our departed leader is indeed a sad occasion. But I am sure that in the midst of their grief, they will find solace and consolation in the same love and high esteem in which they have always been held in the hearts of their own people.

May I ask for a minute of silence in reverent tribute to the late President Quezon.

I thank you for this demonstration of greeting on my return from Washington. It is good to be back. During the entire course of my mission to the United States, my thoughts were always with you. I went to Washington as a spokesman, not for myself, but for you and all our people.

This great gathering reminds me of a similar reception accorded to me when I returned from my mission to the United States in 1939. The world-shaking changes which have taken place since that time can be no better illustrated than by comparing that mission with the one which I have just concluded.

In 1939, you may recall, my mission was to secure some much-needed adjustments in the trade provisions of the Philippine Independence Act. When I left Manila, many people believed that conditions in Washington would prevent the success of the mission. The war clouds were already hovering over Europe, and the domestic American problems were very great. This time, when I arrived in Washington, I found the United States facing even more complex and troublesome issues than before. In the domestic field, Americans must settle grave national problems. Internationally, the post-war world—with its awesome atomic power—is faced with a new urgency in the need for solid international understanding and strong international organization. These problems are uppermost in the minds of the highest leaders in the American government, and in many cases the affairs of the Philippines must be dealt with in terms of the larger issues.

On the other hand, in 1939, I had all the time I needed at my disposal, and it took me almost a year to obtain a few changes in the existing law. This time, all of my activities were influenced by the knowledge that it was imperative for me to return to Manila as quickly as possible.

In 1939, I was able to devote myself completely to my responsibilities in Washington. This time, I had to divide my attention between Washington and Manila.

In 1939, I had the united backing of our people. This time, I faced a widespread American impression that our people are not united.

In spite of these tremendous difficulties, I can report to you now that my mission has enabled me to assist in the formulation of a program for the Philippine reconstruction and rehabilitation, now and after independence, along definite lines. This program, in human terms, stands for food, clothing, shelter, employment, health, and education. It stands for prospering trade, economic security, and social welfare.

In arriving at this program, I held conferences with President Truman and also with members of his Cabinet, all of whom clearly showed their deep and sympathetic interest in the welfare of the Philippines. I conferred also with key leaders of the American Congress, including Senate President pro tern McKellar and Speaker Rayburn, Senator Tydings and Representative Bell, who are making a sincere effort to assist us in our present difficulties. I worked closely with the new American High Commissioner to the Philippines, the Honorable Paul V. McNutt, who is an old friend of ours and knows our problems well. Commissioner McNutt’s help throughout my stay in Washington has been invaluable. The cooperation of all these officials deserves the gratitude of the nation.

Throughout all of these conversations and negotiations, I was treated with the highest courtesy and consideration, and I want to express publicly my appreciation of this treatment. I do not need to tell you that these courtesies are no mere matter of lip service. They stem from the very heart of America. Everywhere in the United States, in high places and in low, among the most important government officials and among private citizens, in the halls of Congress and in the American press, there is a warm and living friendship for the Filipino people such as Americans hold, perhaps, for no other people on earth.

In the course of my negotiations I received much assistance from Commissioner Romulo, Secretary Hernandez, and the other Filipino members of the Rehabilitation Commission, and from the members of my mission. All of these men have been most helpful, and on some of them there—especially Commissioner Romulo—rests the responsibility of following through on the steps that have already been initiated.

My purpose in visiting Washington at this time was to secure the fulfillment of American commitments to help us in our rehabilitation program and in the preparations for our forthcoming independence.

In practical terms, this program can be separated into a series of objectives. I should like to state these objectives now, and to report to you on where they stand. In this way, the whole people will be able to judge how far we have progressed along the road to rehabilitation and national well-being.

My first objective was to secure relief supplies to meet the present emergency requirements of our people . I have submitted to the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration a relief program calling for more than 200,000,000 pesos of emergency supplies—food, clothing, medicines. Final action on this program is now under consideration by the UNRRA authorities. While awaiting the decision, I conferred with the Director-General of UNRRA, Governor Herbert H. Lehman, and pictured for him the sufferings of our people. On my request, emergency aid to the Philippines has been made available to us at once, to the amount of four million pesos. I expect the decision on the larger application to be acted upon in conjunction with similar applications from other countries.

Second, to rebuild our homes and industries shattered by the war . Senator Tydings has already introduced a bill in Congress to achieve this objective. It is expected that one billion pesos will be authorized for this purpose.

Third, to rebuild our roads, bridges, and port and harbor facilities . An amendment prepared by Senator Carl Hay-den for this purpose has been incorporated in the Tydings “Rehabilitation Act of 1945,” which will shortly be voted on by the United States Congress.

Fourth, to assist our Government in restoring and rebuilding essential public buildings, services, works and utilities . This is covered by a bill authorizing the Surplus Property Board to transfer to the Commonwealth of the Philippines, without cost, all surplus property of the United States now or hereafter located in the Philippines, with exception of weapons and munitions.

Fifth, to redeem guerrilla currency . The War and Treasury Departments have been requested by the President of the United States to submit recommendations for necessary steps to fulfill the United States obligation with regard to this currency.

Sixth, to insure to Filipino veterans the same benefits which accrue to American veterans in the United States . The Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs is now making a careful analysis of all phases of past and current benefits payable in the Philippines.

Seventh, to gain control over enemy property of every character and description in the Philippines, to be disposed by the Commonwealth Government as it sees fit . This is provided for in the Tydings “Rehabilitation Act of 1945.”

Eighth, to provide credit facilities in order to restore commerce, industry and agriculture . The President of the Export-Import Bank has been requested by President Truman to participate in the restoration of normal economic life in the Philippines and to suggest steps that will permit the Bank to do so. A bill is now pending in Congress to implement this.

Ninth, to establish and maintain mutually beneficial trade relations which will insure the rebuilding of our export industries and bring about the normal flow of consumer goods . The Ways and Means Committee of the House of Representatives of the United States Congress is now considering a Trade Relations bill for this purpose. Meanwhile, the Chairman of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation has been requested by President Truman to continue and advance the Philippine program of importing and selling consumer goods.

Tenth, to strengthen the position of the national police force and thereby maintain peace and order . The War Department will continue to assist the Commonwealth Government in reorganizing the Philippine Constabulary.

Eleventh, to strengthen the stability of the Commonwealth Government by eliminating the causes of discontent . The High Commissioner to the Philippines, with the cooperation of the Commonwealth Government, will suggest measures which may be taken by the Government to eliminate the causes of discontent among agricultural laborers.

Twelfth, to provide immediate financial assistance to the Commonwealth Government . The Congress and the President of the United States have now removed all restrictions to the use of the coconut oil and sugar excise tax funds. This makes available for general purposes an amount of approximately 140,000,000 pesos. President Truman has signed the law releasing part of our exchange standard fund for general purposes of the Commonwealth Government.

Thirteenth, to restore and improve inter-island commerce . The Maritime Commission will be authorized to charter to individuals and corporations vessels of less than two thousand gross tons. The Commission will also be authorized to permit Filipinos to receive instruction in the United States Merchant Marine and at the United States Merchant Marine Academy at the expense of the United States Government.

Fourteenth, to maintain a system of air navigation facilities and communications services for inter-island airways operations . The Administrator of Civil Aeronautics of the Department of Commerce will be authorized to provide the facilities and services for this purpose. The agency will also train Filipinos, at the expense of the United States Government, in air traffic control and other services essential to the orderly and safe operation of air traffic.

Fifteenth, to establish meteorological facilities in the Philippines until the Philippine Weather Bureau is reestablished and in a position to assume responsibility . The Chief of the Weather Bureau of the Department of Commerce will establish such facilities in the Philippines. The Bureau will also train Filipinos in weather service at the expense of the United States Government.

Sixteenth, to rehabilitate and develop the fishing industry . The Fish and Wild Life Service of the Department of the Interior will cooperate with the Commonwealth Government in developing the fishing industry and conserving our fishing resources. The Service may establish and maintain fishery schools in the Philippines and train Filipinos in methods of deep-sea fishing and other techniques. The Maritime Commission will make arrangements to sell or charter small vessels for use in the fishing industry.

Seventeenth, to secure a reasonable adjustment in the base pay of the enlisted men of the Philippine Army in recognition of their valiant service . This matter has been discussed at great length with the President of the United States and the Secretary of War, and is now receiving serious consideration.

Some of these objectives are already accomplished; some await action by Congress; and a few are still under negotiation. A rehabilitation program like this consists of many things, which vary in importance. Some may be handled by the executive, some by negotiations with individual departments or agencies concerned, and some can only be settled by Congressional action. In the seventeen points that I have listed, it has been necessary to act in all of these ways.

Several of the most important rehabilitation measures are still pending final action by the United States Congress. These include our trade relations with the United States, war damage compensation which will permit us to rebuild what has been destroyed, and the acquisition of surplus properties. It is expected the United States Congress will take favorable action on these measures within the next five weeks.

Some phases of our rehabilitation program were included in the series of directives issued by President Truman to various United States departments and agencies. Many of the directives were requested by us, and arise out of previous agreement between our two governments. In one or two cases, however, the initiative came entirely from the United States.

I understand that, during recent weeks, there has been considerable discussion of the directive relating to our agricultural problems in central Luzon. I should like to clarify this point. During my stay in the United States, I have repeatedly made clear the fact that the United States has certain commitments to the Philippines—commitments which are legal as well as moral. At the same time, it is obvious that, until our independence is recognized, American sovereignty remains in our country, and by virtue of this sovereignty the United States has certain rights. One of these rights is to obtain any information it needs about conditions in the Philippines.

In the case of the farmers who hold honest grievances in central Luzon, our Government recognizes that these grievances must be settled satisfactorily. We believe in justice for the common man—and justice means freedom from want. We are working along the lines of social legislation and government action which will protect all our people from economic insecurity or exploitation. Just as we welcome American help in solving other problems of Philippine rehabilitation, so do we welcome American help in solving our agrarian problems. This help does not involve undue interference in our purely domestic affairs. That is not the intention of President Truman, nor is it the intention of our Government. Such interference, if it were to occur, would be contrary to the entire principle of Philippine-American cooperation. But American assistance, in this and other matters, is entirely in line with our tradition of cooperation.

My countrymen, the rehabilitation of the Philippines is not something that a magician can accomplish overnight. It is a process of continuous growth. It involves careful planning, patient negotiation, determined execution. It must grow out of a long-range program that will take years to accomplish. I bring back no secret formula that will rebuild our once-beautiful city in the twinkling of an eye. I bring back, instead, the assurance that we will have the full assistance of the richest and most powerful nation in the world as we go about the slow, back-breaking tasks of reconstruction.

In order to take full advantage of this program, all of us must work together in unity. We must bury our rivalries, our political disputes, our jealousies, in the common cause. I appeal to all Filipinos, in the cities and on the farms, in high places and in low, to unite. I make this appeal—not only in the highest spiritual interest of our nation—but in the practical interest of the work that must yet be done. Commissioner Romulo has done good work for us so far. But he has difficult tasks ahead of him, calling for the highest degree of diplomacy, tact, and initiative. It will be difficult for him to accomplish his tasks in Washington if he must work against a background of disunity at home.

There is one final point I should like to make. In the United States, many people asked me whether we Filipinos still want our independence. My answer to them was one word: Yes.

The events of the past war years may have changed the face of our land, but they have not changed our spirit of self-reliance. We need help from the United States to rebuild our ravaged land, but we see no conflict between help from America and independence for the Philippines. Our rehabilitation program, from this day forth, goes into full speed. And, in the normal course of events, we shall assume our role as an independent Republic. Even if the rehabilitation program is not fully completed, there is no reason why the advent of our independence need be delayed.

I do not say to you that independence will be easy. There will be many hardships and many responsibilities for us. That is the price we must pay for the choice we have made. Surely, none of us is unwilling to pay that price. For there is a just God in heaven Who has guided us throughout the stormy years of war and destruction. In His own good time, He protects those who are true to themselves and to Him.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Sergio Osmeña at the welcome program held in his Honor upon his arrival from the United States. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (9), 1146-1152.