Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines Before the members of the Philippine Association of University Women

[Delivered at the Centro Escolar University, December 16, 1945]

I deem it a privilege to be able to address an audience like this. Our women, the Filipino women, cannot and should not hold themselves indifferent to the fate of our country, to the many and difficult problems which confront her in this critical period of her history. You do well to dedicate part of your time and attention to work of a social and civic character, thus contributing your effort to the common task of promoting the public welfare. This would have been an imperative obligation even if our women did not have political rights: the more so now that you share with men the full enjoyment of those rights.

I want to talk to you this afternoon on a subject in which the woman can play an important and decisive rôle,—I refer to the task of moral and spiritual rehabilitation which must be taken up together with our material reconstruction. When one speaks of reconstruction and rehabilitation, the mind is apt to focus itself on the material phases of the problem,—the rebuilding of destroyed homes, the reconstruction of factories and industries, the replacement of other means of production, the acquisition of things necessary for physical comfort. This is only natural because what most impresses the senses are the visible ruins and wreckage, and because this form of destruction, physical and material, most directly affects the life of every individual as well as the nation.

But what doubt is there that the war has disturbed and destroyed other values,—values of a moral and spiritual character which, though not so visible, are none the less vital to the happiness and welfare of the people? And why doubt that no work of reconstruction and rehabilitation will be sound and complete unless it encompasses also the reestablishment of moral and spiritual values? I fear that we shall be rebuilding over shifting sand if besides the purely material foundations, we do not build on those eternal truths and principles which constitute the basis of all true and enduring civilizations.

More than ever there is need of placing singular emphasis on the development of private as well as public virtues. It is well that the strict observance of the law be preached; it is well that the agencies and means of insuring public order, social peace, and a healthy social and civil relationship be strengthened. But there are still other problems confronting society and the State which would be simplified, if not solved by a more general and strict observance of the Golden Rule. In this hour, so critical to humanity, the future of the world depends not only on the manner in which we unravel our economic problems, but also on the extent to which we may be able to solve our ethical problems.

I believe that a great crusade for moral rehabilitation should be launched,—the rehabilitation of private and public virtues. In this crusade, the Filipino woman has the right and the duty of occupying the very forefront.

There should be utilized for this crusade all the means and agencies at our disposal,—the home, the school, the church, the press, the forum. Fortunately, in them all, the influence of women is important and in some of them, as in the home, there can be no substitution. With reference to religious rehabilitation, it is significant that in the proposed Rehabilitation Act of 1945, known to us as the Tydings Bill, there is set aside the sum of twenty million pesos for the reconstruction of churches.

We must open a war without quarter against any form of moral retrogression. There is especially that wholly antisocial manifestation of selfishness which can never be dealt with too harshly; that is, the intent and readiness to take personal advantage of any situation or opportunity, whatever the detriment to one’s neighbor and the community.

There is a gospel that must be universally preached and practised,—the gospel of honesty, of integrity, of fair play. This must be made to permeate the home, business, public office, in one word, all social and civic life.

We must preach and practice a great love among our fellowmen, an all-embracing sympathy between all our social elements. And who better than woman can undertake that task of love and sympathy?

Capital should constantly be reminded of its responsibilities and social obligations. Labor should likewise be told of its corresponding duties.

I have stated on repeated occasions that this country, if it is to surmount its present tremendous difficulties must maintain its unity unimpaired. I mean not only political unity but also social unity. The greatest calamity that could befall us would be the calamity of class hatred. That is why I emphatically appeal to the Filipino woman that she make use of her abilities and the weight of her influence in helping to insure an orderly and just solution of all our socio-economic problems, contributing thereto all her love, all her sympathy, all the sense of harmony and justice which she so abundantly possesses.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Sergio Osmeña before the members of the Philippine Association of University Women. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (9), 1156-1158.