Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines Before the Manila Rotary Club at its Weekly Luncheon

[Released on December 20, 1945]

I am glad to have taken part in the cordial fellowship which binds you—the Manila members of the international businessman’s organization known as Rotary. This fine spirit is accentuated by the cheer of Christmas that has again come upon a world which but yesterday was torn by the most devastating war in history.

This is the first Christmas we will celebrate after our liberation. The last four years have been like the Dark Ages for our people who lived in constant terror of death, torture, and hunger. But today the weight of oppression is gone. We are free again—to think and to say what we want. Once more we are at liberty to shape our affairs as we see fit.

We all have reason to feel cheerful now. The war is over, leaving the enemy crushed and helpless. In all parts of the world where the aggressor states once held sway, a new order of law and justice is gradually being evolved out of the chaos of the last six years. The new motto is to secure the peace which has been won at an enormous sacrifice. In Europe as well as in the East, human energies are being concentrated upon this monumental task.

With the rest of the world, our country is now committed to the task of reconstruction. This involves a long-range program of material rebuilding and moral rehabilitation in which the whole-hearted cooperation of all is needed, particularly the leaders of business in our country. We are beginning to carry out this plan with high hopes and enthusiasm. We have actually reconstituted the different branches of our national government. Our local governments are now functioning. The administration of justice is being reestablished. Our semi-governmental agencies are being restored to help the country return to its feet.

Public services so essential to the people’s welfare are once more revived. Institutions that take care of our public health, public relief, and public education are again open. The system of communications is being reestablished. Public utilities are gradually being restored. Motor vehicles for land transportation in and outside the city are becoming available in increasing numbers. On January 1st the Manila Railroad Company will be turned over to the Commonwealth. A civilian airplane service is in operation and another is coming. In Manila once more we have our water system in operation and we have now electric lighting facilities. For the rebuilding of our capital, expert planning has been secured.

For our interisland shipping so vital to the life of the nation, there are now seventeen ships. But many more are needed. I understand that the two-man maritime commission sent here to look into our shipping problem is leaving for the United States to report its findings on our present needs. There is reason to hope that during January more ships will be allocated to the Philippines. Efforts are also being exerted to reestablish our ocean-going lines in order to speed up the coming of food and other essential commodities from the United States and the exportation of Philippine products.

Financially, our government is in a better position now than one year ago. About P190,000,000 from coconut and sugar excise taxes, and from the readjustment of our currency reserves, has been made available for our current expenses. But more important than this is the Tydings Rehabilitation Bill the approval of which our people are anxiously awaiting. This bill sets aside approximately one billion pesos for payment of war damages and for meeting the reconstruction needs of the Philippines. There is another important measure—the Bell Trade Bill—designed to take care of our future trade relations with the United States. These are a few of the salient features of the over-all rehabilitation program agreed upon between the United States and the Philippines. When the whole program is finally carried out, the Philippines will be back on its feet.

The spirit that has pervaded Filipino-American relations for nearly half a century was indeed one of goodwill, confidence, and mutual helpfulness. It is coming to fruition with the independence of our country. This is the very spirit that will be needed for the success of international cooperation among the democratic powers which won the war. It is worth any effort to maintain it in the winning of the peace, that universal peace which must be the foundation of any true human happiness.

These are the thoughts I desire to leave with you as I extend to you all my best wishes for a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Sergio Osmeña before the Manila Rotary Club at its Weekly Luncheon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 42 (1), 109-110.