Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines At Plaza Miranda, Quiapo, Manila

[Released on April 20, 1946]

If the campaign has been a bitter one, it was not I who made it so, I have added no fuel to the fires of factiousness. I have tried to set an example of silent, uncomplaining, unremitting work. And for that reason there have been those who said I was bed-ridden, ill, too weak even to talk!

I must admit that certain things have truly sickened my heart — the appalling havoc wrought by the enemy in our cities and towns, the devastation of our countryside, the death of so many of our best men in the resistance movement, the loss of our late beloved President Quezon. There was also the sorrow of the unexpected division among our people at this time when unity was so desperately needed.

And so I am here before you, to see me, to listen to me. Probably my hair is grayer than it was a year ago, but I assure you that this was not because of worry about the elections, but rather because of my grave responsibilities and preoccupations concerning our country, so rashly imperiled by the big ambitions of small men.

I have not come to you to promise you the moon. . . . It would be dishonest for me to vie with those who have promised you more than any man, even the chief executive of a country, could not carry out. It would be childish of you to believe me if I made any such false and empty promises.

I promise this, and also that we shall remain the friends and allies of America — that great and most enlightened nation of all time, to which we owe our liberties, our very lives.

I promise to stand by the Common Man of the land, to dedicate my energies to the betterment of his lot, so that he may enjoy that other freedom the late great President Roosevelt called the freedom from want.

I call on every citizen to think straight and to realize what his vote will mean, both here and abroad.

Source: Manuel L. Quezon III Library

Liang, D. (1970). Philippine parties and politics : a historical study of national experience in democracy (New ed). San Francisco : The Gladstone Company.