Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines Before the Senate of the Philippines on ratification of an official copy of the Charter of the United Nations

[Released on August 27, 1945]

MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE OF THE PHILIPPINES:

A few days ago I received from Washington the report of the Philippine Delegation to the United Nations Conference on International Organization, held in San Francisco from April 25 to June 26, 1945. This report includes an official copy of the Charter of the United Nations, with the statute of the International Court of Justice annexed thereto, which was adopted in the Conference signed by the representatives of fifty nations, including the Commonwealth of the Philippines.

As I had occasion to state before, we have reason to be proud of the position our country occupied at that historic conference. The part our delegates played in the actual formulation and adoption of the Charter is evidence of the admitted capacity of our people to share in the deliberations affecting the fundamental problems of mankind.

It is with profound gratification that I invite the attention of this body to the fact that during the consideration of the proposal of trusteeship for dependent peoples, the Philippine Delegation was able to assume the leadership in the advocacy of independence as the goal toward which the aspiration of the peoples placed under trusteeship should lead. The stand of our delegation is fully in agreement with the world’s concept of our people as a democratic nation, and attests to our advocacy of self-government and freedom for all the peoples of the world.

After the Charter has been accepted by this body, the Philippines as a member of the United Nations, will be entitled to the exercise of such rights as are now enjoyed only by full sovereign states. The Philippines will have a seat in the General Assembly and will exercise the right of choosing members, or of being chosen a member, of the Security Council. The Philippines will be entitled to take part in the selection of the members of the Social and Economic Council, of the Trusteeship Council, and also of the jurists who will sit in the International Court of Justice.

Those who have made a thorough study of the Charter make no claims to perfection for this instrument. But its provisions offer, under the present circumstances, the most practical means of reducing international irritations and of mediating conflicts which might otherwise plunge the world into another and even more terrible holocaust than that which has just ended. The Charter is not merely a remedial measure. It embodies great constructive power. It establishes agencies to ensure the cooperation of all nations in the improvement of the economic, social, and cultural conditions of all peoples. As President Truman said:

“This Charter points down the only road to enduring peace. There is no other. Let us not hesitate to join hands with the peace-loving peoples of the earth and start down that road with firm resolve that we can and will reach our goal.”

I am taking the liberty of transmitting to you for your information the whole text of the message of the President of the United States on this subject. The United States Senate has already ratified this Charter, thus making the United States definitely a leading member of this new international organization established by the free nations of the world to maintain peace and security and friendly relations among them.

I consider it a privilege to appear before you to bring personally the official copy of the Charter of the United Nations received by our Government from the State Department of the United States of America. It is indeed a happy coincidence that when the Senate is called upon to exercise, for the first time in our history, its constitutional authority to ratify an international agreement, it should be this new Magna Carta which brings the Philippines into fellowship with all the peace-loving nations of the earth.

I extend to you my heartiest congratulations on the opportunity which has come to this august body to exercise a high duty in behalf not only of our nation but also of mankind.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, before the Senate of the Philippines on ratification of an official copy of the Charter of the Unites Nations. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (6), 492-493.