Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines At the reactivation and citation ceremony of the 803rd Engineer Aviation Battalion

[Delivered at the University of the Philippines, Quezon City, December 15, 1945]

This impressive ceremony to which I consider it a great honor to be invited is held in tribute to the famous 803rd Engineers, which participated so heroically in the defense of the Philippines, and which, as a result of its reactivation today, will live again to carry on the great tradition of your Corps of Engineers.

The period from December 8, 1941, to V-J Day, will remain a dark one for the people of the Philippines. The suffering and humiliation which we endured at the hands of the Japanese will never be forgotten. I well remember that December, four years ago, when small, but gallant American and Filipino forces diverted the Japanese invader from the City of Manila into the hills of Bataan. I remember the people’s feeling of relief when the metropolis was declared an open city in order to spare it in so far as that was possible from the ravages of war.

At that time, too, the work of the United States Army Engineers was as prominent in the defense of the Philippines, as it was in the more recent liberation of our country. In those dark days the job of the engineers was an unhappy one, that of destroying installations which might be valuable to the enemy. But though it might have been advantageous to follow a scorched-earth policy, American engineers chose a course less destructive, less cruel. For that the people of the Philippines will always be grateful.

During the years of terror and misery which followed, the people in their hearts clung to the democratic way of life. And they lived always in the certainty that the United States would return. That this finally came to pass was not a surprise. But it was as if a fair dream had come true.

The work of the United States Army Engineers during and since the Philippine liberation campaign cannot be too highly praised, for it is of inestimable value.

The Japanese monster, in its dying hour, turned not only to rape and murder, but to wholesale destruction. The American liberators found not the beauty which was the Philippines, but destroyed villages and towns and our capital city afire. The great job of reconstruction which the engineers began in the form of restoring our public utilities and various important structures, constitutes a good start in the rebuilding of the entire country.

To you, men of the 803rd Engineer Aviation Battalion, I wish to extend, both for myself and the people of the Philippines, best wishes for the future of your great organization.

The citations which you are about to receive in the name of the President of the United States, are the highest honors which can be bestowed upon an organization of the armed forces. The men of the 803rd Engineers who gave their lives on Bataan, share with you an even greater award. The principles of democracy and the sanctity of human rights have been preserved.

When our historians compile the great story of men who made history in the Pacific, they will tell of the exploits of the 803rd Engineer Aviation Battalion,—the first such battalion to be placed in the field of combat. Posterity will know that it distinguished itself in the service of its country, and that it was duly honored by these presidential citations. Future soldiers and engineers will be grateful that this organization was reactivated and its name kept alive.

You men now constitute the 803rd. I extend sincere wishes for your well-being and success in the future. Let us hope that the 803rd Engineer Aviation Battalion may never again find it necessary to distinguish itself on the field of battle. Let us hope rather it will continue to find greatness in the rebuilding of a more peaceful world.

On behalf of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, I take pride in presenting your Battalion with these colors, which with your own glorious Stars and Stripes, the Americans and Filipinos defended together.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Sergio Osmeña at the reactivation and citation ceremony of the 803rd Engineer Aviation Battalion. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (9), 1154-1156.