Speech of His Excellency Sergio Osmeña President of the Philippines Before the delegation of the Democratic Alliance

[Delivered at Malacañan, September 23, 1945]

MY COUNTRYMEN:

I am happy to receive you all and I am very eager to have your petition. Your suggestions are entirely welcome, and I promise to give them my most careful and sympathetic attention.

It is only proper that you should take a keen interest in the rehabilitation of the Philippines. After all your trouble and suffering, you show a commendable determination to help your Government produce order from chaos and solve your common problems. Your frank acknowledgment of our present limitations reveals your sense of fairness.

You are aware of the precarious condition of our national economy and our public finance. You realize the fact that in order for us to solve our problems of relief and rehabilitation, we need all the resources we can muster in money as well as in materials. Precisely because of this situation, I feel it is my duty to go again to the United States as soon as my pressing official work here will permit.

I am hopeful that in my negotiations with the United States authorities, I shall have behind me the united and whole-hearted support of our people. All of us must work together and see eye to eye with one another in the matter not only of rebuilding our country on the ruins of war, but of standing well in the eyes of the world. We are now, as you all know, a member of the United Nations organization. Only the other day I had the honor of affixing my signature to the document ratifying our adherence to the Charter of Democracy.

Whatever we do, therefore, must be in keeping with, the new spirit of human unity that is behind the United Nations. It was this spirit which kept the ranks of the Democracies compact in the darkest hours of the titanic struggle with Fascism, and it is this same spirit which must preserve mankind in the new day of peace. The freedom-loving peoples of the earth have survived the great test of war by pulling together: they cannot fail in peace, if they bear in mind their common destiny as creatures of one God.

In this post-war era, when all chauvinistic aims must give way to collective responsibility, it would be fatal not to open our eyes to the realities emphasized by the war. These realities are basically economic and their main goal is the well-being and security of the Common Man. No program of economic betterment can be evolved upon any other basis than the improvement of the lot of the ordinary citizen. I have said it before, and I say it again now, that the Citizen’s Bill of Political Rights is no longer enough; that there must be, besides it, a Bill of Economic Rights. To formulate, adopt and enforce this Bill of Economic Rights we must stand and work together as a people one and indivisible.

Man must be free from want. We must expand our social legislation program to include all the neglected phases of the worker’s life. We must keep that always in mind. We will have fought the war in vain, the patriotic sacrifices and the suffering of our people will have been in vain, if our leaders now neglect the interests of the masses of the people. They indeed demand,—have long demanded, a fairer share in the fruit of labor, better wages, a piece of land they can call their own, a home in which to live, ample educational opportunities for their children.

What could be more reasonable? That is only just. The current of national opinion runs strongly in the direction of these reforms, and I pledge every legitimate endeavor of my Administration to their establishment.

I thank you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Osmeña, S. (1945). Speech of President Sergio Osmeña before the delegation of the Democratic Alliance. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 41 (7), 689-690.