Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 26

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE LANGUAGE CONFERENCE ON “FILIPINO-NATIONAL AND OFFICIAL LANGUAGE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION” ON JANUARY 15-16, 1987 AT MANILA.

The Sanggunian Ng Wika sa Pambansang Pagpapaunlad which is composed of representatives from the various ministries and other national offices, constitutional commissions and government corporations and the Kalipunang Kamaynilaan which is composed of representatives from the four cities and thirteen municipalities within Metro Manila, and the Metro Manila Commission, under the guidance of the Institute of National Language, Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports will hold a language conference on “Filipino-National and Official Language in the New Constitution” on January 15 and 16, 1987 at Manila.

The objectives of the conference are: 1) to prepare strategies for the most effective and expeditious enrichment and promotion of Filipino as national and official language in the government and all over the nation; and 2) prepare the necessary reading and information materials in Filipino relative to the provisions on language in the New Constitution, in relation to its presentation to the nation for ratification.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, and local government units are hereby authorized to send one (1) participant each, who are members of the Sanggunian Ng Wika sa Pambansang Pagpapaunlad or of the Katipunan ng Kasapi-Kamaynilaan to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of not more than P500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds, the usual accounting and auditing requirements. Participants residing or stationed within Manila shall be entitled to convention fees only. Meals covered by the convention fee shall be deducted from per diems. The Institute of National Language shall provide ten (10) employees to constitute the secretariat and technical staff of the conference.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference. Likewise, the organizers shall submit to this Office a general report and evaluation of the conference including a duly audited financial report and a list of participants indicating their respective offices, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget and Management.

(Sgd.) FULGENCIO S. FACTORAN, JR. Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, January 8, 1987

Source: CDAsia