Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 63

CREATING THE CABINET ACTION COMMITTEE ON DECENTRALIZATION

There is hereby created the Cabinet Action Committee on Decentralization with the following membership:

Secretary of Agriculture

Secretary of Public Works and Highways

Secretary of Education, Culture and

Sports Secretary of Labor and Employment Secretary of Health Secretary of Transportation and Communications

Management Staff

The Presidential Management Staff shall serve as the Committee Secretariat.

The Committee shall have these objectives:

1. Formulation of guidelines and implementation of decentralization projects in Laguna, Tarlac, Negros Occidental and Davao del Sur in consultation with their respective Governors and Provincial Development Councils. The decentralization projects shall be formally launched not later than July 15, 1988.

2. Ensure that consultations shall be undertaken in formulating the plans for the decentralization projects, including but not limited to the following:

a) The relevant regional and provincial offices of the affected national line agencies;

b) The Governors; the Provincial Boards ; and key officials of the provinces concerned; and

c) The Congressmen of the provinces concerned.

3. Recommend approval of the appropriate legal issuances to implement the plans for the decentralization projects proposed by the Provincial Development Councils, including but not limited to:

a) Presidential issuances;

b) Departmental Orders and Circulars;

c) Resolutions and ordinances by the Provincial Boards;

d) Orders and circulars from the Governors; and

e) Memoranda of Agreement; as appropriate.

4. Submit a report to the President on measures on administrative decentralization that can be adopted by the Executive Branch.

The Committee shall submit its plans for the decentralization projects not later than 60 days from the date hereof.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Manila, May 30, 1988.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office