MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 4

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE MEDIUM-TERM PHILIPPINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR 1987-1992

There is an urgent need to formulate a medium-term Philippine Development Plan for 1987-1992 to guide development efforts in both the public and the private sectors in the six-year period, 1987-1992. For this purpose, the National Economic and Development Authority, in coordination with all ministries, offices and instrumentalities including government-owned and controlled corporations and regional development bodies, shall immediately prepare the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan covering the period 1987-1992.

All government ministries, offices and instrumentalities shall formulate their respective medium-term plans for 1987-1992. The Plan shall contain at least the following basic elements:

Development goals and objectives.

2. Strategy and policy framework.

3. Measurable targets supportive of broader development objectives.

4. A descriptive list of ongoing and new development programs and projects to implement this framework, with benefits and costs estimates, sources of financing and timetable of implementation.

The Plans shall be submitted to the NEDA for coordination and integration at the national and regional levels on or before June 30, 1986. Copies of said development plans shall be furnished the Office of the President and the Office of Budget and Management.

All ministries, agencies and government-owned and controlled corporations shall draw inputs from their regional offices considering regional development strategies, physical framework and local needs. The regional development component of various ministry, agency and corporate plans shall be consistent with the integrated regional development plans.

In order to make these plans more meaningful in terms of implementation, all agencies, government corporations, and regional development bodies shall henceforth prepare more detailed annual development plans linked closely to their respective annual budgets.

All sectors of society, public or private, shall be consulted to the fullest extent to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related hereto.

The Director-General of the NEDA shall issue such guidelines as may be necessary to ensure effective compliance with this Circular. Such funds as may be necessary for the attainment of the objectives of this Circular shall be requested from the Minister of the Budget subject to the availability thereof and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

This Circular takes effect immediately.

By authority of the President (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Manila, March 18, 1986.

Source: CDAsia