MALACANANG Manila

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES.

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 103

PROVIDING MEASURES FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF POLICE SERVICES

In order to address effectively and efficiently the problem of peace and order and, thereby, insure adequate public safety and the protection of our communities and our people, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. The local chief executives and the Integrated National Police (INP) elements in their respective jurisdictions shall adopt integrated approaches in the prevention and control of crimes.

2. The local chief executives shall give special attention to the maintenance of peace and order and shall exercise active operational supervision and direction over police elements in their respective jurisdiction, subject to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1162, dated June 8, 1977; Executive Order No. 1012, dated March 22, 1985, as amended by Executive Order No. 1027, dated May 14, 1985; and the Amended Rules and Regulations, dated July 19, 1985.

3. a) The Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police (PC/INP) shall require police accountability and proper methods of employment and/or deployment and shall exercise effective operational control, supervision and direction consistent with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1162, dated June 8, 1977; Executive Order No. 1012, dated March 22, 1985, as amended by Executive Order No. 1027, dated May 14, 1985; and the Amended Rules and Regulations, dated July 19, 1985.

b) In places where deemed feasible, the following concepts of employment of police personnel to address the problem of criminality shall be vigorously implemented:

i. The policemen shall be brought closer to and be made acquainted with the people to whom they are assigned to serve;

ii. Fixed responsibility and fixed level of accomplishment shall be set for every policemen. The prescribed police-to-population ratio shall be made whenever practicable and as may be allowed by budgetary appropriations; and

iii. Widest effective police coverage possible shall be aggressively worked out.

The policemen so employed shall be directly under the Commander of the police sub-station/box most conveniently located to render timely reinforcement, investigation support and effective control and supervision.

c) Police work performance shall be periodically measured against performance standards that shall be set along the following observable dimensions:

i. police visibility/actual presence in the place of work;

ii. effective reduction of the crime rate in the assigned area of responsibility;

iii. effective neutralization of criminal elements; and

iv. honesty and dedication to the service.

Special and sincere efforts shall be vigorously undertaken to identify members of law enforcement agencies and the military who are connected or involved with criminal elements for the purpose of promptly removing them from the service.

Each barangay captain shall organize a “Neighborhood Support Group” that shall play the role of assisting /supporting the policemen assigned to his community and monitoring the performance of said policemen.

4 . a) The Department of National Defense, the Department of Local Government, the National Police Commission and the Philippine Constabulary/Integrated National Police (PC/INP) shall ensure that the provisions of this Memorandum Circular are effectively carried out.

b) A Working Committee is hereby constituted to coordinate and oversee the implementation of this Memorandum Circular and to insure unity of purpose, composed of the following:

The Working Committee shall submit periodic reports to the Office of the President.

This Memorandum Circular shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of July in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office