Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 82

CALLING ATTENTION TO THE GENERAL PROVISIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987 AS REGARDS THE STRENGTHENING OF REGIONAL OPERATIONS AND PROVIDING GUIDELINES THEREFOR

The Administrative Code of 1987 provides, in its Section 27, Chapter 5, Book IV and Section 40, Chapter 8, Book IV, that:

SEC. 27. Duties of a Regional Director . – The Regional Director shall:

(1) Implement laws, policies, rules and regulations within the responsibility of the agency;

(2) Implement agency programs in the region;

(3) Exercise the management functions of planning, organizing, directing and controlling;

(4) Appoint personnel to positions in the first level and casual and seasonal employees; and exercise disciplinary actions over them in accordance with the Civil Service law;

(5) Approve sick, vacation and maternity leaves of absence with or without pay, for a period not beyond one year;

(6) Prepare and submit budget proposals for the region to the central office, administer the budget of the regional office, authorize disbursement of funds pursuant to approved financial and work programs, and administer the budget control machinery in the region;

(7) Approve requisition for supplies, materials and equipment, as well as books and periodicals, and other times for the region, in accordance with the approved supply pro­curement program;

(8) Negotiate and enter into contracts for services or furnishing supplies, materials and equipment to the regional office involving an amount not exceeding fifty thousand pesos (₱50,000.00) within a given quarter, provided that authority in excess of fifty thousand pesos (₱50,000.00) may be further authorized by the proper department or agency head;

(9) Approve claims for benefits under existing laws;

(10) Approve requests for overtime services;

(11) Promote coordination among the regional offices, and between his regional office and local government units in the region;

(12) Provide housekeeping services for the regional office;

(13) Approve application of personnel for permission to teach, exercise a profession, or engage in business outside of office hours in accordance with standards and guidelines of the Civil Service Commission;

(14) Issue travel vouchers authorizing employees to travel on official business within

the region for a period not exceeding thirty days;

(15) Approve attendance of personnel in conferences, seminars, and non-degree training programs within the region;

(16) Authorize the allocation of funds to provincial district offices; and

(17) Perform such other duties and functions as may be provided by law or further delegated by the head of agency or other proper authorities concerned.

SEC. 40. Delegation of Authority . – The Secretary or the head of an agency shall have authority over and responsibility for its operation. He shall delegate such authority to the bureau and regional directors as may be necessary for them to implement plans and programs adequately. Delegated authority shall be to the extent necessary for economical, efficient and effective implementation of national and local programs in accordance with policies and standards developed by each department or agency with the participation of the regional directors. The delegation shall be in writing; shall indicate to which officer or class of officers or employees the delegation is made; and shall vest sufficient authority to enable the delegate to discharge his assigned responsibility.

Upon effectivity of the Code, strict compliance with these provisions is enjoined,’ To ensure consistency in the exercise of delegated functions and prerogatives, the heads of departments and agencies are directed to issue standard manuals of operations to their respective regional offices. Such manuals shall be maintained and updated from time to time in keeping with developments at the home offices and in the field.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, October 24 1988

Source: Malacañang Records Office