MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 37

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND NATIONAL CONVENTION ON PRODUCTIVITY IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND PROVIDING GUIDELINES THEREON

Separate issuances established the Government Productivity; Improvement Program (GPIP) as a priority undertaking of the Government and declared October, 1987, as Government Productivity Improvement Month.

In line therewith, the Second National Convention on Productivity in the Public Service shall be held in Manila on October 14 and 15, 1987. The Convention shall seek to: (a) promote productivity improvement consciousness in the government, (b) assess ongoing productivity improvement efforts and identify new directions for subsequent ones, and (c) update the private sector on activities to improve quality in public service.

In view thereof, the attendance of representatives of national government agencies and corporations in the Second National Convention on Productivity on official time and at government expense is hereby authorized.

Participation shall be limited to not more than three (3) participants from each government office, agency or corporation. Agency delegates shall be division chiefs or higher officials who are actively involved in or can considerably influence productivity improvement and related activities in their respective offices.

A convention fee of not more than ₱200.00 per participant is hereby authorized, chargeable against the appropriations of the agencies concerned, subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedures. Participants stationed outside Metro Manila shall be entitled, in addition to the Convention fee, to traveling allowance provided for under the Joint MBM-COA General Circular No. 86-1.

Participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance/participation to the Convention within a week after the activity. The Department of Budget and Management in coordination with the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP), shall immediately submit to the Office of the President a report on Convention proceedings and outputs.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

Source: Malacañang Records Office