Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 137

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 1991 PICE NATIONAL ANNUAL CONVENTION

The Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers, Inc. (PICE) will hold a national convention on November 7 to 9, 1991 at the Manila Midtown Hotel on the theme “Upgrading the Civil Engineering Profession Thru Continuing Education.” This convention aims to supplement and/or upgrade the current level of knowledge of civil engineers through continuing education, which will also earn for them their – needed credit units for the renewal of their professional license.

Heads of departments, bureaus, offices, and agencies of the national government performing civil engineering functions, as well as concerned government-owned and controlled corporations and local government units are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) representatives, preferably members of the Institute, to the convention on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, travelling allowance and registration fee of ₱750.00 per participant for the duration of the convention, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. Meals covered by the convention fee shall be deducted from the travelling allowance. Participants residing or stationed within the Metropolitan Manila area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and registration fees only.

Participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance and shall, within a reasonable period thereafter, echo the seminar to key personnel in their respective offices. Likewise, within fifteen days after the convention, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the seminar, including a duly audited financial report and a list of participants indicating their respective offices, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management and the Civil Service Commission.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Manila, October 24, 1991

Source: Malacañang Records Office