Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 75

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL SECURITY AND PEACE AND ORDER CONFERENCE-WORKSHOPS SPONSORED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE.

The Department of Local Government (DLG) and Department of National Defense (DND) are jointly sponsoring a series of Conference-Workshops on “National Security and Peace and Order” country-wide for key policy-makers at national level and implementors at regional level of government policies, plans and programs on security and public order.

These Conference-Workshops are expected to enhance a functional awareness of the national “total approach” strategy, as well as a knowledge of the infrastructures and systems available for the attainment of national goals with speed and efficiency.

In view of the relevance of the Workshops to the national goals and objectives, heads of departments, bureaus and offices, including government-owned and controlled corporations and local government units are hereby authorized to attend the Conference-Workshops on official business with reasonable expenses for transportation, billeting and per diems chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated 26 November 1973 as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, or other applicable laws, subject to the availability of funds and usual accounting and auditing requirements.

It is understood that participants residing or stationed within the City of the Conference-Workshop venue shall be entitled only to reasonable expenses for transportation.

Participants shall, within a reasonable period, echo the Conference-Workshop to key personnel in their respective jurisdiction or area who are involved in national security and public order. Likewise, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the Conference-Workshops, copy furnished the Department of Budget and Management, including a list of participants and observers indicating their respective offices.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, September 21, 1988

Source: Malacañang Records Office