Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 54

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES ON THE COMPUTATION OF CREDITABLE VACATION AND SICK LEAVES.

WHEREAS, Executive Order (EO) No. 1077, dated January 9, 1986, provides under Section 1 thereof that any officer or employee of the government who retires or voluntarily resigns or is separated from the service through no fault of his own and whose leave benefits are not covered by any special law, shall be entitled to the commutation of all the accumulated vacation and/or sick leave to his credit, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays without limitation as to the number of days of vacation and sick leave that he may accumulate;

WHEREAS, Civil Service Commission (CSC) Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 4, series of 1986, prescribing guidelines on the implementation of EO No. 1077, provides that the “reckoning date for crediting accumulated leave in excess of 300 days shall start on October 12, 1981 [and that] leave credits in excess of 300 days before this date shall be deemed forfeited;” and

WHEREAS, on February 28, 1988, the CSC recommended the issuance by this Office of a memorandum circular specifying the coverage and applicability of EO No. 1077, particularly the reckoning date for accrediting accumulated leave in excess of three hundred (300) days, and interposed no objection if the reckoning date of October 12, 1981, as stated in CSC MC No. 4-, is modified or deleted.

Accordingly, and for the guidance of all concerned, the computation of leave credits shall be as follows:

Any officer/employee of the government who retires/ voluntarily resigns/is separated from the service through no fault of his/her own, and who is not otherwise covered by special law, shall be entitled to the commutation of all his/her leave credits exclusive of Saturdays/Sundays/holidays without limitation and regardless of the period when the credits were earned; provided that the leave privileges under EO No. 1077 as herein outlined may be availed of only by concerned officers/ employees in the service as of the effectivity thereof on January 9, 1986.

Strict compliance hereto is enjoined.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, March 24 1988

Source: Malacañang Records Office