Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 08

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE TO EXPEDITE THE ORGANIZATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY

WHEREAS , Republic Act (RA) No. 10844 established the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT) to be the primary policy, planning, coordinating, implementing and administrative entity of the Executive Branch of the government that will plan, develop, and promote the national information and communications technology development agenda;

WHEREAS , the timely performance by the DICT of some of its crucial functions, such as the issuance of the Implementing Rules and Regulations within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of RA No. 10844 and the formulation of the internal organic structure, staffing pattern, operating system, and revised budget of the DICT within six months from effectivity of the said law, requires the immediate organization and operation of the DICT; and

WHEREAS , there is an urgent need to organize a transition team to ensure the timely and efficient operationalization of the DICT.

NOW , THEREFORE , the following are hereby ordered:

SECTION 1 . There is hereby established an Inter-Agency Task Force (IATF) composed of representatives from the DICT, Office of the President, Department of Budget and Management and the Development Academy of the Philippines. The IATF shall be headed by the DICT Secretary or his duly designated representative. The heads of the agencies comprising the IATF shall designate their respective representatives and thereafter, the IATF shall convene immediately upon call by the DICT Secretary.

SECTION 2 . The IATF shall have the primary duty of expediting the organization of the DICT, in coordination with the Civil Service Commission. In line therewith, the IATF shall undertake the following functions: (a) Assist in the prompt approval of the organization and staffing pattern, placement, recruitment, secondment, and selection of personnel, subject to pertinent laws, rules and regulations;

(b) Provide general administrative support and assistance in the organizational development of DICT; (c) Assist in the development of office policies and internal rules and regulations; (d) Coordinate with the public and private sectors, including research institutions, for the purpose of providing such assistance as the DICT may require for its immediate organization; and (e) Perform all acts necessary to accomplish the intent of this Circular.

SECTION 3. This Circular shall take effect immediately and shall remain in force until the normal operations of the DICT shall have commenced.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 27th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Sixteen.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd). SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA Executive Secretary