FROM :

Fax NO. : 19 Sep. 2817 @5:55AM

 

MALACANAN PALACE
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 6

REPEALING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 103 (S. 2004) AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Administrative Order (AQ) No. 103 (8. 2004) directed the
continued adoption of austerity measures in the government,

WHEREAS, said AO was issued in order to meet the country's fiscal targets,
maintain its macroeconomic stability, improve investors’ confidence, and for the
national government, its agencies and instrumentalities to undertake cost-cutting
measures for purposes of reducing expenses and channelling its scarce resources,
in order to attain a sound budget policy and ensure a balanced budget by 2009;

WHEREAS, the country’s fiscal condition from the time AO ‘No. 103 took
effect has already significantly improved due to public expenditure management
reforms, tax administration reforms, and sound and prudent debt management;

WHEREAS, with the country’s improved fiscal situation, the government
could, among other initiatives, increase infrastructure and social spending,
implement public expenditure management reforms with greater intensity, streamline
government operations, and make public service delivery more efficient in order to
give the Filipino people the best value for their taxes;

WHEREAS, most of the provisions of AO No. 103 are already covered or
superseded by pertinent provisions of the General Appropriations Act and recent
issuances of the Office of the President, Department of Budget and Management
(DBM), Civil Service Commission and other relevant agencies, which direct the
judicious and prudent use of government funds,

WHEREAS, repealing AO No. 103 is aligned with the strategies of the
Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022, which provides for, among others, the
formulation and implementation of public expenditure management reforms that will
improve budget utilization and address underspending of government agencies;

NOW, THEREFORE, |, RODRIGO ROA DUTERTE, President of the
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. AO No. 103 (s. 2004) is hereby repealed.

THI PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

FROM :

Fax NO. : 19 Sep. 2817 @5:55AM

Notwithstanding the repeal of AO No. 103, existing laws, rules and regulations
mandating the judicious and prudent use of government funds shall remain in full
force and effect, and all agencies and instrumentalities shall continue to ensure that
no irregular, unnecessary, extravagant, excessive and unconscionable expenses
shall be incurred by the Government.

Section 2. Within thirty (30) days from the issuance of this Order, the DBM
shall issue the necessary guidelines to inform and remind all national government
agencies and instrumentalities of the existing laws, rules, regulations and other
issuances governing the matters previously covered by the austerity measures of AO

No. 103.

Nothing in this Order shall hinder the appropriate government agencies from
issuing rules and regulations on the use of public funds within the bounds of their
respective mandates.

Section 3. Should any part or provision of this Order be declared invalid or
unconstitutional, the other parts or provisions hereof not affected thereby shall
remain valid and subsisting.

Section 4, All orders, rules and regulations, issuances or any part thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed, amended, or
modified accordingly.

Section 5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of September in the year of
Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seventeen.

By the President:

.. tenn

SALVADOR C. MEDIALDEA
Executive Secretary ws

 
    

ie ye Yk
Ae
REPUBLIC OF THE
pRRp 2016 - 003812

P4