IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF
ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 10S. 2018

_—_eeee CO errr

RULE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 1. The following implementing rules and regulations are hereby being issued pursuant to
Administrative Order No. 10 entitled: Centralizing all Government Efforts for the Reintegration of Former
Rebels and Creating for the purpose an Inter-agency Task Force.

Section 2. Declaration of Policy. It is the policy of the state to prioritize the maintenance of peace
and order, the protection of life, liberty, and property and the promotion of the general welfare which
are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings of democracy. For this purpose, an Inter-
Agency Task Force for the Reintegration of FRs, to be known as Task Force “Balik-Loob”, is hereby
created.

2.1. The government shall pursue a comprehensive, integrated, community-based
national program that is locally-implemented to address the legal status and security of FRs, as well as
their economic, social and psychological rehabilitation needs and provide immediate to long-term
interventions that are supported by strengthened institutions to ensure effective implementation and
attainment of these desired outcomes.

2.2. The program shall be implemented nationwide anchored on fundamental principles
which are indispensable to ensure the effectiveness of the program implementation. It is focused, with
seamless and streamlined processes to ensure the E-CLIP’s sustained implementation aimed at
empowering the individual FR.

RULE 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS

Section 3. Definitions. As used for purposes of these implementing rules and regulations, the
following terms shall mean:

a. Enhanced - Comprehensive Local Integration Program (E-CLIP) — a complete package of
assistance to Former Rebels (FRs).

b. Former Rebels (FRs) — beneficiaries of the program who were members of the Communist Party
of the Philippines (CPP), New People’s Army (NPA) and National Democratic Front (NDF)
who voluntarily abandoned the armed struggle and opted to become productive members of
the society.

 

Page 1 of 7

Chief, Records Division
Administrative Service, OND

ARLENE DAVIANIARES /

c. Former Rebel Reintegration Plan (FRRP) - refers to the plan resulting from the individual
assessment undertaken by the Local Social Welfare and Development Officer (LSWDO) with
the FR.

d. Joint AFP-PNP Intelligence Committee (JAPIC) — refers to the committee responsible for
verifying the identities of the rebels upon their surrender.

e. Regular Members of NPA - refers to full-time NPA members, such as those belonging to
Sandatahang Yunit Pampropaganda (SYP), Platoon Gerilya (PLAGER), Sentro de Grabidad
(SDG), and Regional Yunit Gerilya (RYG).

f. Militia ng Bayan (MB) — refers to Individuals who have been indoctrinated and may or may not
be directly involved in violent armed struggle but, when organized, can provide mass support
to the “revolutionary movement” of the CPP/NPA/NDF. These organized individuals form part
of the mass-base that serves as revolutionary enforcement in the barrio. They secure the NPA
forces while in the community and, at times, are even armed to reinforce the NPA during
encounters. They are trained with sniping and Improvised Explosives Device (IED)
deployment and detonation, among other armed activities, which eventually qualifies them to
become the main source of NPA regulars.

g. Immediate Family — refers to the spouse, direct descendants or ascendants of the FR by
consanguinity or affinity.

RULE 3. COMPOSITION OF THE TASK FORCE

Section 4. Composition. The Task Force for the reintegration of FRs, to be known as Task Force
Balik-Loob (TFBL) is hereby created composed of representatives, with a rank not lower than
Undersecretary, from the Department of National Defense (OND), DILG, OPAPP, Office of the President
(OP) and the National Housing Authority (NHA). The Task Force shall be chaired by the DND
representative.

The Task Force Chair may invite such other government agencies and instrumentalities to the
Task Force, as he may deem necessary,

RULE 4. POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE TASK FORCE

Section 5. Powers, duties and functions. The Task Force shall perform the following functions: -

a. Develop the Strategic Communication (StratCom) Plan and the Implementing Guidelines
governing the reintegration efforts;
b. Address implementation issues at the national and local levels;

CERTIFIED COPY:
Page 2 of 7

“
ARLENE D, MANIJARES
Chief, Records Division
Administrative Service, OND

 

Coordinate with concerned Local Government Units (LGUs) to ensure the effective and timely
implementation of reintegration efforts;

. Provide capability assistance to concerned LGUs;

Prepare a coordination, monitoring, evaluating and reporting mechanism that shall be used by
all concerned agencies in checking the status of the reintegration efforts, particularly their
responsiveness, effectiveness, and sustainability; :
Prepare regular consolidated reports on the implementation of the reintegration efforts to be
submitted to the OP;

» Regularly review and update the StratCom Plan, Implementing Guidelines and other

mechanisms to ensure the responsiveness and effectiveness of the reintegration efforts; and

. Call upon the assistance and cooperation of all concerned government agencies for the effective

implementation of AO 10s. 2018.

RULE 5. COMPOSITION, ROLES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE SECRETARIAT

Section 6. Composition. The Task Force Balik-Loob shall be assisted by a Secretariat which shall
be composed of Technical Staff drawn from the DND, DILG, OPAPP, Office of the President and the
NHA. The Secretariat shall also be chaired by the DND.

Section 7. Functions. The Secretariat shall have the following functions:

a.

9g

Section 8. Qualified Beneficiaries. Who are quali

Assist in the preparation of the Task Force program of action on a yearly basis including targets
for the year and expected funding requirements; :
Provide technical support in the formulation of policies and plans and interventions;

Prepare, schedule and arrange the regular meeting of the Task Force;

- Provide technical assistance to ensure the continuity of the implementation of the program of

action, project, or activities of the Task Force;

Maintain a database to track the provision of assistance packages ;

Install efficient monitoring and evaluation system as basis for programming and direction
setting;

Keep the records of the proceedings of the meetings of the Task Force;

. Undertake capability building programs as needed;

Facilitate the conduct of research initiatives of the Task Force;
Develop and maintain a centralized information management system and regularly update the
Task Force, its member agencies on the insurgency profile and situation in the Philippines;

. Coordinate all regular and special meetings of the Task Force; and

Perform other tasks which are necessary and incidental to the concerns of the Task Force.

RULE 6. ENHANCED COMPREHENSIVE LOCAL INTEGRATION PROGRAM

 
 
  

Page 3 of 7

   

ARLENE D. MIANJARES

Chief, Records Divirion
Administrative Service, OND

    

Regular Members of the CPP-NPA-NDF; or

. Spouses, partners, children, whether legitimate or illegitimate, parents, or siblings of the FR.

Members of the Militia ng Bayan (MB), who surfaced starting April 3, 2018 shall only be eligible
to the following assistance: 1) Immediate Assistance; 2) Reintegration Assistance and 3) Firearm
Remuneration.

Section 9. Period. The Program shall cover those who shall surface starting April 3, 2018, or issuance
of A.O. No. 10. ;

All FRs who surfaced starting July 1, 2016 shall likewise be provided with benefits from the
Program in addition to the CLIP package they have received.

Section 10. Certification. All FRs must be certified by the JAPIC to be entitled to the Program's
assistance. This certification shall likewise hold in the event that the person has died while his/her
enrolment to the program is being processed. In such a case, his/her identified beneficiaries shall be
entitled to the Program’s benefits and assistance package.

RULE 7. BENEFITS AND OTHER FORMS OF ASSISTANCE

Section 11. Benefits and Other Forms of Assistance. All FRs or their qualified beneficiaries shall be
entitled to the following benefits and other forms of assistance:

a.

Safety and security guaranteed by the Local Government Unit (LGU) and/or Philippine National
Police (PNP) in cooperation with the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) from the time the
FR surfaced, and while he/she is enrolled under the Program for three (3) years;

Immediate Assistance in the amount of FIFTEEN THOUSAND PESOS (PhP15,000.00) per FR,
for mobilization expenses while his/her enrolment in the Program is being processed;

Support for the Receiving Unit in the amount of TWENTY-ONE THOUSAND PESOS
(PhP21,000.00) to defray the subsistence or meals cost of FR while in the custody of the
Receiving Unit, and other incidental expenses that may be incurred while processing the JAPIC
Certification such as: securing FR’s birth certificate and identification card and, mobility

expenses;

Facilitation by the LSWDO for the registration of birth and/or marriage certificates and issuance
of Identification Cards (IDs), such as postal and voter’s ID, as part of restoring or affirming the
FR’s identity in society. The expenses that may be incurred in this process shall be covered by
the Receiving Unit;

Support to relocate and secure the FR and his/her family;

QP Z F 7
aa! , Page 4 of 7

ARLENE D¢ MANJARES
Chief, Records Division
Administrative Service, OND

 

Evaluation of the detailed assistance required by the former rebel to live a normal life conducted
by the Provincial Social Welfare and Development Officer. This shall be accomplished with the
submission of the Initial Interview Form;

Livelihood Assistance in the amount of FIFTY THOUSAND PESOS (PhP50,000.00) per FR;

. Firearms remuneration in the amount of the valuation of turned-in firearms based on the
Implementing Guidelines and Procedures for the Disposition of Firearms, Explosives and
Ammunition (FEA) of the former New People’s Army (NPA) Rebels (FR) under the Enhanced
Comprehensive Local Integration Program to provide additional funds to the activities reflected
in the FRRP including, but not limited to, capacity building, skills trainings, provision of shelter,
and legal assistance;

Temporary shelter for surrenderees or “Halfway House Assistance” while awaiting their
processing for enrolment to the Program. During the FR’s stay lectures, workshops, and other
de-radicalization activities to facilitate their reintegration to mainstream society may be
conducted. A separate room or facility shall be provided for individual women FRs;

PhilHealth enrolment under the PAMANA-PhilHealth Sponsored Program with one-year
validity. It shall be open for renewal, subject to availability of funds. Availment of insurance
will be guided by the PAMANA-Philhealth Sponsored Program guidelines issued by the
PhilHealth and the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP). This shall
be applicable to those not covered by other sponsored programs of PhilHealth;

. Medical Assistance package provided by the Department of Health (DOH) including, but not
limited to, physical examination, immunization and vaccination, and support to hospitalization

for the duration of enrolment under the Program;

Housing Assistance and/or Housing Unit from the National Housing Authority (NHA) shall be
given to each FR;

» Modified Conditional Cash Transfer where, should the FR prefer and be qualified, the
Provincial Social Welfare and Development Officer (PSWDO) shall refer him/her to the
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) for enrolment under this program;

. Legal assistance, where, should the FR require, under the DOJ-Public Attorney’s Office (PAO);

. Livelihood materials and implements;

. Healing and reconciliation initiatives to provide psycho-social support to FRs, and immediate
families through the E-CLIP Committee; and

Page 5 of 7

ARLENE D. MANJARES
Chief, Records Div'rion
Administrative Servicn, OND

 

q. Any other additional assistance that may be determined based on the FRRP and sourced out

from partner institutions/agencies, This may include capacity building and skills training,
among others, if necessary.

RULE 8. INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM

Section. 12. Institutional Arrangement with Partner Agencies and Instrumentalities. All concerned
agencies and instrumentalities, but not limited to the members of the Task Force, shall ensure efficient
complementation of resources and interventions as reflected in their respective plans, programs and
projects, with the corresponding budgets to support the reintegration efforts

Each agency concerned shall likewise come-up with their respective enabling policies or set
guidelines on the programs and projects necessary, to ensure holistic convergence efforts for the effective
implementation of the Enhanced Comprehensive Local Integration Program (E-CLIP). Initially, in view
of the provisions of the AO, the following agencies shall within one (1) month issue their respective
guidelines on the following:

A.

B.

DND on the administration and operationalization of the Task Force.

DILG on the administration of financial assistance for Former Rebels (FRs), namely:

Immediate Assistance

Livelihood Assistance

Firearm Remuneration

For the receiving unit

For the construction of Halfway House

- OPAPP on the implementation of the PAyapa at MAsaganang PamayaNAn (PAMANA)

Program

. NHA on the provision of Housing Assistance to beneficiaries,

. Other departments, agencies and instrumentalities for their respective assistance packages such

as but not limited to DBM, DSWD, DOLE, DTI, DOH, DOJ, DA, DepEd, CHED, DPWH,
TESDA, CDA, NCIP, PhilHealth, and PCOO that may be tapped to complement and
supplement the reintegration program for FRs.

RULE 9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 13. Adoption of Task Force Meeting Internal Rules. - The Task Force shall meet regularly
and adopt its own internal rules. Only official members shall be allowed to participate in the discussions,
raise motions and vote. Resource persons or observers may be allowed by the Task Force to attend to

clarify or answer questions that may be raised in the meeting.

  

Page 6 of 7

ARLENE D. MANJARES

Chief, Records Divirion
Administrative Serview, OND

Section 14, Separability Clause. - Should any part of provision of this IRR be held unconstitutional
or invalid, the other parts or provisions hereof shall not be affected and shall continue to be in full force
and effect.

Section 15. Repealing Clause. - All orders, rules and regulations, issuances or any part thereof
inconsistent with the provisions of this IRR are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 16. Supplemental Guidelines. - The member-agencies and implementing partners of the
Task Force shall issue such additional implementing rules and regulations, in conformity with this IRR as
may be necessary for the implementation of the program.

Section 17. Effectivity, - This IRR shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in two (2)
newspapers of general circulation and after registration with the Office of National Administrative
Register (ONAR), UP Law Center, Quezon City. '17 MAY 2018

 

    
 
  

APPROVED and ADOPTED this day of » in Quezon City, Philippines.
(© sicnranze
UE
Ana. | tna

“ARY DELFIN N. LORENZANA
DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE

UNDERSECRET. [ARDO M. ANO
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

ommnntn |

CO-0SEC O10 12016-20280

GENERAL MANAG ES A, JR.
NATIONAL HOUSING AUTHORITY

       
 
   

US G.

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ADVISER ON THE PEACE PROCESS

. MANJARES

Chief, Records Divirion
Administrative Service, OND