PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1123

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State under the New Society to protect wages, incomes and employment against the erosion of imported as well as domestic inflation;

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of this policy the Government has subsidized wage goods, controlled the prices of essential commodities, and provided the workers with emergency allowance under PD 525, 13th month pay under PD 851, new minimum wages under PD 928 and 10 paid legal holidays under PD 442;

WHEREAS, recent oil price increases and other inflationary factors have caused new difficulties to the workers, especially the lowest-income groups;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree the following:

Section 1. In the Private Sector. In the private sector, an across-the-board increase of sixty pesos (P60.00) in emergency allowance as provided in PD 525 shall be paid by all employers to their employees effective 1 May 1977. Accordingly, the monthly emergency allowance under PD 525 is hereby amended as follows:

(a) For workers being paid P50.00 P110

(b) For workers being paid P30.00 P 90

(c) For workers being paid P15.00 P 75

Section 2. In the Public Sector. Effective 1 May 1977, an across-the-board salary increase of ten per cent (10%) shall be paid to all employees of the Government receiving a monthly salary of not more than P600.

Section 3. Report on Compliance. All private employers shall report compliance with this Decree to the Labor Statistics Service of the Department of Labor inManila, furnishing a copy thereof to the nearest Department of Labor Regional Office.

Section 4. The Secretary of Labor and the Commissioner of the Budget shall issue appropriate rules and regulations to implement this Decree for their respective sectors. Under such rules and regulations, distressed employers whether public or private may be exempted while in such condition in the interest of development and employment.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect on 1 May 1977.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of April, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office