PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 207

RATIFYING THE 1968 VIENNA CONVENTIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS ON ROAD TRAFFIC AND ROAD SIGNS AND SIGNALS, RESPECTIVELY

WHEREAS, a United Nations Conference on Road Traffic was held in Vienna, Austria, for the period from October 7 to November 8, 1968, under the auspices of the United Nations Economic and Social Council;

WHEREAS, in this Conference the participating countries, including the Philippines, have agreed on a Convention for Road Traffic and a separate Convention for Road Signs and Signals, both considered absolutely necessary to facilitate international road traffic and to increase road safety;

WHEREAS, the contracting parties to these Conventions to which the Philippines is a signatory, have agreed to accept the system of traffic, road signs, signals and symbols and road markings described in said conventions and to adopt the same as soon as possible;

WHEREAS, the period of five years have elapsed since these two conventions have been signed, but the past Congress of the Republic of the Philippines have failed to ratify the same;

WHEREAS, there is now an urgent need for the ratification of these conventions in order to adopt internationally prescribed uniform rules of road traffic and road signs and signals in the Philippines, especially so, because of the intensified government campaign for road safety;

WHEREAS, the urgent need for adopting the uniform traffic rules, road signs and signals as prescribed in the conventions is made more necessary because of the considerable number of foreigners and tourists that are now operating motor vehicles on Philippine roads;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby adopt and make as part of the law of the land the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic and Road Signs and Signals, respectively.

The Commissioner of Land Transportation shall draw, enact and promulgate the necessary regulatory measures to implement this Decree.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office