MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1979

REAPPROPRIATING UNRELEASED BALANCES OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS.

WHEREAS, there are unreleased balances of appropriations authorized for infrastructure projects under the six existing Public Works Acts, namely, Presidential Decree Nos. 759, 1062, and 1342, and Batas Pambansa Blg. 13, 50 and 132;

WHEREAS, since the enactment of the above-cited six Public Works Acts, major unforeseen changes have taken place in the external and domestic socio-economic environment which call for a review and shifting of developmental thrusts and resources allocation in general, and revision in priorities, scopes, costs, and implementation schedules of infrastructure projects in particular, in accordance with the Updated Five-Year Philippine Development Plan and the Medium-Term Public Investment Program;

WHEREAS, such revisions in priorities, scopes, costs, and implementation schedules of infrastructure projects necessarily require a revision and adjustment of allocations of the appropriations already authorized under the existing Public Works Acts; and

WHEREAS, because of the extensive destruction wrought by the recent typhoons and other calamities, there is an urgent need to allocate sufficient funds for the immediate rehabilitation and reconstruction of the damaged infrastructure and implementation of additional structural works to mitigate future losses to life and property.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order the following:

SECTION 1. The amount of ₱10,825,000,000 representing a portion of the unreleased balances of appropriations provided under the aforementioned existing Public Works Acts is hereby reappropriated for the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, and/or completion of the following infrastructure projects, including engineering supervision and acquisition of sites, equipment, materials, supplies, and services to be used directly for the projects:

SECTION 2. Sections 2 to 12 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 132 are hereby made applicable to the abovementioned projects. In addition, the Minister of Public Works and Highways shall, in coordination with the Minister of the Budget, render year-end reports to the President of the Philippines on the sums actually reappropriated, released, and expended during the year under consideration.

SECTION 3. If any provision of this Decree is declared unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall remain in force.

SECTION 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia