MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1950

AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1934, AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 4136.

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1934 was issued for the purpose of amending certain provisions of Republic Act No. 4136, otherwise known as the Land Transportation and Traffic Code, in view of the need to conserve energy and fuel and utilize these resources properly;

WHEREAS, there is a pressing need to provide funds for road maintenance and construction;

WHEREAS, in line with said purpose, there is a need to further amend certain sections thereof, so that the road user charge for 2/3 Axle trucks is reduced by 30%, from ₱60 to ₱40, and the fixed common carriers tax for public utility jeeps and motorcycles is reduced by 50%, from ₱500 to ₱250 and ₱200 to ₱100, respectively, to provide adequate transition;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and ordain:

SECTION 1. Section 8-A of Republic Act No. 4136, as inserted by Presidential Decree No. 1934, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8-A. Road Users’ Charge . — In addition to the registration fee imposed under Section 8, there shall be levied, assessed and collected, in lieu of the Energy Tax imposed under Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 843, a Road Users’ Charge in accordance with the following schedule:

SECTION 2. Section 8-B of Republic Act No. 4136, as inserted by Presidential Decree No. 1934, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8-B. Common Carriers Tax . — In addition to the Registration Fee imposed under Section 8 and the Road Users’ Charge imposed in Section 8-A, there shall be levied, assessed and collected, in lieu of the Percentage Tax on Carriers and Keepers of garages imposed under Section 207 of the National Internal Revenue Code, a Common Carriers Tax on Keepers of garages, cars for rent or hire driven by the lessee, land transportation contractors, persons who transport by land passenger or freight for hire and common carriers by land, in accordance with the following schedule:

SECTION 3. A new Section 5-A is hereby inserted to read as follows:

“SECITON 5-A. Amnesty for Delinquent Motor Vehicle Owners . — All motor vehicle owners, whose vehicles are not currently registered and who shall register said motor vehicles, under the rates prescribed herein, on or before December 31, 1984, shall not be subject to the penalties prescribed for the period of delinquency.”

SECTION 4. A new Section 5-B is hereby inserted to read as follows:

“Section 5-B . Period for Registering Transfers of Ownership of Motor Vehicles and Penalties . — Transfers of ownership of motor vehicles shall be registered within seven (7) days after the execution of the Deed of Sale, the Sheriff’s sale, or other documents transferring ownership of motor vehicles. In the event of failure to register the transfer of ownership of motor vehicles within the period prescribed herein there shall be added to the amount collectible a surcharge of fifty per cent (50%).

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause . — All laws, decrees, orders and regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. Effectivity . — This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia