MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1544

CREATING BARANGAY BULAKIN II IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF DOLORES, QUEZON PROVINCE.

WHEREAS, the effective implementation of the progress of the government development hinges primarily of the administrative efficiency of each and every local unit;

WHEREAS, the creation of more self-reliant communities would pave the way toward the economical, social and political development of the areas effected;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the proposed barangay with the conformity of the elective officials of the locality to create a new barangay; and

WHEREAS, subject locality, if created into a barangay will help attain greater efficiency and expedience, in the rendition of essential public services thereby insuring the well-being of the residents;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Sitio Bana of Barangay Bulakin, in the Municipality of Dolores, Province of Quezon, is hereby created into a distinct and independent barangay to be known as Barangay Bulakin II without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother barangay of Bulakin.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular barangays shall be applicable to the barangay of Bulakin II.

Section 3. The present elective barangay officials of Barangay Bulakin shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly-created barangay of Bulakin II until the barangay officials of said barangay have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for barangay officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of Barangay Bulakin II shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of his Decree, the proportionate share of the new barangay of Bulakin II in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the mother Barangay of Bulakin shall be transferred by the President of the newly-created barangay upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws are parts of laws as well as executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the Year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1544 June 11, 1978