PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 997

CONFERRING CIVIL SERVICE ELIGIBILITIES ON SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL SPECIALISTS ON THE BASES OF THEIR QUALIFICATIONS AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF PUBLIC SERVICE

WHEREAS, the present development efforts of the government give emphasis to scientific and technological programs in keeping with national and global events;

WHEREAS, this is consistent with the provision of the Constitution that “(T) he State shall promote scientific research and invention”, and that “(T) he advancement of science shall have priority in national development;”

WHEREAS, the recruitment into the government service of more scientific and technological personnel has therefore become necessary;

WHEREAS, such recruitment has been rendered difficult both by the scarcity of qualified manpower in these fields and by the requirements of the Constitution and the Civil Service law and rules that merit and fitness for government employment be largely determined by competitive examinations;

WHEREAS, the Civil Service Commission which is responsible for the conduct of such examinations has not yet come up with a test that would accurately measure the capabilities of such personnel;

WHEREAS, there are now in the government service scientific and technological specialists who have dedicated themselves to government and who therefore need to be given some form of recognition;

WHEREAS, it is believed that the highly technical qualifications gained through education and sharpened by research and experience, of scientific and technological personnel can be considered more than adequate to determine their fitness and capacity for government jobs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. It shall be the policy of the government to give support and encouragement to science and technology, and to attract scientific and technological specialists into the public service, realizing the contribution that they can make to push with greater vigor the development programs of the country.

Section 2. As used in this Decree, the term scientific and technological specialist shall refer to a person who has at least a bachelor’s degree with major in any of the following fields, or any bachelor’s degree with specialization in the same fields:

A. Applied Sciences, such as

Agricultural Science

Agronomy

Animal Husbandry

Plant Breeding

Plant Physiology

Plant Pathology

Soils Science

Horticulture

Medical Science

Physiology

Parasitology

B. Biological Sciences, such as

Botany

Zoology

Biology

Microbiology

Paleontology

Ecology

C. Biophysical Sciences, such as

Biophysics

Biochemistry

Health Physics

Environmental Science

D. Physical Sciences, such as

Physics

Meteorology

Geophysics

Geochemistry

Astronomy

Seismology

Archeology

Astrophysics

E. Engineering Sciences, such as

Nuclear Engineering

Geothermal Engineering

Metallurgical Engineering

Aeronautical Engineering

F. Mathematics such as pure and applied mathematics including statistics.

Section 3. For purpose of appointment in the Civil Service, a person whose field of specialization is appropriately covered by a board examination shall utilize the civil service eligibility arising therefrom.

Where a field of specialization is not covered by a board examination the scientific and technological specialist concerned as defined in Section 2 hereof shall be conferred a civil service eligibility if he is determined to be qualified by a committee composed of the Chairman, National Science Development Board, the Commissioner, National Institute of Science and Technology, and the Chairman, Philippine Atomic Energy Commission. The Chairman, Civil Service Commission, or his representative may sit in the deliberations of the Committee, as may be necessary.

A scientific and technological specialist may qualify for conferment of eligibility if, as determined by the Committee, he fully meets the requirements for three years research and/or teaching experience in the pertinent field, or an earned graduate degree.

Section 5. The Committee shall promulgate the appropriate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Decree which shall be effective upon approval by the Civil Service Commission.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 16th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office