PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 452

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 190 CREATING THE NATIONAL DEFENSE COLLEGE OF THE PHILIPPINES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 190, dated May 11, 1973, created the National Defense College of the Philippines to develop qualified military leaders and civilian executives for national policy formulation and competency for high command;

WHEREAS, in order that the purposes and objectives of said National Defense College of the Philippines can be effectively and satisfactorily attained, it is necessary to strengthen the organization by way of quality participants and college personnel.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby amend Presidential Decree No. 190 as follows:

Section 1. Section 1 of the decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 1. There shall be established in the Philippines under the Department of National Defense an educational institution to be known as the “NATIONAL DEFENSE COLLEGE OF THE PHILIPPINES”.

Section 2. Section 2 of the decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 2. The College shall be specifically designed and geared to prepare and develop potential national defense leaders, civilian officials of the different branches of the Government, and selected executives from the private sector.”

Section 3. Section 3 of the decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 3. (a) The College shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the Secretary of National Defense. It shall be headed by a President who shall administer the College with the assistance of an Executive Vice President.

(b) The College shall have an Academic Board to be composed of the Vice President for Academic Affairs as Chairman, and the heads of the academic disciplines, as members.

(c) The College is empowered to confer the degree of Master in National Security Administration (MNSA) upon all its students who will satisfactorily complete the prescribed course of studies; Provided, however, that students who completed the regular course of the college prior to the approval of the Decree are hereby declared eligible to the privileges conferred hereon.”

Section 4. Section 6 of the decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 6. (a) The heads of various Departments, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the National Government, and the Armed Forces of the Philippines shall submit to the Secretary of National Defense a list of their ranking officials and officers who are holding or are earmarked for positions of higher responsibility and/or are involved in the formulation and implementation of national security policy. The names of these officials and officers shall compose the Standarding List of NDCP Candidates, hereafter called the List, which shall be annually kept up to date. Holders of the MNSA Degree shall recommend to the Secretary of National Defense the number of candidates for inclusion in the List from the AFP, each department, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the national government.

(b) Upon request of the Secretary of National Defense, the various Heads of Departments, offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of the National Government are hereby authorized to detail officers and employees for duty or to take any course of instruction in the College.

(c) The President of the College shall circularize to the private sector, not later than ninety (90) days prior to the opening of each course of study student quota spaces for selected executives.

(d) The College shall have a Board of Admission responsible for the screening and selection of the best qualified candidates from the Standing List of NDCP Candidates and the private sector. It shall be composed of five members to be chosen by the President of the College, three of whom shall be outstanding MNSA graduates each representing the military, civilian government and the private sector.

(e) Allowances of military and civilian personnel detailed with the College for duty therein, as well as those of students of the College, shall be fixed by the Secretary of National Defense.”

Section 5. Section 7 of the Decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 7. Graduates of the College will receive, for purposes or promotion to key and sensitive positions in the military and civil offices, preferential consideration and/or credit points in the grade or class of their respective positions.

Subject to existing AFP regulations, the following shall be complied with:

(a) Civilians who will graduate from the NDCP will receive an initial rank of Lieutenant Colonel.

(b) Civilians who will graduate from the NDCP and who are holders of a commission in the reserve force (inactive) below the rank of Lieutenant Colonel shall be promoted to Lieutenant Colonel.

(c) AFP personnel in the active service and who will graduate from the NDCP are not covered by the provisions of this paragraph.

Authority to use with honor the abbreviations MNSA after their names shall be given to all graduates of this College.”

Section 6. Section 9 of the decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 9. Such sum or sums as maybe needed to carry out the provisions of this Decree is hereby appropriated and shall be carried annually under the Department of National Defense in the General Appropriations Act.”

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office