PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 524

AMENDING SECTION 42 OF THE PHILIPPINE IMMIGRATION ACT OF 1940, AS AMENDED (PROVIDING FOR NEW FEES).

WHEREAS, under Section 42 of Commonwealth Act No. 613, otherwise known as the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940, certain specific fees are charged and collected by the Commission on Immigration and Deportation;

WHEREAS, such fees were originally fixed in 1940, then revised in 1950, thereby amending Section 42 of the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940;

WHEREAS, these fees fixed in 1950 are, by present standards, inadequate taking into account the higher cost of living obtaining in our country today;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue, of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to proclamations No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended do hereby order and decree that new fees shall be charged and collected by the Commission on Immigration and Deportation under Section 42 of the Philippine Immigration Act 1940, as amended, as follows:

Section 42. (a) In addition to the documentary stamp required by existing law, there shall be collected and paid into the Philippine Treasury the following fees for services, as indicated, for aliens seeking to enter or remain in the Philippines under the provisions of this Act:

(Olds fees)

New fees

Provided, however, that all aliens admitted as religious missionaries under this Decree shall be exempted from the payment of monthly extension fees that are due from temporary visitors.

(b) No fee shall be charged for a passport visa granted to a foreign government officials or his family, attendants, and household helpers, and employees, nor shall be a fee charged for a passport visa for a non- immigrant in transit to a destination outside the Philippines.

Any provisions of laws, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office