PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 499

DECLARING PORTIONS OF THE ERMITA-MALATE AREA AS COMMERCIAL ZONES WITH CERTAIN RESTRICTIONS.

WHEREAS, the government is committed to the promotion and development of tourism in the country, particularly in the City ofManilawhich is the hub of commercial and cultural activities in the Manila Metropolitan Area;

WHEREAS, certain portions of the districts of Ermita and Malate known as the Tourist Belt are still classified as Class “A” Residential Zones and Class “B” Residential Zones where hotels and other business establishments such as curio stores, souvenir shops, handicraft display centers and the like are not allowed under the existing zoning plan in the City of Manila;

WHEREAS, the presence of such establishments in the area would not only serve as an attraction for tourist but are dollar earning enterprises as well, which tourist areas all over the world cannot do without;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me under the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order and decree the classification as a Commercial Zone of that portion of the Ermita-Malate are bounded by Teodoro M. Kalaw, Sr. Street in the north; Taft Avenue in the east; Vito Cruz Street in the sound and Roxas Boulevard in the west. PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That no permit shall be granted for the establishment of any new warehouse or open storage depot, dump or yard, motor repair shop, gasoline service station, light industry with any machinery or funeral establishment in these areas, and PROVIDED, FURTHER, That for purposes of realty tax assessment on properties situated therein, lands and buildings used exclusively for residential purposes by the owners themselves shall remain assessed as residential properties.

All laws, ordinances, orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 28th day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 499 June 28, 1974