PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 480

CREATING A RADIATION HEALTH OFFICE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.

WHEREAS, there is no distinct government office or agency authorized to control the use of diagnostic X-Ray units, high energy machines or any radiation apparatus in medicine, industry, agriculture, research and other fields of activity except those units with radio-active sources which are controlled by the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission;

WHEREAS, the use of radiation, although beneficial to the development of the country, carries with it certain hazards and, therefore, should be properly regulated;

WHEREAS, the danger to public health posed by ionizing radiation is similar in effect to the other dangers to public health resulting from human activity; and

WHEREAS, the Department of Health, being the government agency charged with the functions of safeguarding and promoting the people’s health, should be assigned the responsibility to institute proper measures of the effective control of such radiation hazards.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Creation; Functions. There is hereby created in the Department of Health a Radiation Health Office which shall have the following functions:

a. Prescribed measures to regulate production, import and export of radiation-emitting apparatus, as well as non-ionizing radiation devices such as microwave oven, laser and other similar and related apparatus the energy emission of which does not reach the threshold required for the production of radio-active material; Provided, That equipment and devices involving the application and use of radio-active materials and any equipment or devices producing or utilizing radio-active materials which fall under regulatory jurisdiction of the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission as provided under R.A. 5207 shall not be subject to the coverage of such measures;

b. Require the registration of the above apparatus and equipment presently used in medicine or for other purposes within six months from the effectivity of this Decree;

c. Undertake the inspection of the above-described apparatus and equipment installed in private and government premises;

d. Issue rules and regulations, duly approved by the Secretary of Health, with the aim of protecting radiation workers handling or operating the above-described devices;

e. Establish and maintain a National Radiation Standard Section in a cooperative effort with the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission;

f. Assist in the training of radiation workers; and

g. Collect, analyze and disseminate information on the protection against radiation.

Section 2. Relationship with other entities. Radiation Health Office shall, in the furtherance of its functions and duties, cooperate and coordinate with governmental and private entities as well as international organizations involved in activities related to radiation.

Section 3. Appropriations. To carry out the functions of the Office herein created, there is hereby appropriated the amount of Two Hundred Thousand Pesos (P200,000.00) out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated. The same amount or such amounts as shall be needed shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act for the continued operation of the Office.

Section 4. Repealing Clause. Any provisions of law, decree, order, rules or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, revised or amended accordingly.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 480 June 06, 1974