MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1644

GRANTING ADDITIONAL POWERS TO THE PHILIPPINE COCONUT AUTHORITY.

WHEREAS, the economic well-being of a major sector of the entire population depends, to a large extent, on the viability of the coconut industry;

WHEREAS, in recognition of this economic reality, it is declared policy of the State to promote the rapid integrated development and growth of the coconut and other palm oils industry in all its aspects and to insure that the coconut farmers become direct participants in, and beneficiaries of, such growth and developments;

WHEREAS, to insure the viability, growth and development of the coconut industry, the State has undertaken a program to rationalize the coconut oil milling industry and thereby assure the coconut farmers a fair price for their copra and the consuming countries as adequate and continuous supply of copra, coconut oil and their by-products at fair and competitive prices;

WHEREAS, in order to further promote the rationalization of the coconut oil milling industry, it is necessary to grant the Philippine Coconut Authority additional powers in respect of the marketing and export of copra, coconut oil and their by-products;

NOW, THEREFORE, I. FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as follows:

Section 1. The Philippine Coconut Authority shall have full power and authority to regulate the marketing and export of copra, coconut oil and their by-products, in furtherance of the steps being taken to rationalize the coconut oil milling industry.

Section 2. In the exercise of its powers under Section 1 hereof, the Philippine Coconut Authority may initiate and implement such measures as may be necessary to attain the rationalization of the coconut oil milling industry, including, but not limited to, the following measures:

(a) Imposition of floor and/or ceiling prices for all exports of copra, coconut oil and their by-products;

(b) Prescription of quality standards;

(c) Establishment of maximum quantities for particular periods and particular markets;

(d) Inspection and survey of export shipments through an independent international superintendent or surveyor.

In the exercise of its powers hereunder, the Philippine Coconut Authority shall consult with, and be guided by, the recommendation of the coconut farmers, through corporations owned or controlled by them through the Coconut Industry Investment Fund and the private corporation authorized to be organized under Letter of Instructions No. 926.

Section 3. All exports of copra and its by-products to socialist countries and such other countries, which, heretofore, have not purchased copra and its by-products from the Philippines on a regular basis shall be undertaken by, or coursed through, the private corporation authorized to be organized under Letter of Instructions No. 926.

Section 4. The Philippine Coconut Authority shall have the power to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to fully and effectively implement this Decree.

Section 5. Whenever any person or entity willfully and deliberately violates any of the provisions of this Decree or any rule or regulation legally promulgated hereunder by the Philippine Coconut Authority, the person or persons responsible for such violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than P20,000.00 and by imprisonment of not more than five (5) years. If the offender be a corporation, partnership or a juridical person, the penalty shall be imposed on the officer or officers authorizing, permitting or tolerating the violation. Aliens found guilty of any offense shall, after having served his sentence, be immediately deported and, in the case of a naturalized citizen, his certificate of naturalization shall be canceled.

Section 6. All laws, executive and administrative orders, and rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 7. If any provision of this Decree is held unconstitutional, all other provisions shall remain valid.

Section 8. This Decree shall be effective immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office