MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1504

EXTENDING THE FRANCHISE OF THE PHILIPPINE RADIO EDUCATIONAL AND INFORMATION CENTER, INC. AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Philippine Radio Educational and Information Center, Inc. has promoted public interest with its constructive radio broadcasts in the fields of education, culture and public information;

WHEREAS, the franchise of the Philippine Radio Educational and Information Center, Inc. is expiring on June 12, 1979 and it is in the public interest that its radio broadcast operations should be allowed to continue;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order;

Section 1. The franchise of the Philippine Radio Educational and Information Center, Inc. to construct, maintain and operate, for non-profit educational, cultural and information purposes, and in the public interest, radio broadcasting and television stations as well as private fixed point-to-point relay and land based stations in the Philippines, granted by Republic Act Numbered One thousand and forty-nine as amended by Republic Act Numbered Three thousand and one hundred twenty-nine, is hereby extended for a period of twenty-five (25) years from June 12, 1979.

Section 2. The extension of franchise herein granted to the Philippine Radio Educational and Information Center, Inc. is subject to the condition that, as an entity engaged in mass media, the ownership and management thereof shall at all times be limited to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or associations wholly owned and managed by such citizens.

Section 3. In consideration of its outstanding public service in the fields of education, culture and public information, and in consideration of the equal value of the free use of its facilities including radio broadcast time by the Philippine Government, the Philippine Radio Educational, and Information Center, Inc., shall be exempt from prepayment of taxes, customs duties and other similar charges on the importations of equipment, spare parts and supplies to be actually, directly and exclusively used in and for its radio broadcast or telecast operations, as certified by the Secretary of Public Information at the instance of the President of said Philippine Radio Educational and Information Center, Inc.; Provided, That, any violation of such condition will subject the importation involved to the payment of taxes, customs duties and other similar charges at double the rates assessed.

Section 4. Programs broadcasting the Philippine Government through the facilities of the Philippine Radio Educational and Information Center, Inc. shall be identified over the air as programs of the Philippine Government which shall be solely responsible for them.

Section 5. The right of the Philippine Radio Educational and Information Center, Inc. granted under this Decree to construct, maintain and operate radio broadcasting, television and other stations, additional to those already in operation at the effectivity of this Decree, shall be subject to such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Office of the President of the Philippines.

Section 6. All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations or any part thereof which are inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked or amended accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect upon approval.

DONE in the city of Manila this 11th day of June in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office