MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1916

PENALIZING THE MOORING OF BARGES, SHIPS OR BOATS TO ANY PORTION OF BRIDGES OR SUPERSTRUCTURES OF BRIDGES.

WHEREAS, it has been observed that the indiscriminate mooring of barges, boats or ships by owners and/or operators of the same to abutments, piers and/or superstructures of bridges has caused considerable damage thereto which may result in the loss of life and/or property;

WHEREAS, the detrimental effect of such pernicious practice, if not immediately checked, will unnecessarily drain the Government of vital and substantial amount of money as a consequence of the repairs and constructions of said structures;

WHEREAS, in order to ensure the safety, longevity and effective usefulness of said abutments, piers and/or superstructures of bridges, it is imperative that the mooring of barges, boats and ships to any part thereof be strictly prohibited;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

SECTION 1. It shall be unlawful to moor barges, ships or boats to any abutment, pier and/or superstructures of bridges.

SEC 2. Any owner/operator found violating this Decree shall, upon conviction, suffer the penalty of imprisonment of from one year to two years or a fine of ₱10,000.00 or both at the discretion of the court, and shall in addition be held liable for the cost of repair/construction of the damaged portions of the bridges to the satisfaction of the government.

In case of corporations, partnerships or associations, the President, General Manager, or any other official in charge of the management thereof, as the case may be, shall suffer the penalties herein provided; and if such guilty officer is an alien, in addition to the penalty herein prescribed, he shall be deported without further proceedings on the part of the Commissioner of Immigration and Deportation.

SEC 3. Repealing Clause. — Any provision of law, decree, executive order, rule or regulation inconsistent with, or contrary to this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC 4. Effectivity . — This Decree shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its publication in the Official Gazette.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) MANUEL M. LAZARO Presidential Assistant for Legal Affairs

Source: CDAsia