PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1049

PROVIDING FOR AN INCREASE IN THE MONTHLY BASE PAY OF THE COMMISSIONED OFFICERS OF THE BUREAU OF COAST AND GEODETIC SURVEY.

WHEREAS, the commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey are deeply engaged in charting the Philippine waters to ensure the safe navigation of out territorial and internal waters and in mapping and surveying activities for various infrastructure projects thereby directly contributing to the acceleration of the economic growth and the social and political stability of the country;

WHEREAS, the commissioned service of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey is composed wholly of engineers and professionals who have undergone highly technical and specialized training in the field of charting and mapping here and/or abroad;

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen and maintain at a high level the morale and efficiency of the commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey;

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey is continually plagued with resignations and transfers of its commissioned officers whose technical skill in the handling of highly sensitive instruments and equipment and their specialized training have made them most attractive to higher paying positions in prestigious government and private agencies here and abroad; and

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 2057 provides that commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey shall receive the same base pay as those officers of corresponding grades in the Armed Forces;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The following rates of monthly base pay is hereby authorized and prescribed for commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey in each grade as indicated effective January 1, 1976; Provided, That the rates of pay hereunder prescribed shall not be the basis of (a) retirement gratuity or pension for commissioned officers retired prior to the effective date of this Decree, and (b) incentive and additional pays of the commissioned officers of the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey except longevity pay; Provided, further, That the increase in longevity pay for the year 1976 shall be subject to the availability of funds and the approval of the Secretary of National Defense.

Section 2. The Secretary of National Defense shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the intent and purpose of this Decree.

Section 3. The sum of FOUR HUNDRED TWENTY THOUSAND PESOS (P420,000.00) is hereby authorized to be appropriated out of any fund in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, in addition to the current budget to the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey and shall thereafter be incorporated in its yearly appropriations to carry into effect the provisions of this Decree:

Section 4. All provisions of existing laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect on January 1, 1976.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office