MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1760

CREATING BARANGAY NEW ERA IN QUEZON CITY

WHEREAS, the acceleration of the country’s socio-economic development is a basic objective of the government;

WHEREAS, in the achievement of this objective, the smallest political unit of government, known as the barangay, has become an effective instrument, through its faster administrative response and as a means of effecting the delivery of the services for the eleven basic needs of the people; and

WHEREAS, the residents of the proposed barangay, being in sufficient number and occupying an adequate area of territory, led by the natural community leaders among them, have clamored for the creation of the proposed barangay to insure closer supervision of the execution of developmental programs of the locality and the attainment of a self-reliant status for the community;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. That portion of Barangay Culiat in Quezon City, Metro Manila, which is bounded on the Northeast by Tandang Sora, on the East by Tandang Sora Avenue, on the Southeast by Don Mariano Marcos Avenue, on the South by Central Avenue, on the Southwest by Sitio Mabilog and Milton Hills Subdivision and on the West by Lots Nos. 689, 680, 678 and 687 of the Piedad Estate and by San Antonio Subdivision, except the property belonging to or occupied by the Claretian Order, the Philippines Assembly of the First Born and the Muslim Conference of the Philippines, is hereby detached and separated from said Barangay and is formed and constituted into a distinct and independent barangay to be known as Barangay New Era without affecting in any other manner the legal existence of the mother barangay of Culiat.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular barangays, shall be applicable to Barangay New Era.

Section 3. The present elective barangay officials of Barangay Culiat shall continue to perform their duties as such in the newly-created Barangay New Era until its barangay officials shall have been appointed by the President. The officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for barangay officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize Barangay New Era or complete its complement of government and personnel shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of Barangay New Era in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of Barangay Culiat shall be transferred by the President to the newly created Barangay upon recommendation by the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts thereof, as well as executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office