MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1416

GRANTING CONTINUING AUTHORITY TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES TO REORGANIZE THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, the organizational structure of the national government should continuously be attuned and responsive to the current needs and requirements of the national development program;

WHEREAS, there is a need to periodically review the organizational structure in order that needed administrative reforms can be expeditiously effected to attain an efficient government machinery;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to effect economy and promote efficiency in the government;

WHEREAS, the transition towards the parliamentary form of government will necessitate flexibility in the organization of the national government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the following:

1. The President of the Philippines shall have continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the National Government.

2. For this purpose, the President may, at his discretion, take the following actions:

(a) Group, coordinate, consolidate or integrate departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, instrumentalities and functions of the government;

(b) Abolish departments, offices, agencies or functions which may not be necessary, or create those which are necessary, for the efficient conduct of government functions services and activities;

(c) Transfer functions, appropriations, equipment, properties, records and personnel from one department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality to another;

(d) Create, classify, combine, split, and abolish positions; and

(e) Standardize salaries, materials and equipment.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1416 June 09, 1978