MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 2011

CONVERTING THE PARTIDO NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF GOA, PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR, INTO A STATE COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE PARTIDO STATE COLLEGE, PROVIDING FOR A BOARD OF TRUSTEES, DEFINING THE BOARD’S RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the Constitution of the Philippines directs the State to establish and maintain a complete, adequate and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 6-A promulgated on September 29, 1972, it has been declared a policy of the government to reorient the educational system toward an accelerated national economic growth and meaningful social development; and

WHEREAS, the conversion of the Partido National High School in the Municipality of Goa, Province of Camarines Sur, into a state college to be known as the Partido State College, providing for a Board of Trustees, broadening for this purpose its curricular offerings and redirecting its objectives would serve to better achieve the above goals and hasten the training and education in national development.

NOW, THEREFORE I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree to be part of the laws of the land the following:

SECTION 1. The present Partido National High School in the Municipality of Goa, Province of Camarines Sur, is hereby converted into a state college to be known as the Partido State College, hereinafter referred to as the State College.

SEC 2. The State College shall primarily provide professional and technical instruction and training in the art and sciences. It shall also promote research, advance studies, and progressive leadership in its fields of specialization.

SEC 3. No student shall be denied admission to the State College by reason of sex, ethnic consideration or religious beliefs or affiliation.

SEC 4. The head of the State College shall be known as the President of the Partido State College. His salary shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees which shall be comparable to that being received by the head of similar institutions of like standing, subject to Presidential Decree No. 985 and other pertinent budget and compensation laws.

The powers and duties of the President of the Partido State College in addition to those specifically provided in this Decree, shall be those usually pertaining to the office of the President of a state college.

SEC 5. The governing body of the State College shall be the Board of Trustees which shall be composed of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports as Chairman, the President of the State College as Vice-Chairman and the following as members: Director, National Economic and Development Authority; President of the Alumni Association; the Government for the Province of Camarines Sur and two prominent citizens who are bona fide residents of Camarines Sur with management and technical expertise, subject to the provision of Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 1437.

SEC 6. A quorum of the Board of Trustees shall consist of a majority of all the members holding office at the time of the meeting. All processes against the State College shall be served on the President of the State College or his duly authorized representative.

SEC 7. The members of the Board of Trustees shall not receive compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in their attendance of meetings or other official functions authorized by the Board subject to existing budget laws in honoraria and allowances.

SEC 8. The Board of Trustees shall have the following powers and duties in addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise of all powers of a corporation as provided in Section thirty-six of Batas Pambansa Bilang 68 otherwise known as “The Corporation Code of the Philippines”:

a) To enact for the government of the State College such rules and regulations, not contrary to law, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and the functions of the State College;

b) To receive and appropriate for the purpose specified by law such sums as may be provided for the support of the State College;

c) To receive in trust, legacies, gifts, and donations of real or personal property of all kinds, and to administer the same for the benefits of the State College or for aid to any student in accordance with the directions and instructions of the donor, and in default thereof, in such manner as the Board may in its discretion determine. Such donations shall be exempt from all taxes and shall be considered as deductible items from the income tax of the donors;

d) To approve the curricula and rules of discipline drawn by the Administrative and Academic Councils as the State College may provide;

e) To confer degrees upon successful candidates for graduation, to award honorary degrees upon person in recognition or eminence in any field of specialization of the State College, and to authorize the President of the College to award certificates for completion of non-degree programs;

f) Subject to Civil Service Laws, to confirm the appointments of a vice-president, deans, directors, registrar, heads of departments, professors and other official and employees of the State College made by the President, to fix their compensation subject to Presidential Decree 985 and other pertinent budget and compensation laws, hours of service, and such other duties, and conditions as the Board may promulgate, in accordance with the provisions of existing laws; and to remove them for cause after investigation and hearing;

g) To establish chairs in the State College and to provide fellowships for qualified faculty members and scholarships to deserving students;

h) To authorize the construction or repair of its buildings, machineries, equipment and other facilities and the purchase of necessary supplies, materials, and equipment, any provision of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding: Provided , however , That the funds for the purpose shall come from the authorized appropriation of the State College; and Provided , further , that it may acquire loans for the improvement thereon.

SEC 9. There shall be an Administrative Council of the State College consisting of the President of the College as Chairman, and the vice-president, deans, directors and other officials of equal rank as members whose duty shall be to implement policies governing the administration, management, and development planning of the State College subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.

SEC 10. There shall be an Academic Council of the State College with the President of the State College as Chairman and all the members of the faculty of the State College as members.

The body of instructors and professors of the State College shall constitute the faculty of the State College.

The Academic Council shall have the power to prescribe the curricula and rules of discipline of the College subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. It shall fix the requirements for admission to the State College as well as for graduation and the conferring of degrees, subject to the review of the Board of Trustees. The Council shall likewise have the power to recommend the students to be recipients of degrees. Through the President of the State College or his duty authorized representative, the Council shall have the disciplinary power over the students of the State College within the limits prescribed by the rules of discipline as approved by the Board of Trustees.

SEC 11. Members of the faculty of the State College shall be covered by appropriate civil service rules and regulations. No religious or political test shall be applied nor shall religious or political opinion or affiliation be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of the faculty members of the State College: Provided , however , that no member or faculty shall teach for or against any particular church or religious sect or shall attempt directly or indirectly, under penalty of dismissal by the Board of Trustees, to influence students or any person in the State College towards any ideology, political or otherwise which may agitate the overthrow of the duly constituted government.

SEC 12. The Treasurer of the Philippines shall be the ex-officio treasurer of the State College. All accounts and expenses of the State College shall be audited by the Commission on Audit or its duly authorized representative.

SEC 13. The yearly appropriation of the Partido National High School herein converted into Partido State College shall henceforth become the appropriation for the operation of the College and shall be included in the Annual General Appropriation Act, subject to such adjustments and/or programming as the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports may recommend.

SEC 14. On or before the fifteenth day of the second month after the opening of regular classes each year, the Board of Trustees shall file with the office of the President of the Philippines through the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, a detailed report setting forth the progress, conditions, and needs of the State College.

SEC 15. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports shall take such steps as are necessary for the immediate implementation of this Act.

SEC 16. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) MANUEL M. LAZARO Presidential Assistant for Legal Affairs

Source: CDAsia