PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 567

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 182 DATED MAY 6, 1973, SO AS TO EXTEND THE DRAFT SERVICE OR PERIOD OF CONSCRIPTION OF TRAINEES, INTO SELECTIVE MILITARY SERVICE, FROM 12 MONTHS TO 18 MONTHS.

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 182 dated May 6, 1973 provide for the conscription of trainees into selective emergency military service for a period not exceeding twelve months after completion of their training and service tour as prescribe under Section Fifty Three of the National Defense Act, as amended by Republic Act No. 4091;

WHEREAS, consistent with the objective of the National Defense Act, employment and utilization of trainees during their service tour and draft service shall be in positions which require skills or qualifications applicable and in demand in the private sector;

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide draftees and trainees with the needed training along vocational courses for gainful employment after they are mustered out of the service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby amend Presidential Decree No. 182 to read as follows:

“That after the completion of the training and service tour of each trainee as prescribed under Section Fifty Three of the National Defense Act, as amended by Republic Act No. 4091, each trainee may thereafter be drafted into selective emergency military service for a period of not exceeding eighteen months and any selected draftee who refuses to render such service shall be punished as a Military Tribunal created under General Order No. 8 may direct. Provided, that within the last six months of conscriptive service, a draftee not enlisted into the Regular Force shall be given the opportunity to undertake a viable training program wherein he could acquire knowledge and skills essentially needed in obtaining a gainful employment after he is mustered out of the AFP. In case of vacancies for enlistment in the Regular Force, the best qualified draftees shall be given priority in filling up such vacancies; PROVIDED, that a draftee shall receive the base pay and allowances equivalent to that of a private in the regular force; and if employed for combat operations, he shall be entitled to all benefits similar to that received by any member of the regular force; PROVIDED, further, that for every year of training and service, to include the emergency military selective service herein provided for, a draftee shall receive a separation gratuity of not less than one month salary upon the condition that a period of six months shall be considered a complete year for purposes of this gratuity; PROVIDED, finally, that a draftee or those who rendered service as contemplated above shall be given priority in appointments in the government service, commensurate to his training, experience, and educational qualifications, provisions of the Civil Service Law to the contrary notwithstanding.”

All laws, rules and regulations which are inconsistent herewith are amended or modified accordingly.

The Secretary of National Defense shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Decree.

This Decree shall take effect immediately

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 567 October 18, 1974