PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1132

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CALANOGAS IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR.

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of certain barangays in the municipalities of Pagayawan and Pualas, Lanao del Sur, with the conformity of prominent and ruling community leaders of the locality, as well as the local elective officials, to form their barangays into a new municipality, so as to accelerate the pace of development of the areas affected; and

WHEREAS, the creation of the new municipality will redound and contribute greatly not only to the maintenance of peace and order but also to the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Barangays Pantaon, Kabasaran, Punud, Lininding, Inodaran, Luguna, Tulatula, Taguranao, Kaoring, Panggawalupa, Baclayan, Dilasun, Bago-Ingud, Dolangan, Kalanaan, Miyanocod, Nginger, East Madaya, Inoma, Tambak, Bumbaran, Lumbakaingud and Canibongan in the municipality of Pagayawan and Barangays Gas, Kapayoran, Maimbalawag, Lumaginding, Pindolunan, Lodas, Bobongaranao, Tiyangel, Bubonga-Koden, Pagalongan, Posdan, Tulatula, Kalibagat, Lumas, Tapocan, Taguranao, Madaya, Barak, Linao, Loya, Calalanoan Dadowan, Ginawagawi-i, Paso-ay, Inaturan, Magatul, Piksan, Pimping, Tamosan, Minabay, Pantar, Taliboka, Panggawalupa, Marinaut, Papandayan, Bowaan, Di mayong, Katipunan, Kundi, and Salaga-an in the municipality of Pualas are hereby separated from their respective mother municipalities and constituted into a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Calanogas without in any manner affecting the legal existence of the municipalities of Pagayawan and Pualas.

Section 2. The seat of government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Calalanoan.

Section 3. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, nor or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities shall be applicable to the newmunicipality ofCalanogas.

Section 4. The present elective officials of the municipality of Pagayawan shall perform their duties as such in the newly created municipality until the officials of the latter shall have been duly appointed by the President and they shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the election for provincial and municipal officials following the issuance of this decree, and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the municipality of Calanogas shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 5. Upon effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the newmunicipality ofCalanogas in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the municipalities of Pagayawan and Pualas shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 6. All laws or parts of laws as well as executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office