MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1780

PROVIDING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE ACADEMY WITH AN ACADEMIC CHAPTER AND EXPANDING ITS CURRICULAR PROGRAMS.

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree Numbered Eleven Hundred and Eighty Four, otherwise known as the Integrated National Police Personnel Professionalization Law of 1977, promulgated on 26 August 1977, has established the Philippine National Police Academy as a service facility for the training and education of the members of the Integrated National Police with the view of professionalizing the personnel in every level of command thereof;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the Philippine National Police Academy be provided with an academic charter in order enhance its organizational growth and development and to better achieve the goals of professionalization of the Integrated National Police;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree to be part of the laws of the land, the following:

Section 1. Title. This Decree shall be known as the “Philippine National Police Academy Charter of 1981.”

Section 2. Status. The Philippine National Police Academy, as established under Section Nineteen of Presidential Decree Numbered Eleven Hundred and Eighty Four, otherwise known as the Integrated National Police Personnel Professionalization Law of 1977, promulgated on 26 August 1977, is hereby declared as the premier educational institution of the Integrated National Police, hereinafter referred to in this Decree as the Academy.

Section 3. Academic Programs. The Academy shall primarily develop and conduct professional, specialized and technological education in public safety and social defense and shall promote continuing research, advanced studies and progressive leadership in its areas of specialization.

In addition to its regular academic programs, the Academy shall offer opportunity or short-term training courses in its areas of specialization to meet the needs of personnel of the Integrated National Police.

Section 4. Cadetship Program. The Academy shall also be responsible for the development, conduct and administration of the Cadetship Program of the Integrated National Police, with the view of providing the preparatory education necessary for the development of potential officers imbued with the professional competence and management leadership qualities and skills compatible with the dynamic role of the Integrated National Police in public safety and social defense.

Participants in this Cadetship Program shall be known as cadets, whose qualifications and standards for selection, appointment, pay and allowances, benefits and other privileges shall be determined by the Director General in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations.

Cadets herein shall collectively constitute the Corps of Cadets of the Integrated National Police.

Section 5. Academic Degrees and Proficiency Certificates or Diplomas. In the conduct of its academic programs, the Academy shall have the power and authority to grant and confer academic degrees and/or proficiency certificates or diplomas and such other appropriate privileges to successful participants thereof, subject to the approval of the Minister of National Defense and the Minister of Education and Culture, for proper accreditation. Provided, however, that graduates of the Philippine National Police Academy of any prescribed course of instruction equivalent to an undergraduate course having a duration of not less than two academic years prior to the approval of this Decree shall be entitled to the privileges provided herein.

Section 6. Rules and Regulations. The Director General, subject to the approval of the Minister of National Defense, shall prescribe such rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Decree.

Section 7. Repealing Clause. All laws, decrees, or executive orders contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 8. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Decree is held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions hereof shall not be affected thereby.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office