PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1147

EXTENDING THE INSURANCE COVERAGE PROVIDED UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 4898, AS AMENDED, TO THE MEMBERS OF ALL SANGGUNIANG BAYAN, AUTHORIZING THE APPROPRIATIONS OF FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Sangguniang Bayan, organized in the municipal, city, and provincial levels throughout the country pursuant to Presidential Decrees No. 824 and 826, provides grassroots participation of the citizenry in the affairs of the Government;

WHEREAS, the members of the Sangguniang Bayan have proved to be strong pillars in the actual workings of our democratic processes, giving the people a great voice in the administration of their local affairs and a sound perception of social, economic, and political problems and the solutions thereof for the good of the common weal;

WHEREAS, in the implementation of its declared policy to afford protection to labor, the State has already extended social-security and insurance benefits to practically all government workers;

WHEREAS, some members of the Sangguniang Bayan who are unselfishly dedicating themselves to the service of the country and, therefore, are as deserving of such benefits, have not as yet been brought within the beneficial mantle of the Republic Act No. 4898, as amended:

WHEREAS, it is only equitable and a recognition of their laudable work that members of the Sangguniang Bayan should enjoy at least the same benefits as are enjoyed by barangay captains at present;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Duly appointed or elected and qualified members of the Sangguniang Bayan of a province; city, or municipality shall henceforth be entitled to the benefits accorded to barangay captains under Sections two, three, and four of Republic Act Numbered Four Thousand Eight Hundred Ninety-Eight, as amended, subject to the same conditions therein contained: Provided, however, That, if a member is eligible for coverage both under Republic Act Numbered Four Thousand Eight Hundred Ninety-Eight and this Decree, his contributions and benefits shall be determined under this Decree.

Section 2. For the insurance benefits herein provided to members of the Sangguniang Bayan, the National Government of the Republic of the Philippines shall pay an annual premium of Fifteen Pesos for every member to the Government Service Insurance System.

Section 3. The sum of Five hundred Thousand Pesos is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the payment of the premium provided in the preceding section for the first year of coverage from and after the date of the approval of this Decree. Every year thereafter, there shall be authorized to be appropriated annually and included in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the amount of Five Hundred Thousand Pesos or such amount as may be necessary to pay the succeeding annual premiums.

Section 4. The System shall undertake periodic valuations of the insurance funds provided under this Decree and under Republic Act Numbered Four Thousand Eight Hundred Ninety-Eight, as amended, and, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines, make such readjustments in the rates of premiums as shall be necessary in order to meet the liabilities of the System under the said funds.

Section 5. The System shall be empowered to prescribe and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Decree.

Section 6. All provisions of law, decrees, and executive orders inconsistent with this Decree are hereby amended or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect upon its approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office