PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1018

LIMITING THE OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF MASS MEDIA TO CITIZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the Constitution, to protect the integrity and sovereignty of the Philippines, provides among other things, that the ownership and management of mass media shall be limited to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or associations wholly owned and managed by such citizens;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that this constitutional mandate be implemented by law, with appropriate sanctions, to ensure that it is respected and carried out at all times;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The term “mass media” refers to the print medium of communication, which includes all newspapers, periodicals, magazines, journals, and publications and all advertising therein, and billboards, neon signs and the like, and the broadcast medium of communication, which includes radio and television broadcasting in all their aspects and all other cinematographic or radio promotions and advertising.

Section 2. The ownership and management of mass media shall be limited to citizens of the Philippines, or to corporations or associations wholly owned and managed by such citizens.

Section 3. Any foreigner or alien residing in the Philippines and any foreign corporation doing business in the Philippines who prints or publishes, or causes to be printed or published, abroad any newspaper, magazine, periodical or other publication but circulates or causes the circulation of the same in the Philippines shall be covered by or be subject to the provisions of this Decree.

Section 4. Any person who publishes a newspaper, magazine, periodical or other publication abroad and desires to circulate it in the Philippines shall do so through a Filipino citizen or a firm or association wholly owned or controlled by citizens of the Philippines, and the said distributor shall be responsible for compliance with any requirements of Philippine law, rules or regulations and be liable for any criminal or civil action against the publication.

Section 5. Violation of the provisions of this decree shall subject the person or corporation guilty of such violation to cancellation of its permit. In addition, any person found guilty of violating this Decree shall be punished by imprisonment of from six (6) months to five (5) years or a fine of Ten Thousand (P10,000) Pesos, or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the Court.

If the violation is committed by a corporation, the penalty shall be imposed on the officers or employees thereof who were responsible for or who committed the violation.

Section 6. All laws, decrees, orders, instructions and rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1018 September 22, 1976