PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 271

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 232 CREATING A PHILIPPINE COCONUT AUTHORITY

WHEREAS, it is necessary to amend Presidential Decree No. 232 creating a Philippine Coconut Authority in order to further strengthen the coconut industry.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972 and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order and decree the amendment to Presidential Decree No. 232 as follows:

Section 1. Section 4 of Presidential Decree No. 232 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 4. Governing Board. The Authority shall be governed by a Board of nine members who shall meet as often as necessary, composed of:

(a) The Chairman;

(b) The Vice-Chairman;

(c) The Chairman, National Science Development Board;

(d) The Undersecretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources;

(e) The Undersecretary of Trade;

(f) The Director-General, NEDA or his representative;

(g) The Chairman, United Coconut Association of the Philippines;

(h) The President, Philippine Coconut Producers Federation; and

(i) The Chairman of the Board, Coconut Investment Company.

The Chairman and the Administrator of the Authority shall be appointed by the President. The Administrator of the Authority shall automatically be the Vice-Chairman.

Section 2. Section 5 of the same decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 5. Management. The management of the Authority shall be vested in an Administrator, who shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) To direct and manage the affairs and business of the Authority, in accordance with policies and plans enunciated by the Board.

(b) To recommend and, upon approval by the Board, to establish and maintain an organization with specific functions and responsibilities for each operating unit;

(c) To appoint and fix the number, with the approval of the Board, of such officials and employees of the Authority as may be necessary for the proper discharge of its functions and responsibilities, and with the approval likewise of the Board, to remove, suspend and otherwise discipline, for just cause, any subordinate personnel thereof;

(d) To prepare and submit thirty days after the close of each fiscal year an annual report to the President, and such periodic reports of activities as may be required from time to time; and

(e) To perform such other duties as may be designed to him by the Board from time to time.

Section 3. All laws, executive and administrative orders, rules and regulations, inconsistent with the foregoing provisions, are hereby repealed, or amended accordingly.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 271, August 09, 1973