PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1139

CREATING THE POSITION OF UNDERSECRETARY OF EDUCATION AND CULTURE FOR NON-FORMAL EDUCATION

WHEREAS, non-formal education as a means of providing learning to the sector of the population who are not in a position to avail themselves of the facilities of formal education, is fast gaining support and acceptance among the people;

WHEREAS, various agencies of the government are now implementing non-formal education programs as part of the government-wide campaign to upgrade manpower skills for industry, improve the literacy of the large masses of the people, and reorient them towards the new values posed by development;

WHEREAS, despite the efforts of these agencies much is yet be done to achieve progress in non-formal education which would make it as least comparable to formal education;

WHEREAS, there is a further need to insure utmost coordination of the non-formal programs of various government agencies by way of rationalizing and integrating these efforts.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order the following:

Section 1. There shall be created in the Department of Education and Culture the position of Undersecretary of Education and Culture with overall responsibility for the non-formal education program of the Department.

Section 2. It shall likewise be the responsibility of the Undersecretary for Non-formal Education to establish linkages with institutions with similar programs, both government and non-government, to assure effective and integrated implementation of these programs.

Section 3. Immediately after his appointment, the Undersecretary for Non-formal Education shall make an overall assessment of the existing non-formal education programs and submit his report with recommendations to the Secretary of Education and Culture.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office