PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 132

AMENDING PART IX ON TRADE AND TOURISM OF THE INTEGRATED REORGANIZATION PLAN RELATIVE TO THE PHILIPPINE TOURISM COMMISSION

WHEREAS, under the Integrated Reorganization Plan, there is created a Philippine Tourism Commission under the Department of Trade and Tourism composed of the Commissioner of Tourism as Chairman, the Undersecretaries of Trade and Tourism and Foreign Affairs as ex-officio members and six members who shall be appointed by the President from among nominees of the following trade organizations: (a) Trade organization of hotel enterpreneurs and restauranteurs; (b) Trade organization of travel agencies and tour operators; (c) Trade organization of land transportation operators; (d) Trade organization of cottage industry producers and/or distributors; (e) Trade organization of air carriers; and (f) Trade organization of sea carriers;

WHEREAS, this Commission shall not exercise adjudicative functions but shall perform purely line activities to promote tourism at the domestic and international levels;

WHEREAS, such functions can be more judiciously and effectively exercised by a single-headed agency;

WHEREAS, the expertise available among representatives of selected trade organizations is considered critical in the economical, efficient and effective implementation of tourism activities; and

WHEREAS, such expertise can be availed of through direct consultation with said representatives in planning and program development for tourism.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order and decree:

1. The Philippine Tourism Commission is reorganized from a multi-headed to a single-headed body. It shall be headed by a Commissioner of Tourism who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines from among persons of proven executive competence and experience in the field of tourism development, promotion or operation.

2. The Philippine Tourism Commission shall be under the direct line supervision of the Secretary of Trade and Tourism.

3. An Advisory Body, to give advice and assistance to the Philippine Tourism Commission, is created. It shall be composed of representatives of the following trade organizations: (1) hotels, (2) restaurants, (3) air carriers, (4) travel agencies and tour operators, (5) cottage industry producers and/or distributors, (6) sea carriers, (7) land transportation operators, and (8) banker’s association who shall be entitled to such per diems and allowances as may be authorized: Provided, That the Commissioner of Tourism, with the approval of the Secretary of Trade and Tourism, may designate representatives from other trade organizations as may be considered necessary, in rendering advice and assistance to the Philippine Tourism Commission, the members of this advisory body shall be exempt from the pertinent provisions of the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Act.

4. All functions of the Philippine Tourism Commission as contained in the Integrated Reorganization Plan together with applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary are transferred to the Philippine Tourism Commission as organized under this decree.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office