PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 86-A

STRENGTHENING AND DEFINING THE ROLE OF BARANGAYS (CITIZENS ASSEMBLIES)

WHEREAS, on the basis of preliminary and initial reports from the field as gathered from barangays (citizens assemblies) that have so far been established, the people would like to decide for themselves questions or, issues, both local and national, affecting their day-to-day lives and future;

WHEREAS, the barangays (citizens assemblies) would like themselves to be the vehicle for expressing the views of the people on important issues;

WHEREAS, such barangays (citizens assemblies) desire that they be given legal status and due recognition as constituting the genuine, legitimate and valid expression of the popular will; and

WHEREAS, the people would like the citizens assemblies to conduct immediately a referendum on certain specified questions such as the ratification of the new Constitution, continuance, of martial law, the convening of Congress on January 22, 1973, and the elections in November 1973 pursuant to the 1935 Constitution.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, do hereby declare as part of the law of the land the following:

1. The present barangays (citizens assemblies) are created under Presidential Decree No. 86 dated December 31, 1972, shall constitute the base for citizen participation in governmental affairs and their collective views shall be considered in the formulation of national policies or programs and, wherever practicable, shall be translated into concrete and specific decision;

2. Such barangays (citizens assemblies) shall consider vital national issues not confronting the country, like the holding of the plebiscite on the new Constitution, the continuation of martial rule, the convening of Congress on January 22, 1973, and the holding of elections in November 1973, and others in the future, which shall serve as guide or basis for action or decision by the national government;

3. The barangays (citizens assemblies) shall conduct between January 10 and 15, 1973, a referendum on important national issues, including those specified in paragraph 2 hereof, and submit the results thereof to the Department of Local Governments and Community Development immediately thereafter, pursuant to the express will of the people as reflected in the reports gathered from the many thousands of barangays (citizens assemblies) throughout the country.

4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 86-A, January 05, 1973