PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1009

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TALAYAN IN THE PROVINCE OF MAGUINDANAO

WHEREAS, the fundamental aim of the government is to develop the entire country thru socio-economic upliftment of the inhabitants especially in this period of economic dislocation of our people;

WHEREAS, the primordial aim of development can be best achieved by the creation of local government units which could, through faster administrative response, greatly contribute to the social, educational, cultural and economic needs of our people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree and make as part of the laws of the land:

Section 1. The former barrios (now barangays) of Ahan, Muti, Bagan, Lumbayao, Tamar, Tambunan I, Tambunan II, Kalumamis, Sampao, Fugotan, Boboguiron, Muslim, Marader, Kidate, South Binangga, North Binangga, Katibpuan, Damabalk, Nunangan, Brar, Talayan, Fukol, Lanting, Linamonan, Macasampan, Kateman, Midtimbang, and Timbaluan in the municipality of Datu Piang and the Former barrios (now barangays) of Talitay, Kuden, Gadungan, Mangay, Bintan, Pageda, Makadayon, Kilalan, Kiladap, Adaon and Mapayag in the municipality of Dinaig, all in the province of Maguindanao, are hereby separated from their respective municipalities and constituted into a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Talayan.

Section 2. The seat of government of the Municipality of Talayan shall be at the former barrio (now barangay) Midtimbang.

Section 3. The present elective officials of the Municipality of Datu Piang shall perform their duties as such in the newly created municipality until the officials of the latter shall have duly appointed by the President and shall have qualified, and they shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the election for provincial and municipal officials following the issuance of this decree, and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Other officials and employees necessary in the organization and operation of the municipal government shall be appointed in the manner provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. All laws, decrees, executive orders, ordinances, rules and regulations, or parts thereto, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1009 September 22, 1976