Office of the President Malacañang, Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1420

AMENDING P.D. NO. 899 REORGANIZING THE BUDGET COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the Budget Commission was reorganized by P.D. No. 899;

WHEREAS, the additional responsibilities of the Budget Commission require that its organization be further strengthened;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Section 2 of P.D. No. 899 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 2. The Commission shall be headed by the Commissioner of the Budget, who shall serve at the pleasure of the President. He shall be assisted by two Deputy Commissioners who shall be career administrator.

The Commissioner of the Budget shall exercise general supervision over the Offices and Services of the Budget Commission and may, in addition and with the approval of the President, render advice and consultancy services to agencies of government and government owned or controlled corporations, and to receive such allowances for such services as may be duly authorized, any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding.”

Section 2. Sec. 3 of P.D. No. 899 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 3. The Commission shall carry out its functions through the following Offices, Services and Staff: (a) National Government Budget Operations Office, (b) Local Governments and Government Corporations Budget Office, (c) National Accounting Office, (d) Management Office, (e) Office of Compensation and Position Classification, (f) Fiscal Planning Service, (g) Financial and Administrative Service, (h) Training and Information Service, (i) Budget Technical Service, (j) Data Processing Service, (k) Legislative Service and (l) Regional Offices.

Section 3. Sec. 14 of P.D. No. 899 is hereby to read as follows:

“Sec. 14. The Legislative Service shall be responsible for providing assistance in the preparation of the national budget proposals during the budget authorization process and generally for legal services in the operations of the Commission.”

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June 1978 in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1420 June 09, 1978