MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1947

TO FURTHER ENCOURAGE THE PRODUCTION OF RICE, CORN AND OTHER PRIORITY CROPS

WHEREAS, self-sufficiency in food and other agricultural food commodities is a primary concern of the state;

WHEREAS, in line with the agricultural production program of the government, it is necessary to provide incentives for the production of rice, corn and other priority crops to the entire agricultural sector to encourage participation in the production of such crops by devoting uncultivated lands or lands planted to crops other than rice and corn to the production of these vital food commodities;

WHEREAS, it is also necessary to allay the underlying fear on the part of the landowners that lands which are planted to crops other than rice or corn but shifted to the production of rice, corn and other priority crops will be covered by the land transfer program under P.D. 27;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as follows:

SECTION 1. Any private agricultural land, whether classified as landed estate or not, presently idle or devoted to crops other than rice or corn but suited to the production of rice, corn and other priority crops, which may now or hereafter be planted to or intercropped with rice, corn and other priority crops shall not be covered by the land transfer program as embodied in P.D. 27, as amended.

SECTION 2. For purposes of implementing this Decree, the Ministry of Agriculture and Food shall certify as to the previous planting of all affected lands and the shift to the hereinabove designated crops.

SECTION 3. The Ministry of Agrarian Reform and the Ministry of Agriculture and Food shall jointly promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement this Decree.

SECTION 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia