PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 399

LIMITING THE USE OF A STRIP OF ONE THOUSAND METERS OF A LAND ALONG ANY EXISTING, PROPOSED OR ON-GOING PUBLIC HIGHWAY OR ROAD, UNTIL THE GOVERNMENT SHALL HAVE A COMPETENT STUDY AND HAVE FORMULATED A COMPREHENSIVE AND INTEGRATED LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN.

WHEREAS, it becomes imperative to limit the use of all lands of the public domain within a strip of one thousand (1,000) meters along existing, proposed or on-going public highway or road for the purpose of formulating a comprehensive land use and development plan;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to limit the use of these lands in favor of human settlement sites, land reform, relocation of squatters from congested urban areas, tourism development, agro-industrial estates, environmental protection and improvement, infrastructure and other vital projects to support the socio-economic development program of the New Society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Any provision of law, decree, or order to the contrary notwithstanding, all lands of the public domain within a strip of one thousand (1,000) meters along any existing, proposed or on-going public highway or road outside existing towns cities and settlements are withdrawn from settlement or sale until an appropriate government agency shall have made a competent study and formulated a comprehensive and integrated land use and development plan for such lands.

Section 2. These lands of the public domain within the strip of one thousand meters along said public highways or roads shall be first available for human settlement sites, land reform, relocation of squatters from congested urban areas, tourism development, agro-industrial estates, environmental protection and improvement, infrastructure and other vital projects in support of the socio-economic development program of the Government.

Section 3. Likewise, all lands owned by private persons within the strip of one thousand meters along existing, proposed or on-going public highways or roads shall first be available for human settlement sites, land reform, relocation of squatters from congested urban areas, tourism development, agro-industrial estates, environmental protection and improvement, infrastructure and other vital projects in support of the socio-economic development program of the Government. The owners of these lands shall not develop or otherwise introduce improvements thereon without previous approval from the proper government agency, who shall in this case be the Chairman of the Human Settlements and Planning Commission.

Section 4. The Chairman of the Human Settlements and Planning Commission shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement this Decree.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 399 February 28, 1974