MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1435

“AUTHORIZING THE BUREAU OF SOILS TO SUPERVISE, REGULATE AND CONTROL THE ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATIONS OF ALL SOIL LABORATORIES IN THE PHILIPPINES”

WHEREAS, the present thrust of government is centered on increasing food production for our growing population as well as commercial crops for dollar earnings, etc.;

WHEREAS, intensification of food production is premised on the proper identification of production inputs as fertilizers, soil amendments, and high-yielding varieties;

WHEREAS, the accurate and timely determination of soil fertility expressed in terms of fertilizer and soil amendment requirements can adequately be provided by soil testing laboratories;

WHEREAS, improper identification and utilization of the aforementioned production inputs will result in depressed yields and/or excessive costs thereby causing low farm productivity detrimental to small farmers as well as to the national economy;

WHEREAS, there is a need to standardize soil testing methodologies, integrate and coordinate soil laboratory activities for maximum efficient utilization of resources;

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Soils is by law, the agency responsible for the maintenance and operation of soil laboratories throughout the country and possesses the technical expertise and facilities to adequately execute such services;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the following:

Section 1. Title . — This decree shall hereinafter be referred to as P.D. No. 1435 “Authorizing the Bureau of Soils to Supervise, Regulate and Control the Establishment and Operations of all Soil Laboratories in the Philippines”.

Section 2 . Additional Powers and Functions of the Bureau of Soils . — The Bureau of Soils shall have the following additional powers and functions so as to be able to carry out the objectives of this Decree:

a. Formulate and set comprehensive guidelines for the establishment of soil laboratories in the Philippines;

b. Formulate and establish soil testing standards and methodologies;

c. Supervise and coordinate the technical operations of all private and government soil laboratories;

d. Assist and integrate the soil testing activities of the private sector with that of the government sector;

e. Call on any department, bureau, office, agency and instrumentalities of the government in the form of personnel, facilities and other resources as the need arises in the performance of its functions;

f. Establish data banking system for efficient technological transfer and data utilization;

g. Grant licenses and impose fees on private soil laboratories; and

h. Perform such other functions as may be necessary to attain the objectives of this Decree.

Establishment of any government soil laboratory will be allowed only upon the recommendation of the Bureau of Soils and the approval of the Secretary of Agriculture.

Section 3 . Power to Issue Rules and Regulations to Implement the Decree . — The Bureau of Soils is hereby authorized to issue or to promulgate rules and regulations to implement and carry out the purpose and provisions of this Decree.

Section 4 . Appropriations . — The Commissioner of the Budget is hereby directed to appropriate immediately the amount of One Million Pesos (₱1,000,000) to the Bureau of Soils for purposes of carrying out this Decree. Additional funding needed by the Bureau of Soils shall be submitted to the President of the Philippines, through the regular Budget process, for consideration and inclusion in the annual Appropriations Act.

Any provisions of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Bureau of Soils may receive and retain for its operation, grant, subsidies, donations, or contributions from any entity.

Section 5 . Separability Clause . — The provisions of this Decree are hereby declared to be separable, and in the event any one or more provisions are held unconstitutional, the validity of other provisions shall not be affected.

Section 6 . Repealing Clause . — All laws, decrees, acts, executive orders, ordinances, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 7 . Effectivity . — This Decree shall take effect upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia