MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1541

ESTABLISHING THE LUNGSOD SILANGAN MENTAL HEALTH CENTER AND PROVIDING FOR THE 5-YEAR DECENTRALIZATION PROGRAM OF THE NATIONAL MENTAL HOSPITAL AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the present National Mental Hospital located in the core of the New Metro Manila Area does not blend with the plans, programs and concept of the Metro Manila Commission;

WHEREAS, the present National Mental Hospital has been designed and constructed to accommodate properly 3,000 patients while the present hospital population is 10,000 patients; and

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to relocate, improve and expand the facilities of the National Mental Hospital alongside with countryside development in order that the mental health needs of all the people throughout the country could be attended to promptly and efficiently.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Creation. There is hereby established a health center to be known as the Lungsod Silangan Mental Health Center under the supervision of the Department of Health.

Section 2. Organization. The Center shall be headed by a chief of Hospital assisted by one or more assistant chiefs and such staffs and operating units as may be organized pursuant to law.

Section 3. Objectives and Functions. The Center shall:

a. Provide treatment, care and rehabilitation of the mentally-ill and emotionally-disturbed people;

b. Promote good mental health and help prevent mental disorders;

c. Train mental health professionals and sub-professionals; and

d. Conduct researches on mental illness and mental health.

Section 4. Creation of Regional Mental Health Centers.

(1) There shall be created regional mental health centers in the twelve (12) health regions of the country within a period of five years.

(2) The present National Mental Health Hospital shall be retained for purposes of training and research in Mental Health.

Section 5. A mental hospital for the Criminal Insane is hereby created under the supervision of the Secretary of Health.

Section 6. Funds and Resources. (1) The initial outlay for the establishment of the Lungsod Silangan Mental Health Center shall come for the Metro-Manila Commission Funds, Calamity fund of the Office of the President, a loan for the GSIS and the allocation in the annual General Appropriations Act for the Center.

(2) The infrastructure program for the Regional Mental Hospitals and the Mental Health hospital for criminal insane shall be included in the annual appropriations of the Bureau of Public Works and their operation and maintenance shall be under their respective regional health offices.

Section 7. Project Implementation. The Project Management Staff of the Department of Health created under Presidential Decree No. 568 is hereby authorized to undertake and supervise the implementation of the projects in coordination with the National Mental Health Hospital authorities.

Section 8. The Secretary of Health is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the Government of such assistance as may be necessary to effectively implement this Decree.

Section 9. All laws or parts of laws inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

Section 10. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1541 June 11, 1978