MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1550

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SARANGANI IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO DEL SUR.

WHEREAS, the fundamental aim of the state is the hasten up the pace of economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the primordial aim of development can only be effectively implemented by the creation of local government units which could, through faster administrative response, greatly contribute to the social, educational, cultural and economic needs of our people;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the proposed municipality with the conformity of all the local officials to create the proposed municipality so as to attain a closer supervision of the execution of the development programs of the locality; and

WHEREAS, the new municipality will become a self-reliant community once intensified government projects are made in line with the declared policy of the government to uplift the socio-economic well-being of the residents therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The islands of Sarangani and Balut, both in the Municipality of Jose Abad Santos, Province of Davao del Sur, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Sarangani without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother municipality of Jose Abad Santos. The seat of the government of the newly-created municipality shall be in Barangay Mabila, in the island of Balut.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the Municipality of Sarangani.

Section 3. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Jose Abad Santos shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly-created Municipality of Jose Abad Santos until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Sarangani shall be appointed as provided under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of Sarangani in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Jose Abad Santos shall be transferred by the President of the newly-created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1550 June 11, 1978