MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1571

GRANTING INCENTIVE AND OTHER ALLOWANCES TO CERTAIN PERSONNEL OF THE PHILIPPINE ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) is the sole government agency in the country charged with the responsibility of promoting and advancing the peaceful uses of atomic energy;

WHEREAS, in the discharge of these duties, the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) is directed to undertake the vital functions of protecting public health and property from the detrimental effects of nuclear radiations and safeguarding the health of the people through the exercise of its licensing and regulatory responsibilities.

WHEREAS, the Commission is committed to the goals of national development particularly in the utilization of all available energy sources including nuclear power;

WHEREAS, the government has embarked on a nuclear power program starting with the construction of the Philippine nuclear power plant;

WHEREAS, there is already an increasing demand for the services of experienced and adequately trained nuclear scientists and technologists in the various projects and activities related to the nuclear power program;

WHEREAS, there is a shortage of nuclear-trained personnel in the country and the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission has actually lost many of its scientific and technical personnel in view of the low salary being offered by the government;

WHEREAS, in order to accelerate the implementation of the nuclear power program in the country it is necessary to augment the salaries of all professional, scientific and technical men of the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission on actively engaged in the various phases of the nuclear power program in the form of monthly incentive allowance to meet the high cost of living; and

WHEREAS, it is the duty of the government to provide sufficient incentives for government workers performing vital scientific and technical functions so as to encourage their stay in the service for the good of the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. All officials and professional, scientific and technical personnel of the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission actively engaged in the different activities related to the nuclear power program shall receive monthly incentive allowance at rates in accordance with the following categories:

(a) The PAEC Commissioner shall receive a commutable monthly incentive allowance of P2,500 and reimbursable representation and transportation expenses of P250 each per month;

(b) The Deputy Commissioner shall receive a commutable monthly incentive allowance of P2,000 a month and reimbursable representation and transportation expenses of P250 each per month;

(c) All other professional, scientific and technical personnel shall receive monthly commutable incentive allowances not exceeding P1,500 a month but not less than P500 a month and reimbursable representation and transportation expenses each not exceeding P200 a month in accordance with graduated scales to be established by the PAEC Commissioner.

Section 2. The PAEC Commissioner shall establish guidelines in the determination of position and salary grouping personnel entitled to these allowances and reimbursable expenses with appropriate safeguards to insure equitable distribution of these incentives.

Section 3. To carry out the provisions of this Decree for the calendar year 1977, the sum of One Million Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P1,500,000.00) is hereby appropriated and released to the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission from the President’s Special Activities Fund. Thereafter the same amount needed to carry out the provisions of this Decree shall be provided from assessed contributions of the National Power Corporation and the Energy Development Board in the amounts of One Million Pesos (P1,000,000.00) and Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P500,000.00) respectively. The amounts to be contributed by these agencies shall be included in their respective annual budgets.

Section 4. All laws, rules and regulations in contravention herewith are hereby modified or superseded accordingly.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1571 June 11, 1978