PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 181

CONSTITUTING THE INTEGRATED BAR OF THE PHILIPPINES INTO A BODY CORPORATE AND PROVIDING GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE THERETO FOR THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF ITS PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the Supreme Court of the Philippines, by virtue of its rule-making power and conformably to the provisions of Republic Act No. 6397, has ordained the integration of the Philippine Bar by Resolution of January 9, 1973, for the fundamental purposes of elevating the standards of the legal profession, improving the administration of justice, and enabling the Bar to discharge its public responsibility more effectively;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the said Resolution and in accordance with Court Rule 139-A, effective January 16, 1973, the Integrated Bar of the Philippines has been organized, its various organs have been established, and its officers, both national and local, have been duly elected and have entered into the exercise and discharge of their respective powers and duties; and

WHEREAS, the Integrated Bar, in the pursuit of its lofty objectives, obviously merits the aid and support of the people and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, particularly in the form of direct material and financial assistance, at least during the initial years of its corporate existence;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, and Proclamation No. 1104 dated January 17, 1973, do hereby order and decree as part of the law of the land that;

Section 1. The Integrated Bar of the Philippines is hereby constituted into a body corporate, by the name, style and title of “Integrated Bar of the Philippines,” with principal office in the Greater Manila Area.

Section 2. The Integrated Bar shall have perpetual succession and shall have all legal powers appertaining to a juridical person, particularly the power to sue and be sued; to contract and be contracted with; to hold real and personal property as may be necessary for corporate purposes; to mortgage, lease, sell, transfer, convey and otherwise dispose of the same; to solicit and receive public and private donations and contributions; to accept and receive real and personal property by gift, devise or bequest; to levy and collect membership dues and special assessments from its members; to adopt a seal and to alter the same at pleasure; to have offices and conduct its affairs in the Greater Manila Area and elsewhere; to make and adopt by-laws, rules and regulations not inconsistent with the laws of the Philippines or the Rules of Court, particularly Rule 139-A thereof; and generally to do all such acts and things as may be necessary or proper to carry into effect and promote the purposes for which it was organized.

Section 3. All donations or contributions which may be made by private entities or persons to the Integrated Bar shall be exempt from income and gift taxes, and the same shall further be deductible in full and shall not be included for purposes of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 30, paragraph (h), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

Section 4. All taxes, charges and fees that may be paid by the Integrated Bar or any of its Chapters to the Government or any political subdivision or instrumentality thereof shall be refundable annually to the former for the period extending up to December 31, 1978.

Section 5. The Integrated Bar shall receive by way of donation or lease at a nominal rent from the Government of the Republic of the Philippines a parcel of land in the Greater Manila Area as a suitable site for the construction of a building for the Integrated Bar, with full power to mortgage or otherwise encumber the same.

Section 6. The foregoing provisions shall without prejudice to the exercise by the Supreme Court of its rule-making power under the Constitution or to the provisions of Court Rule 139-A.

Section 7. The sum of five hundred thousand pesos is hereby appropriated, out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the purposes of the Integrated Bar of the Philippines for the fiscal year 1973-1974.

Section 8. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 181, May 04, 1973