PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1135

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SULTAN GUMANDER IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the proposed municipality with the conformity of all the local officials thereat, to create the proposed municipality of Sultan Gumander so as to achieve a closer supervision of the execution of the development programs of the locality;

WHEREAS, self-reliant communities are a must in line with the intensified governmental development projects geared toward the hastening up of the pace of economic development throughout the country, especially in areas comprising Muslim, Mindanao;

WHEREAS, the necessity is imperative to create the municipality of Sultan Gumander out of the existing municipality of Malabang so as to maximize the efficacy of law and order thereat, particularly considering that the proposed municipality yield sufficient income from agricultural products;

WHEREAS, the creation thereof will redound and contribute greatly to the maintenance of peace and order and to the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Rarab, Maganding, Micalubo, Pimbawangun, Manga-apo, Bisong, Pindolonan, Sobuan, Liangan, Mapia-Lupa, Katibong, Ubanoban, Cabontalan, Mama-anun, Maladi, Babasal, Kararao, Romarah, Tual, Dilimbayan, Kapiklan, Ilian, Malico, Tuca, Pansang, Bulangos, Cadalibalo, Polacao, Durian, Biruar, Ramitan, Badak, Tarontong, Kalunti, Punong, Bara-as, Tulatula, Betara, Dimayon, Lindongan, Banangan, Mapantao, Mangan, Kaludan, Madamba, Kumalias, Dilpa, Pagorican, Tangcayan, Linuk, Torogan, Kawa and Malalis, all in the Municipality of Malabang, Province of Lanao del Sur, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent municipality which is created to be known as the Municipality of Sultan Gumander without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother municipality of Malabang.

Section 2. The seat of government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Liangan.

Section 3. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to themunicipality ofSultan Gumander.

Section 4. The present elective municipal officials of themunicipality of Malabang shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of Sultan Gumander until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for provincial and municipal officials following the issuance of this decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality ofSultan Gumander shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 5. Upon the effectivity of this decree, the proportionate share of the newly created, municipality of Sultan Gumander in the obligations, funds assets and other properties of the municipality of Malabang shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 6. This Decree shall take immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office