MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1516

FURTHER AMENDING THE CHARTER OF THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL OIL COMPANY AS PROVIDED FOR IN PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 334, AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 334, as amended, the Philippine National Oil Company is expressly tasked with:

(a) maintaining an adequate and stable supply of oil and petroleum products;

(b) promoting the exploration, exploitation and development of local oil, petroleum and other energy resources, and

(c) fostering conditions relating to oil or petroleum operations and other energy resources exploitation, conducive to a balanced and sustainable growth of the economy.

WHEREAS, to enable the Philippine National Oil Company to attain these objectives efficiently and expeditiously, it is necessary that it be granted sufficient powers and incentives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as follows:

Section 1. Section 7 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 7. Capital Stock. The company shall have a capital stock divided into ten million no-par shares to be subscribed, paid for and voted as follows:

(a) Two million shares of stock shall be originally subscribed and paid for by the Republic of the Philippines at an original issue value of P50 per share.

(b) The remaining eight million shares of stock may be subscribed and paid for by the Republic of the Philippines or by government financial institutions at values to be determined by the Board, but in no cases less than the original issued value above stated to the Republic of the Philippines.

The voting power pertaining to shares of stock subscribed by the government of the Republic of the Philippines shall be vested in by the President of the Philippines or in such person or persons as he may designate.

The voting power pertaining to shares of stock subscribed by the government institutions shall be vested in them.”

Section 2. Section 10 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 10. General Counsel. The Secretary of Justice or the Solicitor General shall perform the duties of General Counsel of the Company. Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Secretary of Justice of the Solicitor General and such personnel as may be necessary to assist him in the performance of his duties and responsibilities shall receive such allowances as shall be fixed by the Board.”

Section 3. EFFECTIVITY. This Decree shall take effect immediately upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office