MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1854

AUTHORIZING AN ADJUSTMENT OF THE FUNDING SUPPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE COCONUT AUTHORITY AND INSTITUTING A PROCEDURE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF SUCH FUND

WHEREAS, the Philippine Coconut Authority (PCA) was created to implement and attain the declared national policy of promoting the rapid integrated development and growth of the coconut and other palm oil industry in all its aspects;

WHEREAS, historically, the defunct Philippine Coconut Administration (PHILCOA) received no regular government financial support and had to depend on the coconut industry for its operational budget, and similarly, the PCA ever since its creation relied mainly on its share of the CCSF assessment/levy collections which accounts for ninety percent (90%) of its budgetary requirements;

WHEREAS, the fluctuation in the world market prices of coconut products which accounts for the impermanence of the levy necessitates the provision of a continuing and self-sustaining funding system to support the operations of PCA;

WHEREAS, from the beginning, it has been the intention of the law pursuant to Section 13, Chapter VI of Republic Act No. 1145 and Section 3(k), Article II of P.D. 1468, that PCA derive support from the coconut industry;

WHEREAS, the authorized amount of support from the industry has remained unchanged since 1954, and in view of the expanded functions and responsibilities of PCA, public interest and welfare dictate that an immediate adjustment of the industry support be made in order to provide this agency with adequate financial means and resources to more effectively carry out its task;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws, do hereby decree and order the following:

Section 1. The PCA fee imposed and collected pursuant to the provisions of R.A. No. 1145 and Sec. 3(k), Article II of P.D. 1468, is hereby increased to three centavos per kilo of copra or husked nuts or their equivalent in other coconut products delivered to and/or purchased by copra exporters, oil millers, desiccators and other end-users of coconut products. The fee shall be collected under such rules that PCA may promulgate, and shall be paid by said copra exporters, oil millers, desiccators, and other end-users of coconut products, receipt of which shall be remitted to the National Treasury on a quarterly basis.

Section. 2. The receipt and process of all collections pursuant to Section 1 hereof, shall be utilized exclusively for the operations of the Philippine Coconut Authority and shall be released automatically by the National Treasury upon approval by the PCA Governing Board of its budgetary requirements, as an exception to P.D. 1234 and the budgetary processes provided in P.D. 1177, as amended.

Section. 3. All laws, decrees, orders, letters of instructions, rules and regulations or portions thereof contrary to the provisions of this Decree are hereby deemed repealed or amended accordingly.

Section. 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 21st day of December, in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia