PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 842

AMENDING SECTIONS 3, 7 AND 8 OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 828 CREATING THE OFFICE OF THE COURT ADMINISTRATOR IN THE SUPREME COURT AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Section 1. Sections 3, 7 and 8 of Presidential Decree No. 828 are hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 3. Qualifications, appointment and tenure. The Court Administrator and the Deputy Court Administrators shall have the same qualifications as Justices of the Court of Appeals. They shall be appointed by the Supreme Court and shall serve until they reach the age of sixty-five (65) years or become incapacitated to discharge the duties of their office, but may be removed or relieved for just cause by a vote of not less than eight (8) Justices of the Supreme Court; provided that a member of the Judiciary appointed to any of the positions, shall not be deemed thereby to have lost the rank, seniority, precedence, benefits, and other privileges appertaining to his judicial position, and his service in the Judiciary, to all intents and purposes, shall be considered as continuous and uninterrupted.

“Sec. 7. The Supreme Court shall create such offices, services, divisions and other units in the offices of the Court Administrator, as may be deemed necessary, and for this purpose, the Chief Justice is authorized to adopt and implement the corresponding staffing patterns approved by the Supreme Court; Provided, however, that the positions, titles and salaries of personnel shall be in accordance with the Judiciary Position Classification and Pay Plans.

“Sec. 8. Status of Subordinate Personnel. All subordinate officials and employees shall likewise be appointed by the Supreme Court, shall belong to the classified service and shall be governed by the Civil Service Law, except those whose positions are highly technical or primarily confidential.”

Section 2. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office