PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 825

PROVIDING PENALTY FOR IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND OTHER FORMS OF UNCLEANLINESS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, one of the principal aims of the New Society is to effect social, economic and political reform through discipline and order;

WHEREAS, a healthy citizenry is a vital factor in bringing about these reforms; and

WHEREAS, to attain these objectives it becomes the duty of every citizen and resident of the Philippines to keep his environment or surroundings clean and wholesome;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Any provision of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding, all citizens and residents of the Philippines; all universities, colleges and schools and other similar institutions, private as well as public; all commercial and industrial establishments such as hotels, restaurants, hospitals, cinema houses, public markets, department stores, groceries and the like; all public conveyances; all residential houses; and all other establishments of any kinds, shall undertake the cleaning of their own surroundings, their yards and gardens, as well as the canals, roads or streets in their immediate premises.

All garbages, filth and other waste matters, shall be placed in the proper receptacles for the disposition thereof by garbage collectors.

Section 2. Any person, who shall litter or throw garbage, filth, or other waste matters in public places, such as roads, canals esteros or parks, shall suffer an imprisonment of not less than 5 days nor more than one year or a fine of not less than P100 nor more than P2,000.00 or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the Court or tribunal, without prejudice to the imposition of a higher penalty under any other law or decree.

If the violator is a corporation, firm, or other corporate entities, the maximum penalty shall be imposed upon the president, manager, director or persons responsible for its operation.

Section 3. Owners of idle lots in Greater Manila are required to keep their idle lots clean to prevent them from becoming the breeding places of mosquitos, flies, mice, rats and other scavengers. In the event of their failure or inability to comply with this obligation, the government shall undertake the cleaning of said lots at the expense of the owners. The government may, through the Barangay Council, further utilize the land for its food production program.

Section 4. The Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, with the assistance of health officials and local governments concerned, shall supervise the implementation of this Decree.

Section 5. All provisions of laws, decrees, order or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby amended or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office