PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1102

AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 684 DATED APRIL 15, 1975, BY INCREASING THE MAXIMUM AGE OF MEMBERS AND OFFICERS OF KABATAANG BARANGAYS.

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 684 dated April 15, 1975, barangay youth organizations known as “Kabataang Barangay” have been established throughout the land composed of all the residents in every barangay who are less than eighteen years of age;

WHEREAS, there is a need to broaden the age coverage of the members and officers of Kabataang Barangays by increasing the age bracket for both members and officers to encourage the participation and involvement of a larger number of youth in Kabataang Barangay activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, hereby order and decree the amendment of Presidential Decree No. 684 dated April 15, 1975, as follows:

Section 1. Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 684 dated April 15, 1975, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 1. There shall be in every barangay throughout the land a barangay youth organization to be known as “Kabataang Barangay” composed of all the residents therein who are twenty-one years of age or less.”

Section 2. Section 2 of the same Decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 2. The affairs of said barangay youth organization shall be administered by a barangay youth chairman, together with six (6) barangay youth leaders, all of whom shall be at least fifteen years of age but not more than twenty-one and actual residents of the particular barangay. They shall be chosen by the barangay youth assembly from among its members at a meeting called for the purpose.”

Section 3. Section 4 of the same Decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 4. The barangay youth assembly shall be composed of the residents of the barangay who are at least fifteen years of age but not more than twenty-one and who are registered in the barangay list contemplated by Section Four of Presidential Decree Numbered Two Hundred and Ten dated June Eight, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Three.”

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office