GRANTING CITIZENSHIP TO DESERVING ALIENS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, in order that aliens residing in this country and deserving of Philippine citizenship may, through a less expensive and more expeditious procedure, become Philippine citizens, Letter of Instructions No. 270 constituted a Special Committee on Naturalization to receive and process applications for naturalization by decree from aliens with the qualifications and none of the disqualifications specified therein and submit recommendations thereon to the President of the Philippines; and

WHEREAS, pursuant to said Letter of Instructions, the aforesaid Special Committee has recommended to the President of the Philippines the grant of Philippine citizenship by decree to certain applicants;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby grant Philippine citizenship to the individuals of foreign nationality whose names appear in Annex “A” of this Decree, with all the rights, privileges, duties, and obligations appurtenant to such grant, and with the following effects and subject to the following conditions:

1. The grant of Philippine citizenship to the aforesaid aliens under this Decree shall be effective upon their taking the oath of allegiance as Philippine citizens and the issuance to them of certificate of naturalization by the Special Committee. The Commission on Immigration and Deportation shall thereupon cancel their certificate of registration as aliens and issue to them the corresponding identification certificates as citizens;

2. If the naturalized alien should die before taking the oath of allegiance as Filipino citizens and the issuance to him of the certificate of naturalization, his widow, if residing in the Philippines and found by the Special Committee to have none of the disqualifications specified in said LOI 270, may take the oath of allegiance as Filipino citizen, after which the minor children of said deceased alien and his wife, subject to the provisos of the next succeeding section, shall follow the acquired Filipino citizenship of their mother;

3. Alien wives and minor children of persons naturalization under this Decree shall be deemed Philippine citizens provided that:

(a) The alien wife shall, in all cases, not suffer from any of the disqualifications for naturalization under Letter of Instructions No. 270;

(b) The alien wife and minor children of persons naturalized under this Decree reside permanently in the Philippines at the time of his naturalization;

(c) If the alien wife does not reside in the Philippines at the time of the naturalization of her husband, she shall come to the Philippines and reside in this country in good faith within one year from the naturalization of her husband;

(d) If minor children do not reside in the Philippines at the time of the naturalization of their father thay shall, within one (1) year from the naturalization of their father, in good faith reside in this country and, if of school age, enroll in Philippine schools. The fact that any such minor child of school age fails to graduate from a Philippine school, except for valid reasons shown, shall be considered prima facie evidence of failure to bona fide enroll in Philippine schools.

4. In case the alien naturalized under this Decree is a woman, her minor children shall continue to follow the citizenship of their alien father during their minority, but may elect Philippine citizenship pursuant to existing law upon reaching the age of majority.

5. The Special Committee may cancel certificates of naturalization issued under this decree in the following cases:

(a) If it finds that the naturalized person or his duly authorized representative made any false statement or misrepresentation or committed any violation of law, rules and regulations in connection with the petition for naturalization, or if he otherwise obtains Philippine citizenship fraudulently or illegally, the certificate of naturalization shall be cancelled;

(b) If the naturalized person or his wife, or any of his minor children who acquire Filipino citizenship by virtue of his naturalization shall, within five (5) years next following the grant of Philippine citizenship, establish permanent residence in a foreign country, that individual’s certificate of naturalization or acquired citizenship shall be cancelled or revoked; provided that the fact of such person’s remaining for more than one year in his country of origin, or two years in any other foreign country, shall be considered prima facie evidence of intent to permanently reside therein;

(c) If the naturalized person or his wife or child with acquired citizenship allows himself or herself to be used as a dummy in violation of any constitutional or legal provision requiring Philippine citizenship as a condition for the exercise, use, or enjoyment of a right, franchise, or privilege, the certificate of naturalization or acquired citizenship shall be cancelled or revoked;

(d) If the naturalized person or his wife or child with acquired citizenship commits any act inimical to national security, the certificate of naturalization or acquired citizenship shall be cancelled or revoked.

6. In case the naturalized person holds any hereditary title, or belongs to any order of nobility, he shall make an express renunciation of his title or membership in this order of nobility before the Special Committee or its duly authorized representative, and such renunciation shall be included in the records of his application for citizenship; and

7. The Special Committee is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the effective and expeditious implementation of the provision of this Decree.

8. Any person who shall fraudulently make, falsify, forge, change, alter, or cause or aid any person to do the same, or who shall purposely aid and assist in falsely making, forging, falsifying, changing or altering a naturalization certificate issued under this Decree for the purpose of making use thereof, or in order that the same may be used by another person or persons, and any person who shall purposely aid and assist another in obtaining a naturalization certificate in violation of this Decree, shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00) and by imprisonment for not more than five years, and in the case that the person convicted is a naturalized citizen his certificate of naturalization shall, if not earlier cancelled by the Special Committee, be ordered cancelled.

9. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of December in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

Page one of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page two of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Three of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Four of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Five of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Six of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Seven of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Eight of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Nine of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Ten of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Eleven of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twelve of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Thirteen of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Fourteen of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Fifteen of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Sixteen of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Seventeen of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Eighteen of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Nineteen of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-one of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-two of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-three of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-four of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-five of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-six of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-seven of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-eight of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Twenty-nine of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Thirty of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Thirty-one of Annex A of P.D. No. 836

Page Thirty-two of Annex of P.D. No. 836