MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 2025

ESTABLISHING A POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAASIN, PROVINCE OF SOUTHERN LEYTE TO BE KNOWN AS THE SOUTHERN LEYTE POLYTECHNIC COLLEGE.

WHEREAS, our educational system should be oriented in order that the population of the Philippines, especially the youth could be equipped with skills that will make them productive;

WHEREAS, a development oriented educational system could best be implemented through the establishment of vocational or polytechnic colleges throughout the country in order to reach as many young people as government resources can afford;

WHEREAS, one such school is direly needed in Southern Leyte to be established in the capital town of Maasin, since the nearest vocational school is more than one hundred kilometers away from this municipality and is hardly accessible to the graduates of elementary schools who desire a vocational and technical education;

WHEREAS, the training of the young population of Southern Leyte with skills in technology will enhance the development of the Province which is rich in natural resources and which have not been exploited because of the lack of knowledge and skills to convert them into useful products;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree, that:

SECTION 1. There shall be established in the Municipality of Maasin, Province of Southern Leyte, a polytechnic college to be known as the Southern Leyte Polytechnic College, hereinafter referred to as the College.

SEC 2. The College shall primarily provide a complete undergraduate courses in the arts, sciences, humanities, business and vocational and industrial technologies. It shall promote research, advanced studies and progressive leadership in its field of specialization.

SEC 3. The governance and administration of the College shall be in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree Numbered Fourteen Hundred and Thirty-Seven.

SEC 4. The amount of Five million pesos for the establishment, operation and maintenance of the College shall be charged to the appropriations authorized for the Ministry of Education subject to the availability of funds. Thereafter, such amount as may be needed for its operation and maintenance shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC 5. The Minister of Education shall take such steps as are necessary for the immediate implementation of this Decree.

SEC 6. This Decree shall take effect upon its approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of February, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia