PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1133

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BUADIPOSO-BUNTONG IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR

WHEREAS, the fundamental objective of the government is to hasten up the pace of economic development throughout the country, especially in areas comprising Muslim Mindanao;

WHEREAS, the effective implementation of the declared programs of the government on development hinges primarily on the administrative efficiency of each and every local government unit;

WHEREAS, there is that imperative necessity to create self-reliant communities for the purpose of maximizing the efficacy of law and order as well as facilitate full development thereof, as it has been the clamor of the residents therein for they stand to benefit economically, socially and politically;

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed municipality will redound and contribute greatly to the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area; and

WHEREAS, the new municipality will become a self-reliant community once intensified government projects are made in line with the declared policy of the government to uplift the socio-economic well being of the residents therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order and make as part of the laws of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Tuka, Buadiposo-Lilod, Pualas, Lumbatan II, Tarik, Sapot, Gata, Villa-Tangkal, Tamporong, Bangon I, Katogonan, Tagondingan, Buadiposo-Proper, Lumbac, Minanga, Cadayonan, Kabasaran, Lumbatan III, Tangkal, Baital, Raya-Bubong, Bubong, Bacolod, Pendolongan, Lumbatan I, Dansalan, Manacab, Buntong, Raya-Buntong, Bangon II, Kalakala, and Paling, all in the municipality of Ditsa-Ramain, province of Lanao del Sur, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent municipality of Buadiposo-Buntong without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother municipality of Ditsaan-Ramain.

Section 2. The seat of government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Manacab.

Section 3. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities shall be applicable to the newmunicipality of Buadiposo-Buntong.

Section 4. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Ditsaan-Ramain shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of Buadiposo-Buntong until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this decree and shall have qualified, unless removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of themunicipality of Buadiposo-Buntong shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 5. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new municipality of Buadiposo-Buntong in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Ditsaan-Ramain shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 6. All laws or parts of laws as well as executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant