PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 460

AMENDING CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 111, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE NATIONAL CHARTER OF THE BOY SCOUTS OF THE PHILIPPINES.

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act Number One Hundred Eleven, dated October 31, 1936, was enacted to create the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, a public corporation and to provide guidelines for its operation;

WHEREAS, recent events have shown that it has become necessary to effect reforms in the organization’s structure in order to revitalize and strengthen its operational capabilities, enhance its effectiveness as an instrument to promote the youth development program of the nation, and insure the full and active cooperation, involvement and support of all sectors of the community, public and private;

WHEREAS, the tremendous increase in the membership of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines and the support generated from the private and public sectors during the period of the Golden Jubilee celebrations amply attests the degree of acceptance by the youth and the community of the Scouting program and the Scout Movement;

WHEREAS, the scouts through their recent involvement in civic and community development projects, undertaken on their own initiative and with extraordinary enthusiasm and zeal have demonstrated that, given the opportunity and properly motivated leadership, they can become the new nation builders and contribute effectively to the improvement of our Society and the development of our nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, in order to effect the desired changes and reforms in the social, economic, and political structure of our society, do hereby decree and order the amendments to Commonwealth Act No. 111 as follows:

Section I. Section I of Commonwealth Act No. 111 is amended to read as follows:

“J.E.H. Stevenot, A.N. Luz, C.P. Romulo, Vicente Lim, Manuel Camus, Jorge B. Vargas, and G.A. Daza; all of Manila, Philippines, their associates and successors, are hereby created a body corporate and politic in deed and in law, by the name, style and title of Boy Scouts of the Philippines’ (hereinafter called the corporation). The principal office of the corporation shall be in Metropolitan Manila, Philippines”.

Section II. Section 5 of the said Act is also amended to read as follows:

“The governing body of the said corporation shall consist of a National Executive Board composed of (a) the President of the Philippines or his representative; (b) the charter and life members of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines; (c) the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Philippine Scouting Foundation; (d) the Regional Chairman of the Scout Regions of the Philippines; (e) the Secretary of Education and Culture, the Secretary of Social Welfare, the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Finance, the Secretary of Youth and Sports, and the Secretary of Local Government and Community Development; (f) an equal number of individuals from the private sector; (g) the National President of the Girl Scouts of the Philippines; (h) one Scout of Senior age from each Scout Region to represent the boy membership; and (i) three representatives of the cultural minorities. Except for the Regional Chairman who shall be elected by the Regional Scout Councils during their annual meetings, and the Scouts of their respective regions, all members of the National Executive Board shall be either by appointment or cooption, subject to ratification and confirmation by the Chief Scout, who shall be the Head of the State. Vacancies in the Executive Board shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members, subject to ratification and confirmation by the Chief Scout. The by-laws may prescribe the number of members of the National Executive Board necessary to constitute a quorum of the board, which number may be less than a majority of the whole number of the board. The National Executive Board shall have power to make and to amend the by-laws, and, by a two-thirds vote of the whole board at a meeting called for this purpose, may authorize and cause to be executed mortgages and liens upon the property of the corporation.

The National Executive Board shall, by resolution passed by a majority of the whole board, designate three or more of their number to constitute an executive or governing committee, of which a majority shall constitute a quorum, which Committee, to the extent provided in said resolution or in by-laws of the corporation, shall have and exercise the powers of the executive board in the management of the business affairs of the corporation, and may have power to authorize the seal of the corporation to be affixed to all papers which may require it. The National Executive Board, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole board, may appoint any other standing committees, and such standing committees shall have and may exercise such powers as shall be conferred or authorized by the by-laws. With the consent in writing and pursuant to an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of said corporation, the national Executive Board shall have authority to dispose in any manner of the whole property of the corporation”

Section III. Section 6 of this Act shall be amended to read as follows:

“The National Executive Board shall meet once every three months at a time and place to be designated in the by-laws.

The annual meeting of the incorporators, their associates and successors, shall be held once in every year after the year of incorporation at such time and place as shall be like-wise prescribed in the by-laws, when the annual reports of the officers and executive board shall be presented. Special meetings of the corporation may be called upon such notice as may be prescribed in the by-laws. The number of members which shall constitute a quorum at any annual or special meeting shall be prescribed in the by-laws. The members and executive board shall have power to hold their meetings and keep the seal, books, documents, and papers of the corporation within or without the Metropolitan Manila.”

Section IV. Section 7 of the same Act shall be amended to read as follows:

“The corporation created by this Act shall adopt distinctive badges, uniforms, and insignia for the Scouts of the Philippines and once adopted shall have the sole and exclusive right to use the titles, emblems, uniforms, badges, descriptive or designating marks, words and phrases used by the Scouts of the Philippines in carrying out its program in accordance with the purposes of this Act”.

Section V. The same Act is further amended by adding the following section immediately after Section 10:

“Until such time as the reorganization and restructuring of the Executive Board, in accordance with Section 5 as amended is effected, the Honorable Carlos P. Romulo, Chairman of the Golden Jubilee Board and one of the founders of the Organization and a charter member thereof, is hereby appointed Interim Chairman of the Board and President of the Organization and authorized to organize an interim body to conduct the affairs of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines and to take the necessary steps to effect such reorganization within six (6) months from date of this decree.”

Section VI. This decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 460 May 17, 1974