Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1686-A

GRANTING PHILIPPINE CITIZENSHIP TO JEFFERY MOORE AND DENNIS GEORGE STILL

WHEREAS, Jeffery Moore and Dennis George Still are amateur basketball players and have mingled socially with the Filipino people and evinced a desire to learn and embrace the customs, traditions, and ideals of the Filipino people;

WHEREAS, they have conducted themselves in a proper and irreproachable manner in their relations with the constituted Government, as well as with the community in which they live;

WHEREAS, they have associated themselves with Filipino athletes and may contribute in the restoration of Filipino basketball athletes to their rightful place among world sports champions;

WHEREAS, they can also contribute immensely to the training and development of Filipino amateur basketball athletes;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby grant Philippine citizenship to Jeffery Moore and Dennis George Still, with all the rights, privileges, duties and obligations appurtenant to such grant, subject however to the following conditions:

1. They cannot own real property nor vote in any election in the Philippines for a period of three years from the effectivity of this grant;

2. The President of the Philippines may revoke the grant of Philippine citizenship to any of the above-named persons in the following cases:

a) If any of them allows himself to be used as a dummy in violation of any constitution or legal provision requiring Philippine citizenship as a condition for the exercise, use, or enjoyment of a right, franchise, or privilege;

b) If any of them commits any act inimical to national security;

c) If any of them is hereafter found or shall commit or have any of the disqualifications for naturalization provided for in Letter of Instructions No. 491.

3. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia