PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 55

PENALIZING UNAUTHORIZED AND ILLEGAL INSTALLATIONS/CONNECTIONS OF TELEPHONES.

WHEREAS, martial law has been declared under Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and is now in effect throughout the entire country;

WHEREAS, one of the objectives of the proclamation of martial law is to effect social, economic and political reforms, and thus bring about the transformation of a New Society in our country, a society infused with a profound sense of discipline and order;

WHEREAS, there has been rampant illegal installation/connections of telephones perpetrated by unscrupulous persons in connivance with the employees and/or officials of the telephone companies;

WHEREAS, there is an immediate need for stopping this nefarious activity as it deprives the lawful users of the telephones of the right to the full use thereof; violates their right to privacy; jeopardizes the legitimate business of the telephone company and is inimical to the interest and security of the state where the purpose of the illegal connection is to enhance and further the activities of the subversive elements;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September, 21, 1972, do hereby declare it unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the proper telephone company/corporation or unless authorized by the court under the provisions of Section 3 of Republic Act No. 4200, to install or connect or cause or induce to be installed or connected any telephone or line whether by connecting it by wire or cable or through any other means, with already existing telephone duly installed in private residences or public or private buildings: and I likewise declare it to be unlawful for any person, whether a participant or not in the act or acts herein penalized to knowingly possess any such illegally connected telephone.

Any person who willfully or knowingly does or who shall aid, permit, or cause to be done any of the acts declared unlawful in the preceding paragraph, or who aids, permits, or causes such violation shall, upon conviction suffer the penalty or imprisonment ranging from six months to two years as a Military Tribunal may direct.

This decree shall take effect immediately, however, persons now in possession of telephones illegally installed or connected are given up to November 30, 1972 to remove or register if legally feasible, and pay the corresponding charges for the installation or connections and use of the telephone.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 55, November 16, 1972