PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1216

DEFINING “OPEN SPACE” IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS AND AMENDING SECTION 31 OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 957 REQUIRING SUBDIVISION OWNERS TO PROVIDE ROADS, ALLEYS, SIDEWALKS AND RESERVE OPEN SPACE FOR PARKS OR RECREATIONAL USE

WHEREAS, there is a compelling need to create and maintain a healthy environment in human settlements by providing open spaces, roads, alleys and sidewalks as may be deemed suitable to enhance the quality of life of the residents therein;

WHEREAS, such open spaces, roads, alleys and sidewalks in residential subdivision are for public use and are, therefore, beyond the commerce of men;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 953 at least thirty percent (30%) of the total area of a subdivision must be reserved, developed and maintained as open space for parks and recreational areas, the cost of which will ultimately be borne by the lot buyers which thereby increase the acquisition price of subdivision lots beyond the reach of the common mass;

WHEREAS, thirty percent (30%) required open space can be reduced to a level that will make the subdivision industry viable and the price of residential lots within the means of the low income group and at the same time preserve the environmental and ecological balance through rational control of land use and proper design of space and facilities;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 757, government efforts in housing, including resources, functions and activities to maximize results have been concentrated into one single agency, namely, the National Housing Authority;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. For purposes of this Decree, the term “open space” shall mean an area reserved exclusively for parks, playgrounds, recreational uses, schools, roads, places of worship, hospitals, health centers, barangay centers and other similar facilities and amenities.

Section 2. Section 31 of Presidential Decree No. 957 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 31. Roads, Alleys, Sidewalks and Open spaces. The owner as developer of a subdivision shall provide adequate roads, alleys and sidewalks. For subdivision projects one (1) hectare or more, the owner or developer shall reserve thirty percent (30%) of the gross area for open space. such open space shall have the following standards allocated exclusively for parks, playgrounds and recreational use:

(a) 9% of gross area for high density or social housing (66 to 100 family lot per gross hectare).

(b) 7% of gross area for medium-density or economic housing (21 to 65 family lot per gross hectare).

(c) 3.5 % of gross area low-density or open market housing (20 family lots and below per gross hectare).

These areas reserved for parks, playgrounds and recreational use shall be non-alienable public lands, and non-buildable. The plans of the subdivision project shall include tree planting on such parts of the subdivision as may be designated by the Authority.

Upon their completion as certified to by the Authority, the roads, alleys, sidewalks and playgrounds shall be donated by the owner or developer to the city or municipality and it shall be mandatory for the local governments to accept provided, however, that the parks and playgrounds may be donated to the Homeowners Association of the project with the consent of the city or municipality concerned. No portion of the parks and playgrounds donated thereafter shall be converted to any other purpose or purposes.

Section 3. Sections 2 and 5 of Presidential Decree No. 953 are hereby repealed and other laws, decrees, executive orders, institutions, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with these provisions are also repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office