MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1945

AMENDING SEC. 7 OF REPUBLIC ACT NUMBER SIX THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOUR AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 1393, the Deputy Minister of Public Works and Highways exercises control and supervision over the administration, management and operations of the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) in order to effectively implement the infrastructure projects of the MWSS;

WHEREAS, the set-up envisioned under Letter of Instructions No. 1393 has been successful, efficient and cost-saving, such that there is a need to adopt it as an integral part of the Government’s organizational structure;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, particularly Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1772, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Sec. 7 of Republic Act No. 6234, as amended, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 7. Other Officers and Employees; their appointment and qualifications. — The Deputy Minister of Public Works and Highways shall be the ex-officio General Manager of the System. He shall be assisted by four Assistant General Managers – one for Engineering, one for Operations, one for Finance and Administration, one for Commercial and Customers Services – and heads of departments all of whom shall perform managerial, highly technical and/or primarily confidential functions, and such additional officers and employees as the Board may provide. The Assistant General Managers shall be appointed by the Board and each shall receive a compensation of forty eight thousand pesos per annum unless the Board shall fix a higher amount therefor.

“The Assistant General Managers shall be persons of integrity, competence, and experience in technical and executive fields related to the purpose of this Act. Their other qualifications as well as powers and duties shall be determined by the Board.

“In case of temporary disability or absence of the General Manager, the Chairman of the Board shall designate any Assistant General Manager, to act as General Manager; in case of temporary disability or absence of any Assistant General Manager, the General Manager may designate any department head in the group to act as Assistant General Manager.”

SEC. 2. All laws, executive or administrative orders, letters of instructions, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent with this Presidential Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 3. This Presidential Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia