PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1175

AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 189, AS AMENDED BY PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 564 OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE CHARTER OF THE PHILIPPINE TOURISM AUTHORITY

WHEREAS, to further ensure the pursuit of the avowed aim of the government to promote Philippine Tourism, it is imperative that certain provision of P.D. No. 189, as amended by P.D. No. 564 be amended;

WHEREAS, the Authority has acquired possession and ownership over personal and real properties and has undertaken projects in relation with the carrying out of its purposes, functions and objectives under said Decree; and

WHEREAS, in order to achieve the foregoing objectives, it is necessary to rationalize the existing function and powers of the Authority and provide new ones that will help optimize the integration of related activities pertaining to tourism development projects;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the amendment of P.D. 564 otherwise known as the Charter of the Philippine Tourism Authority, as follows:

Section 1. Chapter I is hereby amended by adding a new section to read as follows:

“Sec. 12-A. All projects undertaken by the Authority in pursuance of its functions and objectives as implementing arm of the Department of Tourism in the development and promotion of tourism projects shall be deemed registered under P.D. 535 and shall enjoy all the incentives and benefits provided therein.”

Section 2. Section 36 is hereby amended by adding a new paragraph to read as follows:

“The above properties including those acquired by the Authority by pursuance, transfer or assignment shall be exempt from the payment of all taxes of whatever kind and nature imposed by the Republic of the Philippines, its agencies, instrumentalities or political subdivisions.”

Section 3. Section 37 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 37. All purchase of equipment and supplies or contracts for services except for personnel services, entered into by the Authority, shall be done through competitive public bidding: Provided, that bidding shall not be required when (1) an emergency, as certified by the General Manager, requires immediate delivery of the supplies or performance of the services, and (2) the aggregate amount involved in any one purchase of supplies or procurement of services does not exceed Two Hundred Thousand Pesos (P200,00), in which case, such purchase or procurement may be made in the usual course of business: Provided, that the Authority’s emergency purchase of supplies and services shall not exceed the amount of Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P500,000.00) for any one month: Provided, further, that purchase of equipment and supplies necessary for the development and operation of tourism enterprises owned by the Authority and its subsidiaries may be made directly without need of approval from the Office of the President and other government agencies: Provided, finally, that in comparing bids and in making awards, the Authority shall consider such factors as the cost and relative quality and adaptability of supplies or services; the bidder’s financial responsibility, skill, experience, integrity, and ability to furnish repairs and maintenance services; the time of delivery or performance offered; and the bidder’s compliance with the specifications desired.”

Section 4. All acts, decrees, Executive Orders, Administrative Orders, Rules and Regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. This decree shall take effect immediately upon its approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of July in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1175, July 28, 1977