MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1546

CREATING BARANGAY DON ANTONIO IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF ENRILE, PROVINCE OF CAGAYAN.

WHEREAS, self-reliant communities are a must in line with the intensified governmental development projects geared toward the hastening up of the pace of economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the primordial aim of development can be least achieved by the creation of local government units which could, through faster administrative response, greatly contribute to the social, educational, cultural and economic needs of our people; and

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the proposed barangay with the conformity of the local officials, to create the proposed barangay, so as to achieve closer supervision of the execution of the development programs of the locality;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Sitios Ubong Sur and Dollar, both of Barangay Lian Norte (San Luis), in the Municipality of Enrile, province of Cagayan, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent barangay which is hereby created to be known as Barangay Don Antonio without affecting in any manner the legal existence of Barangay Lian Norte.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable, to regular barangay shall be applicable to the new Barangay Don Antonio.

Section 3. The present elective barangay officials of Lian Norte (San Luis) shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly-created barangay of Don Antonio until the Barangay officials of said barangay shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the issuance of this Decree shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or complete the government personnel of Barangay Don Antonio shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new barangay of Don Antonio in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of Barangay Lian Norte (San Luis) shall be transferred by the President of the newly-created barangay upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1546 June 11, 1978