PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 599

AMENDING THE APPROVED STAFFING PATTERN OF THE BUREAU OF CUSTOMS BY CREATING NEW DIVISIONS/UNITS THEREIN, INCLUDING THE INCREASE OF POSITIONS IN THE OPERATION AND ENFORCEMENT, COMMUNICATIONS AND THE NATIONAL POLICE GROUPS.

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1 dated September 24, 1972, the Integrated Reorganization Plan was adopted and made part of the law of the land; and

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to create new divisions/units in the Bureau of Customs such as the economic intelligence and research division; increase the number of positions in the communications, export coordination, port operations coordination, customs laboratory and customs police groups in order to effectively carry out the desired objectives of reorganization as invisioned in the Integrated Reorganization Plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, in order to effect the desired changes and reforms in the Bureau of Customs, do hereby order and decree the following:

Section 1. An Economic Intelligence and Research Division is hereby created under the Operation and Enforcement Service which shall handle matters pertaining to economic intelligence and research, the specialized staff study of the actual application of the tariff and commodity classifications, the international commitments and agreements involving Customs operations and the impact of various incentives and concessions given to industries. It shall have the following sections: National Tariff and Customs Research Section and International Tariff and Trade Research Section.

Section 2. A Port Operations Coordination Division is hereby created under the Operation and Enforcement Service which shall serve as the central evaluation and coordinating unit on ports, arrastre, pilotage, cargo, disposal, storage and bonded warehousing operations. It shall have the following sections: Port Operations Section and Bonded Warehousing and Cargo Disposal Section.

Section 3. A Central Radio Communication Division is hereby created under the Administrative Service which shall take charge of all types of radio communications between the central office and field offices including those involving ship to shore and ship to ship facilities.

Section 4. A Customs Laboratory Division is hereby created under the Operation and Enforcement Service to render laboratory examination and analysis of samples of imported commodities to establish proper classification.

Section 5. The Cash Section and Liquidation Section of the Assessment Branch of thePort ofManila are hereby made into divisions to be known as Cash Division and Liquidation Division, respectively. The Collection Division is hereby abolished.

Section 6. One hundred forty-five (145) positions are hereby created and apportioned as follows:

The amount of EIGHT HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (P800,000) is hereby appropriated out of the funds of the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the aforementioned positions; Provided, That the same positions shall be subject to final WAPCO classification action and approval by the Commissioner of the Budget.

TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (P200,000) is hereby appropriated for equipment, supplies and materials of the Customs laboratory unit and the radio communications unit.

Section 7. All laws, decrees, rules and regulations or parts thereof, inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Decree are repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 8. This Decree shall take effect immediately along with Presidential Decree No. 1 insofar as it affects the Bureau of Customs.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office