PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 803

FURTHER AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 79 AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS REVISED POPULATION ACT OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, private sector participation must be strengthened to achieve a comprehensive and more effective national population program;

WHEREAS, involvement of the private sector in the development and formulation of policy and plans is essential to the effective coordination in the execution of our national population program;

WHEREAS, the Population Center Foundation, Inc. is the primary grant-making institution for population programs of the private sector in the Philippines and has developed the potential of becoming a major source of population expertise in the Asian Region;

WHEREAS, effective coordination between the Population Center Foundation, Inc. and the Commission on Population is necessary to maximize the efforts and resources that are applies to our national population program;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and in order to strengthen the population program of the Philippines, do hereby decree and make part of the law of the land the following:

Section 1. Section 6 of Presidential Decree No. 79 as amended is hereby to read as follows:

“All functions and powers of the POPCOM shall be vested in and exercised by a Board of Commissioners hereinafter referred to as the Board, composed of Secretary of Education and Culture, Secretary of Health, Secretary of Social Welfare, Dean of the University of the Philippines Population Institute, the Director-General of the National Economic and Development Authority, Executive Director of the Population Center Foundation, Inc., and two other members from the private sector who possess the necessary expertise in the field of population and who are not recipients of Population Commission program money, each to be appointed by the President of the Philippines for a term of three years.”

Section 2. Repealing Clause. All laws, acts, degrees, executive orders and rules and regulations, or parts thereof inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 3. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 25th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office