PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 656

DECLARING UNLAWFUL THE USE OF HIGH-POWERED INBOARD/OUTBOARD ENGINES IN WATERCRAFT OF LESS THAN ONE HUNDRED (100) GROSS TONS THAT ARE CAPABLE OF PROVIDING PROPELLING POWER/SPEED IN EXCESS OF FIFTEEN (15) KNOTS AND PROVIDING CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS AND PENALTIES THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, Presidential Proclamation No. 1081 envisioned, among other goals, the bringing about of a social order characterized by a high stage of discipline among the citizenry;

WHEREAS, subversion, sabotage, rebellion, insurrection, criminality and smuggling mentioned in the aforesaid Proclamation No. 1081 are committed and abetted by the use of watercraft of less than 100 gross tons and capable of cruising with a speed in excess of fifteen (15) knots;

WHEREAS, it has been observed that speedboats and other similar type of watercraft are flagrantly used by criminal elements for purposes inimical to national interest and security;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and decree, that;

1. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or possessor of any watercraft less than one hundred (100) gross tons, to install on board, high-powered inboard and/or outboard engines such as Volvo PENTAS, MERCRUISER, etc., that are capable of providing propelling power/speed to any such watercraft in excess of fifteen (15) knots: Provided, that this Decree shall not apply to such engines installed in watercraft owned and/or operated by the Armed Forces of the Philippines;

2. Effective immediately, it shall be unlawful to own and/or operate vessel/watercraft less than one hundred (100) gross tons with high-powered inboard and/or outboard engines capable of providing speed exceeding fifteen (15) knots, other then those constructed with the approval of the Philippine Cost Guard and duly registered therewith. Such vessel/watercraft or engines shall be subject to seizure and custody; Provided that the Philippine Cost Guard shall exercise exclusive jurisdiction over seizure proceeding against vessels apprehended for violation of the provision of this Decree and such implementing regulations thereof: Provided, finally, that such seizure proceedings maybe instituted independently of a criminal action.

3. Any person violating this Decree shall be prosecuted before the Military Tribunal and upon conviction, shall suffer an imprisonment ranging from two to four years and a fine ranging from P5,000 to P10,000 without prejudice to further prosecution for such other offenses/crimes in violation of other General Orders, Presidential Decrees and/or Letters of Instructions promulgated under said Proclamation No. 1081: Provided, further, that the crew of the same vessel/watercraft, the president, manager, members of the board of directors or responsible officers of any public, private firms, companies, corporation or entities who shall knowingly cause or allow the installation of such high-powered engines in such vessel/watercraft shall suffer similar punishment as above; Provided finally that conviction of the offender(s) carriers with it the forfeiture of said vessel/watercraft in favor of the government under the direct control and operation of the Secretary of National Defense for use in law enforcement activities.

The Secretary of National Defense shall promulgate the implementing rules and regulations of this Decree.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office