MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1966

FURTHER AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 810, AS AMENDED.

WHEREAS, Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 810 requires the grantee of the franchise to operate, construct and maintain a fronton for Basque Pelota and similar games of skill in the Greater Manila Area to provide mechanical and/or computerized devices, such as an electric totalizator and other devices specified therein for clean, honest and orderly Basque Pelota games within three years from the grant of the said franchise;

WHEREAS, compliance with the foregoing requirement will entail enormous expenditures on the part of the grantee, taking into account not only the initial costs of importing and installing the necessary devices but also the costs of maintaining them;

WHEREAS, government support and inducement in developing the sport of Basque Pelota to a level at par with International standards is provided for under Presidential Decree No. 810.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, hereby decree as follows:

SECTION 1. Section 4 of Presidential Decree No. 810 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 4. The total wages fund on gross receipts from the sale of betting tickets will be apportioned as follows: sixty-nine per centum (69%) shall be distributed in the form of dividends among the holders of “win” or “place” numbers or holders of the winning combination or grouping of numbers as the case may be. The remaining balance of thirty one per centum (31%) shall be distributed as follows: seventeen per centum (17%) shall be set aside as the commission fee of the grantee, four per centum (4%) thereof shall be set aside and allotted to any special health, educational, civic, cultural, charitable, social welfare, sports, and other similar projects as may be directed by the President, and a final tax of ten per centum (10%) shall be levied as a final tax in lieu of any kind, nature or description, levied, established or collected by any municipal, provincial, or national authority, except income tax; Provided, that no other taxes shall be levied upon booking stations, established pursuant to this Decree; and provided, further that the aforesaid tax shall be remitted to the Bureau of Internal Revenue every quarter.”

SECTION 2. Any provision of laws to the contrary notwithstanding, the grantee is hereby authorized to hold or conduct Basque Pelota games (including the games of pala, raqueta, cestapunta, remonte and mano) within Metro Manila, establish branches thereof for booking purposes therein or in any other place within the Philippines, subject to the existing rules and regulations.

SECTION 3. All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source : CDAsia