MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1946

AMENDING SECTION 3 OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE 824 AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, under Executive Order No. 943, the Minister of Human Settlements shall be assisted by a Deputy Minister for the purpose of administering the National Capital Region;

WHEREAS, there is a need to redesign the organizational structure of the Metropolitan Manila Commission by institutionalizing the set-up wherein the Deputy Minister of Human Settlements for the National Capital Region is also the Vice-Governor of Metropolitan Manila, for better coordination of functions and more effective implementation of policies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and by law, particularly Presidential Decree No. 1416, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 1772, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 824, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 3 . Organization and Personnel of the Commission . — The Commission shall be composed of a Chairman or Governor, the Deputy Minister of Human Settlements for the National Capital Region as ex-officio Vice Chairman or Vice Governor, and three Commissioners or Board Members, one for planning, another for finance and a third one for operations, all of whom shall be appointed by the President and shall hold office at his pleasure.

“The Chairman or Governor shall receive an annual salary of ₱75,000.00 or equal to that being received by a Minister/Cabinet member. The Vice Governor or Vice Chairman shall receive an annual salary of ₱71,364.00 while the three Commissioners shall each receive an annual salary of ₱67,896.00, or equal to those received by Career Executive Service Officers, Rank I, Grade 2 and Rank I, Grade 1, respectively; Provided : That these rates shall be automatically adjusted/revised in accordance with the modification/adjustment of rates that may be subsequently approved for Ministers/Cabinet members and the Career Executive Service Officers Rank I, Grade 2 and Rank I, Grade 1, as the case may be.

“All heads of departments and/or offices and subordinate personnel shall be appointed by the Chairman or Governor and their compensation shall be fixed by the Commission. All positions, except those of highly professional and highly technical personnel, shall be subject to Civil Service Law, rules and regulations. Non-presidential appointees shall enjoy security of tenure and may be removed or otherwise disciplined only for cause, in accordance with Civil Service Law, rules and regulations.

“The Chairman or Governor and Vice Chairman or Vice Governor shall be the General Manager and Deputy General Manager, respectively, of the Commission.”

SEC. 2. All laws, executive or administrative orders, letters of instructions, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent with this Presidential Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 3. This Presidential Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia