MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1492

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF FERROL IN THE PROVINCE OF ROMBLON

WHEREAS, the fundamental objective of the government is to hasten up the pace of economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the effective implementation of the declared programs of the government on development hinges primarily on the administrative efficiency of each and every local government unit;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the locality with the conformity of the local officials thereat, to create a municipality so as to achieve a closer supervision of the execution of the developmental programs of the area; and

WHEREAS, the proposed municipality will become a self-reliant community once intensified government projects are made in line with the declared policy of the government to uplift the socio-economic well-being of the residents therein.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Agnocnoc, Bunsoran, Ferrol, Hinagoman, Tubigon and Claro M. Recto, all in the Municipality of Odiongan, Province of Romblon, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent municipality which is hereby created to be known as the Municipality of Ferrol without effecting in any manner the legal existence of the Municipality of Odiongan. The seat of government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Ferrol.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities shall be applicable to the new Municipality of Ferrol.

Section 3. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Odiongan shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of Ferrol until the municipal officials of the said Municipality shall have been appointed by the President.

Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular election for municipal officials, following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Ferrol shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new Municipality of Ferrol in the obligations, fund, assets and other property of the Municipality of Ferrol shall be transferred by the President to the newly created Municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or part of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office