PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 716

CONVERTING THE TIWI NATIONAL VOCATIONAL SCHOOL INTO AN AGRO-INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 6301, enacted without executive approval in June 19, 1971 established a national vocational school in the Municipality of Tiwi, Province of Albay, and authorizes the appropriation of funds therefor;

WHEREAS, said school has been placed under the direct supervision of the Director of Vocational Education;

WHEREAS, said Republic Act No. 6301 authorizes the offering of the following courses: a) general education curriculum with practical arts for the first and second year, b) vocational education curriculum including craftsmanship and home industries in the third and fourth years, c) short vocational courses, and d) two-year post secondary technical courses;

WHEREAS, Resolution No. 153 of the Municipal Council of Tiwi, Albay, dated January 15, 1974, recommended the establishment of anAgro-IndustrialSchoolin said municipality;

WHEREAS, the survey made indicates that the town of Tiwi, Albay, and the surrounding municipalities are basically agricultural, hence, the establishment of an Agro-Industrial School in said municipality;

WHEREAS, the survey made indicates that the town of Tiwi, Albay, and the surrounding municipalities are basically agricultural, hence, the establishment of an Agro-Industrial School has been favorably recommended; and

WHEREAS, the approved budget for the implementation of Republic Act No. 6301 indicates Agro-Industrial vocational education programs which crystallized in effect the clamour of the citizens thereat for the establishment of anAgro-IndustrialSchool:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the amendment to Section 1 of said Republic Act No. 6301 to read as follows:

Section 1. The Tiwi National Vocational School is hereby converted into anAgro-Industria lSchool, at Tiwi, Albay, to be known as the Tiwi Agro-Industrial School.

Section 2. The sum of two hundred thousand pesos is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the establishment, operation and maintenance of said school during the fiscal year nineteen hundred and seventy-five. Thereafter, such as may be necessary shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.”

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office