MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 917

ESTABLISHING A FREIGHT BOOKING AND CARGO CONSOLIDATION CENTER IN THE PHILIPPINE SHIPPERS’ COUNCIL AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the economic growth and stability of the Philippines to expand exports, conserve foreign exchange and strengthen our international trade and balance of payments position;

WHEREAS, in order to make our exports competitive and contain increases in domestic prices of goods, it is important not only to provide adequate and efficient shipping services but also to secure reasonable freight rates for our export and import cargoes;

WHEREAS, these objectives can be attained through pooling of homogeneous cargoes for shipment in bulk, efficient vessel chartering, utilization of shipping lines which charge reasonable freight rates and other measures;

WHEREAS, Philippine shippers need assistance in effecting cargo consolidation and other means to secure economic carriage of their goods;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the following a part of the law of the land:

Section 1. A Freight Booking and Cargo Consolidation Center, hereinafter referred to as Freight Center, is hereby established as an integral part of the Philippine Shippers’ Council, with the following duties, functions and powers:

(a) To encourage, facilitate and assist Philippine shippers in, and effect the consolidation of their cargoes, in order to achieve economy and efficiency in bulk shipments;

(b) To provide systematic vessel chartering services or charter vessels for the benefit of Philippine shippers;

(c) To secure adequate shipping services for the carriage of Philippine overseas trade and book cargoes, at reasonable freight rates;

(d) To serve as the central implementing authority for the utilization of Philippine shipping lines for the seaborne transport of Philippine export and import cargoes, as prescribed under Presidential Decree No. 894; and

(e) To foster cooperation among, and enter into suitable arrangements with relevant private and public sectors in the Association of Southeast Asian nations for these purposes and projects.

Section 2. The Secretary of Trade as Chairman of the Philippine Shippers’ Council shall issue the necessary rules and regulations after consultation with the private sector for the effective implementation of this Decree.

Section 3. The sum of two hundred fifty thousand (P25,000.00) pesos is hereby appropriated from funds in the National Treasury, not otherwise appropriated, for the administration and initial operations of the Freight Center unit December thirty-one of the current fiscal year. Thereafter, its appropriation shall be included in the national government budget.

Section 4. The Freight Center is hereby authorized to collect reasonable fees for its services, which shall be utilized for the training and development of its services, as the Board of Directors of the Philippine Shippers’ Council may authorize.

Section 5. All provisions of laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect upon its approval.

Done in the City Manila, this 1st day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) Juan C. Tuvera Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 917 April 01, 1976