MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1654

AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1281 REVISING COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 136, CREATING THE BUREAU OF MINES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, there is a need to change the name of the Bureau of Mines to make it responsive to the multivaried functions invested under Presidential Decree No. 1281; and

WHEREAS, there are other functions which should be included in the existing Presidential Decree No. 1281 to enable the Bureau of Mines to administratively function smoothly and efficiently.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order, as follows:

Section 1. Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 1281 is hereby amended to read, as follows:

“Sec. 2. The name “Bureau of Mines” is hereby changed to “Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences”, and shall be headed by a Director and an Assistant Director, both of whom shall be appointed by the President.

“No person shall be appointed Director or Assistant Director of the Bureau of Mines and Geo- Sciences unless he is a natural-born citizen of the Philippines, at least 30 years of age, and shall be of recognized competence, particularly in the fields of mining engineering, geology, geodetic engineering, metallurgy, management, law, economics, or any field related to the development of mineral resources.”

Section 2. Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 1281 is hereby amended by changing paragraph (s) thereof and by adding paragraphs (t) and (u) and as changed and added to read, as follows:

“Sec. 3. The Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences shall have the following functions and powers, to wit:

“s.) To require mining lessees/operators to include in their annual program of work submitted to the Bureau of Mines and Geo- Sciences for the approval of the Director of Mines and Geo-Sciences the extent of the research and development projects to be undertaken by them on their mining claims and to monitor the implementation thereof to the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences;

“t.) To require mining permittees, lessees or operators to submit to the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences samples of their mineral products together with a complete analysis of the same; and

“u.) To grant, or recommend to the Minister of Natural Resources the granting of, the right to undertake the installation and operation of milling or processing plants to produce ores and/or mineral products.”

Section 3. Section 4 of Presidential Decree No. 1281 is hereby amended to read, as follows:

“Sec. 4. For an efficient and effective implementation of its powers and functions, the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences shall be composed of ten (10) Divisions, as follows:

1. Administrative Services

2. Budget and Fiscal

3. Accounting

4. Geological survey

5. Mineral Economics and Information

6. Metallurgical and Laboratory Services

7. Mining Technology

8. Mineral Lands and Topographic Survey

9. Marine Mineral Resources

10. Mineral Resources Administration

“Existing divisions may be organized, merged or abolished, and additional divisions, sections and units may be established and new positions therefor created by the Minister of Natural Resources, upon the recommendation of the Director of Mines Geo-Sciences, as may be necessary to exercise powers and discharge the functions of the Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences under this Decree. In addition to the existing Planning and Management Staff, positions requiring highly technical skills and expertise may be created under the Office of the Director of Mines and Geo-Sciences as the exigency of the service may require.

“The existing mining regions with offices at Baguio City, Metro-Manila, Daet, Cebu City and Surigao City shall be maintained, and shall conform to the national regionalization numbering scheme. Upon the recommendation of the Director of Mines and Geo-Sciences, the Minister of Natural Resources may establish other mining regions as the need for them arises, the boundaries of which shall so far practicable coincide with the boundaries of the corresponding provinces: Provided, however, That mineral districts may be established by the Minister of Natural Resources in existing mining regions, subject to such rules and regulations that shall be promulgated by him.”

Section 4. The phrase “Bureau of Mines” found in Presidential Decree No. 1281 is hereby changed to “Bureau of Mines and Geo-Sciences.”

Section 5. The word “Secretary” as used in Presidential Decree No. 1281 is hereby changed to “Minister”.

Section 6. The phrase “Director of Mines” as used in Presidential Decree No. 1281 is hereby changed to “Director of Mines and Geo-Sciences”.

Section 7. All laws executive orders, decrees, rules and regulations or parts thereof contrary or inconsistent with this Decree are hereby amended or modified accordingly.

This Decree shall take effect immediately upon promulgation.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office