PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 472

REQUIRING TIMBER LICENSEES AND PASTURE LESSEES TO ENGAGE IN FOOD PRODUCTION, CREATING THE MECHANICS FOR ITS IMPLEMENTATION AND PROVIDING THE NECESSARY FUNDS THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, self-sufficiency in rice, corn and other basic staples is a primary concern of the State;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to supplement current food production programs in order to attain self-efficiency in food; pasture lands that can profitably be devoted to food production;

WHEREAS, the forest-based industries, industries recognize the urgent need of producing sufficient food to sustain not only their own workers but the surrounding communities as well, as a demonstration of their ability to respond to economic problems thru the imaginative use of the country’s vast store of natural wealth; and

WHEREAS, forest-based industries, particularly timber licensees and pasture lessees, have the resources and facilities to help in the food production drive of the Government.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree as part of the law of the land following:

Section 1. Timber licensees and pasture lessees are hereby required to develop areas within their concessions and pasture lands for the production of rice, corn and other basic staples to take care the consumption requirements of their workers and the people within their area.

The Secretary of Natural Resources shall, in consultation with the Director of Forest Development, determine what area within the concessions or pasture lands may be devoted to this purpose: Provided, That existing pasture lands shall first be evaluated to determine which, or what portions thereof, are to be devoted to food production or grazing purposes: Provided, further, That the classification of the area during the duration of this program shall be as before it was so devoted for food production.

Section 2. Hereafter, it shall be a condition to the issuance, renewal or extension of a timber license or pasture lease that the licensee or lessee shall undertake the production, in area so selected within the concession or pasture land, of rice, corn or other basis staples in amounts sufficient to meet the requirements of their workers and people living within the concession or pasture land.

Section 3. After a determination of the area to be devoted to the production of rice, corn or other basic staples within the concession or pasture land, it shall be incumbent upon the licensee or lessee to bring such area into production in accordance with a development plan approved by the Secretary of Natural Resources.

Failure of the licensee or lessee to develop the area so selected for the production of staples within a period specified by the Secretary of Natural Resources, shall be sufficient cause for the cancellation of the license or lease.

Section 4. The Secretary of Natural Resources shall be the Action Officer of this project. He shall be assisted by the Director of Forest Development. He shall create a Secretariat and designate a Project Director to head the same.

To carry out the provisions of this Decree, the Secretary of Natural Resources shall issue the necessary rules and regulations, and he may call upon any government office or agency as well as any private entity for assistance.

Section 5. The sum of One Million (P1,000,000.00) Pesos or so much thereof as may be necessary is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to carry out effectively the provisions of this Decree for the fiscal year 1974-75.

Section 6. All Acts, Decrees, rules and regulations or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 472 May 24, 1974