MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1547

CREATING BARANGAY TABACDA, IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TUBO, PROVINCE OF ABRA.

WHEREAS, in this period of political and economic dislocation of our people, the government has engaged in intensified developmental programs geared toward the hastening up of the pace of economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, in the execution of said governmental programs, close supervision by local officials is a necessity so as to at least approximate a certain degree of achievement which will contribute to a large extend toward the political, social and economic upliftment of the people;

WHEREAS, the creation of more self-reliant communities would pave the way toward the economical, social and political development of the residents of the areas affected;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Sitio Baclingayan, Taleb, Mintangeb, Dataan, Napo, Ampongan and Tabbac of Barangays Kili, Alangtin and Tubtuba, in the Municipality of Tubo, province of Abra, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent barangay which is hereby created to be known as Barangay Tab a without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother Barangays of Kili, Alangtin and Tubtuba.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular barangays shall be applicable to the new barangay of Tab a.

Section 3. The present action elective barangay officials of Barangay Kili shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly-created Barangay Tab a until the officials of said barangay shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointed officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of Barangay Tab a shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new Barangay of Tab a in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of Barangays Kili, Alangtin and Tubtuba shall be transferred by the President of the newly-created barangay upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1547 June 11, 1978