PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1041

CREATING THE NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT CENTER IN THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES.

WHEREAS, there is need for up-to-date and accurate information for the formulation of resource policies, as well as for the effective and efficient planning for the development and conservation of the country’s natural resources and the protection of the environment;

WHEREAS, there are rapidly developing technologies for gathering and interpreting information relative to the inventory, assessment, and monitoring of the country’s natural resources such as the use of aircraft and satellite-borne sensors, computerized imagery interpretation and data banking techniques;

WHEREAS, proper utilization of such technologies will enhance the capability to formulate effective plans for economic development; and

WHEREAS, in order to avail of these technologies, there is a pressing need for the creation of an agency which shall be responsible for their utilization and through which the capability of the nation to use these technologies for resource planning and monitoring can be developed.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Declaration of Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Government (a) to utilize efficient and appropriate technologies in the inventory and management of our natural resources; (b) to enhance the capability to plan for accelerated economic growth; and (c) to make sound decisions with respect to natural resources utilization and conservation, and environmental enhancement and protection.

Section 2. Creation of the Natural Resources Management Center. For the purpose of carrying out the above declared policy, a Natural Resources Management Center, hereinafter referred to as the NRMC, is hereby created in the Department of Natural Resources.

Section 3. Management of the NRMC. The Secretary of Natural Resources is hereby granted authority to create such working units as may be necessary for carrying out the functions of the NRMC.

The Secretary of Natural Resources shall appoint and maintain an adequate and highly technical staff, which shall be headed by an Executive Director, assisted by a Deputy Executive Director. In view of the highly technical character of the NRMC’s functions, the regular professional and technical personnel of the NRMC shall exempt from OCPC (WAPCO) rules and regulations.

Section 4. Functions. The NRMC shall have the following functions:

(a) To conduct natural resources and environmental surveys and analysis, and keep an up-to-date inventory and assessment of the country’s natural resources;

(b) To undertake research in remote-sensing technologies such as satellite imagery analysis, airborne multi-spectral scanning systems, and side-looking airborne radar;

(c) To undertake technology assessment and forecasting studies in natural resources;

(d) To develop and maintain a management information system for the Department of Natural Resources;

(e) To develop the country’s physical and manpower capability in the application of advanced technology for resource survey, assessment and analysis;

(f) To provide remote sensing services and vital data on the environment, water resources, agriculture, weather, etc., to other government agencies and to the private sector;

(g) To provide remote sensing and related services to other countries upon approval of the President;

(h) To generate income through services and sale of the NRMC’s developed materials to government agencies and the private sector;

(i) To promote ASEAN cooperation in the application of advanced technologies in regional resource surveys, and assessment for the effective management thereof;

(j) To call on any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, and on private entities and organizations for cooperation and assistance in the performance of its functions; and

(k) To perform such other activities which are necessary for the effective performance of the above-mentioned functions and objectives.

Section 5. Appropriation. The budget of the NRMC for its first year of operations shall be included in the budget allocation of the Department of Natural Resources. Thereafter, such amount as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Decree shall be included in the annual Appropriations Act. Income derived from the NRMC’s operations shall constitute a special fund which shall be expended by the NRMC to carry out its activities.

Section 6. Separability Clause. Should any of the provisions herein be declared unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of the other provisions.

Section 7. Repealing Clause. All laws, decrees, orders, rules or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect upon its promulgation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1041 October 25, 1976