PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 833

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 165 WHICH CREATED THE PHILIPPINE SHIPPERS’ COUNCIL

WHEREAS, the Philippine Shippers’ Council was created under Presidential Decree No. 165 in order to assist, protect and promote the interests of shippers and the national economy;

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen the Council in order to enhance its capability to negotiate with shipping lines for reasonable freight rates and other shipping terms; and

WHEREAS, continued government leadership and support of the Council are essential for the effective accomplishment of its objectives and close cooperation among ASEAN shippers’ councils;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the following amendments to Presidential Decree No. 165:

Section 1. Amendment of Section four. The first paragraph of Section four is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 4. Governing board. The Council shall be governed by a board of Directors, herein also referred to as Board, consisting of fifteen members: the Secretary of Trade, Chairman; the Maritime Administrator; the Presidents of the Confederation of Philippine Exporters, Inc., the Chamber of Cottage Industries of the Philippines, Inc., the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, the Philippine Chamber of Industries and the Chamber of Agriculture and Natural Resources, and eight other members. Six of these members shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines from nominees of major export commodity groups and the other members to represent shippers of non-traditional exports or general cargoes, for a term of three years each. The present members of the Board, however, shall continue in office until their terms expire or their successors have been appointed and qualified; and the ex-officio members shall assume office in the order above-listed.”

Section 2. Amendment of Section five. Section five is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 5. Sources of funds. The members shall pay such fees, dues and other contributions as the Board of Directors may determine, which shall be deposited in any government banking institution and utilized by the Board to attain the objectives of the Council. The amount of two hundred and fifty thousand pesos is hereby appropriated from the general funds of the National Government not otherwise appropriated as contribution for the administration and operation of the Council, and its appropriation shall be included in the annual general appropriations act.”

Section 3. Amendment of Section six. Section six is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 6. Assistance of financial and other agencies. The Maritime Industry Authority, Philippine Port Authority, Central Bank of the Philippines, Board of Investments, Development Bank of the Philippines, Bureau of Customs, Philippine Coast Guard and other government offices and instrumentalities as well as private financial institutions and other associations are hereby enjoined to extend the necessary assistance to the Council and Philippine shippers, particularly in the extension of incentives, credits, financing and facilities and in the effective accomplishment of their objectives. The Council, while operating as a private corporation, shall continue to be attached to the Department of Trade, through the Secretary, for direction and supervision and for coordination of the efforts of government authorities to assist the Council.”

Section 4. Amendment of Section seven. Section seven is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 7. Executive Director and Council secretariat. (a) The Council shall have a secretariat to be headed by an Executive Director who shall be appointed by the Board, upon recommendation of the Chairman, for a term of six years. He shall have a broad background in international and domestic trade, overseas and inter-island shipping, economics and maritime matters, and must have had at least ten years of work experience in research, planning and management in a responsible capacity. He shall be under the general direction and supervision of the Chairman and serve as executive officer of the Board. Until the Board shall otherwise fix his compensation, he shall receive an annual salary of thirty-six thousand pesos.

“(b) The secretariat staff shall consist of highly competent technical and administrative personnel, to be appointed by the Chairman in accordance with the budget approved by the Board, at rates of compensation comparable to those in private enterprise.”

Section 5. Change of position title. The position title “Secretary of Trade and Tourism” as used in the Decree is hereby changed to “Secretary of Trade.”

Section 6. Repealing clause. All provisions of existing acts, decrees, orders and rules which are contrary to or inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office