MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 566

DECREE FURTHER AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 39

1. Sub-paragraph c(2), Section 4 of Presidential Decree No. 39 dated November 7, 1972, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“(2) No sentence of a military commission shall be executed unless the same is approved and ordered executed by the President of the Philippines. The recommendation of the Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines, as Reviewing Authority, along with the record of trial of the case and the opinion of the Board of Review shall be forwarded to the President of the Philippines for final action, through the Secretary of National Defense who shall conduct a thorough and exhaustive review of such record of trial as firm basis for the President’s dispositive action. In any case, the President shall have the power to reverse, confirm, increase the penalty imposed, or otherwise modify any decision of the military commission.”

2. Sub-paragraph C, Section 5, of Presidential Decree No. 39, dated November 7, 1972, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“c. After trial. No sentence of a provost court shall be executed unless the same is approved and ordered executed by the President of the Philippines. The recommendation of the appropriate Reviewing Authority, along with the record of trial of the case, and the recommendation of the Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines with the opinion of the Board of Review, shall be forwarded to the President of the Philippines for his final action, through the Secretary of National Defense who shall conduct a thorough and exhaustive review of such record of trial as firm basis for the President’s dispositive action. In any case, the President shall have the power to reverse, confirm, increase the penalty imposed, or otherwise modify any decision of the provost court.

3. All provisions of Presidential Decrees, General Orders or Letters of Instruction or portions thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 566 October 18, 1974