MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1557

AMENDING SECTIONS 5 AND 6 OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1003-A CREATING THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1003-A established the National Academy of Science and Technology to be composed of outstanding scientists in the country; and

WHEREAS, certain amendments are necessary in order to carry out more effectively the objectives of the Decree.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Section 5 of the Presidential Decree No. 1003-A is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 5. A scientist who is a Filipino citizen and who is in sympathy with the purposes of the Academy may become a member therein when his nomination for membership, which shall be made by at least three (3) members of the Academy who shall certify that the nominee is qualified under the provisions of Section 2 of this Decree, is formally approved by a majority of the full membership of the Academy.

“Membership in the Academy shall carry with it the title of “Academician”, and shall be for life except when terminated for cause or by voluntary resignation.”

Section 2. Section 6 of the same Decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 6. The Academy shall be initially composed of scientists who shall be nominated by different national scientific societies and recognized research and academic institutions of higher learning and screened by a temporary Committee of ten (10) members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Board of Governors of the National Science Development Board. This Committee shall be representative of Five (5) major fields of sciences, including basic and applied biological, physical, mathematical, engineering and social sciences.

The temporary Committee shall screen and evaluate the nominee pursuant to the provisions of Section 2, and may confer membership by a favorable vote of at least eight (8) members.

The temporary screening Committee shall exist for a period of not more than twenty-four (24) months after promulgation of this Decree.”

Section 3. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1557 June 11, 1978