PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 988

DEFINING THE ROLE, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CHIEFS OF DIVISIONS IN THE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES OF THE GOVERNMENT AND REGULARIZING THEIR APPOINTMENTS.

WHEREAS, Chiefs of Divisions occupy pivotal positions in the governmental hierarchy, comprising the link between the top management and the rank and file of government personnel;

WHEREAS, this puts the Chiefs of Divisions in the best position to oversee the performance of the employees.

WHEREAS, Chiefs of Divisions are directly charged with translating into action the policies, plans and programs of a department or agency, whether these constitute line or staff activities;

WHEREAS, Chiefs of Divisions are generally career officials who have been appointed to their positions by virtue of competence, qualifications and potential not to mention dedication and commitment to department or agency goals;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. As used in this Decree, “Chief of Division” shall refer to the incumbent of a position in the second level of the career civil service, whether in a department or agency or local government, which has the responsibility of overseeing the work of an organizational unit charged with a major and specialized activity.

Section 2. A Chief of Division shall be appointed to a position whose nomenclature reflects the expertise required in his area of work but such position shall be specifically referred to as a “Chief of Division” position.

Section 3. A Chief of Division shall be responsible for the accomplishment of the goals and objectives of his organizational unit. To this end he shall perform the following:

1. Planning, programming and distribution of work;

2. Motivation, training and development of employees;

3. Review and evaluation of performance of employees;

4. Maintenance of morale and discipline among employees;

5. Development of cooperative and well-coordinated work-force;

6. Coordination and cooperation with other organizational units within the Department or agency.

Section 4. These functions shall be performed by a Chief of Division in accordance with guidelines, policies and standards set by his higher supervisors and as contained in laws and policies governing his actions.

Further, in the performance of these functions, the Chief of Division shall be responsible and accountable to his higher supervisors.

Section 5. The Chief of Division shall be required to submit semi-annually an action program for his division based upon the broad policy guidelines of the Office to which his Division belongs, which shall be arrived at in consultation with his employees, the accomplishments of which shall form the basis for the evaluation of the performance of the Division, of himself, and that of his employees.

Section 6. A sound comprehensive method for the selection of Chief of Division shall be established by the Civil Service Commission which shall be supplemented and reinforced by thorough and continuous training by the departments and agencies of such Chiefs and prospective Chiefs in the obligations and techniques of good supervision.

Section 7. Any law or decree or provision of law or decree inconsistent with the Decree is hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 8. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office