PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1235

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 6-A, AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT DECREE OF 1972

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 6-A, as amended, the Educational Development Projects Implementing Task Force (EDPITAF) is charged with the function of implementing development projects in education; and

WHEREAS, in order to accelerate the implementation of ongoing and proposed education development projects, there is a need to strengthen and provide flexibility in the organizational structure of EDPITAF:

NOW, THEREFOR, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The pertinent paragraphs of Section 6 of Presidential Decree No. 6-A are hereby amended and incorporated into a new section to be known as section 7 which shall read as follows:

“Sec. 7. Organization of EDPITAF. A project unit to be known as the Educational Development Project Implementing Task Force (EDPITAF) is hereby established under the Office of the Secretary of Education and Culture, to be headed by an Executive Director and to be composed of a full-time technical and administrative staff and consultants. its functions are (1) to supervise and implement foreign assisted projects; and (20 To implement such other development projects as may be assigned to it by the Secretary of Education and Culture.

(a) The Secretary of Education and Culture is hereby authorized to determine the organizational structure of EDPITAF in any manner consistent with the requirement of the projects authorized under this Decree and/or pursuant to loan agreements or covenants which may be entered into by the government for the Implementation of such projects.

(b) The Secretary, through the Director, shall have the authority to hire such number of consultants as may be deemed necessary, from the private sector or from other government offices, agencies or instrumentalities, or contractual, part time or full-time basis in order to effectively carry out the above functions: Provided, however, That all existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding, consultants hired from other government office, agencies or instrumentalities be granted compensation in the form of allowances or honoraria, the amount of which to be determined by the Executive Director with the approval of the Secretary.

(c) Where the project involves an office, agency, or instrumentality of the government other than the Department of Education and Culture appropriate working arrangements shall be established by the Educational Development Projects Implementing Task Force and the Office, agency or instrumentality concerned, including the turn over of the project upon its completion to such office, agency or instrumentality to be integrated with and be part of the regular activities thereof.”

Section 2. Sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, of Presidential Decree No. 6-A, as amended, are hereby renumbered and shall henceforth be identified as Sections 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 respectively.

Section 3. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office