PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1277

PROVIDING FOR THE PRESERVATION OF THE WALLS OF INTRAMUROS AND THE RESTORATION OF ITS ORIGINAL MOAT AND ESPLANADE.

WHEREAS, the ancient Walls of Intramuros stand as a monument to the artistry, craftsmanship and industry of the Filipino artisans and laborers who were responsible for its buildings;

WHEREAS, these walls represent an integral part of our national history, and has been declared a national historical monument under Section 2 of the Republic Act No. 597; and

WHEREAS, the recapturing of the ambience of a past era within these walls presents a special tourist attraction;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The walls of Intramuros which are precious historical relics of the artistry, craftsmanship and industry of the Filipino craftsman and laborers should be restored, preserved and maintained in accordance with this Decree and the rules and regulations that may be promulgated pursuant thereto.

Section 2. Those parts of the Walls of Intramuros with minor damages shall be maintained and cleaned as is; those parts which have been almost totally destroyed shall not be reconstructed but also left as is; but those parts which have been suffered only partial destruction shall be restored.

Section 3. An access road of al least six meters from and along the inner face of the walls and a clear space of 55 meters from and along the outer face of the walls, bastions and ravelins shall be provided for and so maintained, this area being the site of the moat which shall be restored together with the esplanade.

Section 4. This road and space shall be opened to the public and shall not anytime be obstructed or used for parking.

Section 5. The owners, administrators, representatives, and/or persons-in-charge of the buildings, structures, and/or constructions encroaching on the above-mentioned easements shall have three months from the date of publication of this Decree to clear the area, otherwise the Military Corps of Engineers shall demolish their structures and the cost of demolition charged against them.

Section 6. Any person found adding to, taking from, and/or defacing the walls, or else altering them without authority from the National Historical Institute, shall suffer a fine of not less than one hundred pesos, no more than one thousand pesos for the first offense; and a fine of not less than one thousand five hundred pesos, not more than five thousand pesos and/or an imprisonment of not less than one month or more than six months on subsequent offenses.

Section 7. Necessary funds to carry out the purposes of this Decree shall be included in the appropriations for the National Historical Institute and disbursements shall be made by said office according to general auditing rules and regulations.

Section 8. The National Historical Institute shall exercise supervision and control over the reconstruction or preservation of the aforesaid areas and structures and shall issue rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Decree. No building shall be constructed or remodeled in the said areas without the prior approval of the Institute.

Section 9. All laws, orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 10. This Decree shall take effect thirty days after its publication in the Official Gazette.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of January in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1277 January 04, 1978