PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 335

AMENDING FURTHER SECTION FIFTEEN OF REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED FOUR THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOUR, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “GEODETIC ENGINEERING LAW,” AS AMENDED BY PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 202

WHEREAS, on June 2, 1973, Presidential Decree No. 202 was promulgated amending Section 15 of Republic Act No. 4374, other wise known as the Geodetic Engineering Law, which authorized, under certain conditions, undergraduates who have completed 4th year of civil engineering to take and qualify in the Board of Examination for Jr. Geodetic Engineers;

WHEREAS, the objective of said Decree was to fill an acute need for technical manpower to undertake and implement the massive cadastral and public land subdivision survey program of the Bureau of Lands, as well as its parcellary mapping operations under the Land Reform Program of the administration;

WHEREAS, further studies indicate that an undergraduate who has completed 3rd year of Civil Engineering would have at that stage acquired the necessary technical skill and proficiency in handling basic land survey and mapping work to qualify in the examination for Junior Geodetic Engineers;

WHEREAS, there are also several graduates of Civil Engineering who are desirous of taking the Board Examination for Junior Geodetic Engineers; and

WHEREAS, in order to achieve the objectives of Presidential Decree No. 202 dated June 2, 1973, it is desirable that the same be further amended to admit graduates of Civil Engineering or undergraduates who have completed 3rd year of Civil or Geodetic Engineering, under certain conditions, to the practice of Geodetic Engineering as Junior Geodetic Engineers;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, and in order to effect the desired changes and reforms in the social, economic and political structure of our society, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Section fifteen, paragraph (e) of Republic Act Numbered Four Thousand Three Hundred Seventy Four, as amended, is further amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 15. . .

“(e) To qualify in the Junior Geodetic Engineer Examination, he must, likewise, satisfy the foregoing requirements (a) to (c) of this Section, and that he is a holder of the degree of Associate in Surveying, or a holder of the degree of Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering, or has completed third year in Geodetic Engineering or Civil Engineering and has earned to his credit the following courses: Laws on Natural Resources, Laws on Land Registration and Property, Land Reform Laws, Land Property Surveys, Photogrammetry and Cartography from any recognized school, college or university.

Section 2. A certificate of registration as Junior Geodetic Engineer shall authorize the holder thereof to execute land surveys or phases thereof, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by the Board of Geodetic Engineers.

Section 3. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office