MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1923

DECLARING AN AMNESTY ON THE PAYMENT OF DELINQUENCY INTERESTS ON OVERDUE ACCOUNTS OF BENEFICIARIES/AWARDEES/LESSEES OF CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL LOTS/DWELLING UNITS IN DESIGNATED PROJECTS OF THE NATIONAL HOUSING AUTHORITY

WHEREAS, it is the declared national policy that slum improvement and sites and services program is the primary strategy for dealing with slums, squatter areas and other blighted communities in urban areas in order to achieve affordable and replicable housing schemes for the urban poor;

WHEREAS, the National Housing Authority, as the lead agency of the Ministry of Human Settlements in the implementation of slum improvement and sites and services program, has disposed either by sale with mortgage, lease/award or by other modes of disposition, residential lots/dwelling units to qualified marginal and low-income beneficiaries;

WHEREAS, these qualified beneficiaries have suffered economic dislocation as a consequence of the prevailing recession;

WHEREAS, under a compassionate society, humanization of laws through government intervention is necessary to alleviate the suffering of the poor and allow them a fair chance to stabilize their economic situations so that they can eventually meet their financial obligations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution of the Philippines, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. All delinquency interests due and payable as of April 30, 1984 by beneficiaries/awardees of purely residential lots/dwelling units in designated projects by the National Housing Authority as may be determined by its General Manager and approved by its Board of Directors, are hereby condoned.

Section 2. Beneficiaries/awardees who are entitled to condonation but have actually paid such delinquency interests on their outstanding obligation as of April 30, 1984 shall be credited with such payment on the balance of their principal accounts.

Section 3. All beneficiaries/awardees availing of this amnesty on the payment of delinquency interest shall, within ninety (90) days from the publication of the approved rules and regulations to implement this Decree, settle their respective outstanding accounts or otherwise agree with the National Housing Authority on the restructuring of such accounts to determine the new schedule of amortization payments.

Section 4. Any beneficiary/awardee who fails to settle his outstanding account or comes to an agreement with National Housing Authority within the stipulated 90-day period shall not be entitled to the amnesty prescribed by this Decree and can be summarily evicted from the homelot/dwelling unit occupied by him.

Section 5. The General Manager of the National Housing Authority shall promulgate the rules and regulations to implement this Decree, subject to the approval of the Board of Directors.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia