PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 29

AMENDING SUBPARAGRAPH (D) OF SECTION SEVENTEEN HUNDRED THIRTY-NINE AND SUBPARAGRAPH (B) OF SECTION SEVENTEEN HUNDRED FORTY OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE.

WHEREAS, there were pending before Congress prior to the promulgation of Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, certain measures vital to the establishment and maintenance of peace and order throughout the land;

WHEREAS, this bill would not only stop the aggravation of the congestion problem plaguing our penal establishments but would also allow the confinement of more prisoners closer to their homes and families;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, and in order to effect desired changes and reforms in the social, economic and political structures of our society, do hereby decree that House Bill No. 2544, entitled “An Act Amending Subparagraph (d) of Section Seventeen Hundred Thirty-Nine and Subparagraph (b) of Section Seventeen hundred Forty of the Revised Administrative Code” as reproduced hereunder is hereby adopted, and approved and made part of the law of the land:

Section 1. Subparagraph (d) of Section seventeen hundred thirty-nine of the Administrative Code is hereby amended read as follows:

‘”(d) Persons who by reason of their sentence may be deprived of liberty for not more than six months. The imposition of subsidiary imprisonment shall not be taken into consideration in fixing the status of a prisoner hereunder except when the sentence imposes a fine only.”‘

Section 2. Subparagraph (b) of Section seventeen hundred forty of the same Code is likewise amended to read as follows:

‘”(b) Persons who by reason of their sentence may be deprived of liberty for not more than three years or are subjected to a fine of not more than one thousand pesos, or are subjected to both penalties; but if a prisoner receives two or more sentences in the aggregate exceeding the period of three years, he shall not be considered a provincial prisoner. The imposition of subsidiary imprisonment shall not be taken into consideration in fixing the status of a prisoner hereunder except when the sentence imposes a fine only.”‘

This decree shall take effect immediately, Provided, that amendments, changes and modifications may be made by me and the same shall take effect after my announcement thereof or by my duly designated representative.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of October, in year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office