PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 557

DECLARING ALL BARRIOS IN THE PHILIPPINES AS BARANGAYS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the Barangay was the basic political unit existing in the Philippines before the arrival of the Spaniards;

WHEREAS, it was through the Barangays that our forebears consulted on matters of community interests;

WHEREAS, the revival of the Barangays under Presidential Decree No. 86 has contributed considerably in awakening the interest of our people and broadening their participation in government affairs, the conduct of their officials, and other matters of public interest;

WHEREAS, the term “barrio” is of foreign origin and consequently there have been various representations from the Barangays all over the country to declare all barrios as Barangays:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order the following:

Section 1. Any provision of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding, all existing barrios or barrios that may hereafter be created are hereby declared as Barangays and all references to the barrio in any existing laws shall henceforth be understood as references to the Barangay: Provided, however, That in the case of the City of Manila and other chartered cities where there are no barrios, all existing Barangays therein created under Presidential Decree No. 86, as amended, shall continue as such Barangays.

Section 2. Republic Act No. 3590, as amended, otherwise known as the Revised Barrio Charter, is hereby adopted as the Barangay Charter.

Section 3. All powers and rights vested in or exercised by the barrio assembly, barrio council and all barrio officials pursuant to Republic Act No. 3590, and such other powers and rights, appertaining to or conferred upon them by other laws, shall henceforth be exercised by the Barangay Assembly, Barangay Council and Barangay officials, and all duties and responsibilities vested in or conferred upon them by existing laws shall likewise be performed by the Barangay assemblies, Barangay councils, and Barangay officials.

Section 4. The officials of the barrio as constituted pursuant to Republic Act No. 3590 shall now be known as Barangay Captain, Barangay Councilman, Barangay Secretary and Barangay Treasurer.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately upon approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 557 September 21, 1974