PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1

REORGANIZING THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, there were pending before Congress prior to the promulgation of Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, certain priority measures vital to the national development program of the Government, and which were duly certified by the President as urgent measures;

WHEREAS, one of these priority measures is the Integrated Reorganization Plan reorganizing the entire Executive Branch of the National Government, prepared by the Commission on Reorganization;

WHEREAS, the Integrated Reorganization Plan is necessary to the realization of the Government’s program to effect administrative reforms in the government machinery;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. l., dated September 22, 1972, as amended, in order to effect the desired changes and reforms in the social, economic and political structure of the country, do hereby order and decree that the Integrated Reorganization Plan as prepared, completed, and submitted by the Commission on Reorganization shall be, as it is hereby adopted, approved, and made as part of the law of the land: Provided, That there shall be created and organized, in lieu of the Public Information Office within the Office of the President as recommended in the Integrated Reorganization Plan, a Department of Public Information, the composition of which shall be indicated in future implementing orders.

Changes and modifications in the Integrated Reorganization Plan shall be made from time to time, as necessity requires, to be correspondingly announced by me or by my duly authorized representative.

Implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan as herein adopted, approved and decreed shall be carried out by Letters of Implementation which will be issued by me from time to time, or by my duly authorized representative.

All concerned, especially heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus, and offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, shall act accordingly, pursuant to the contents of this Decree.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office