PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1223

AMENDING SECTION 6 OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1187 ENTITLED, “PROVIDING FOR A GENERAL REGISTRATION OF ALL QUALIFIED VOTERS THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES”

WHEREAS, as provided under Presidential Decree No. 1187, the only government officials or employees who may qualify for appointment as chairman and members of the Citizens’ Registration Committee are public school teachers and members of the barangay council recommended by the barangay captain;

WHEREAS, there is justification to broaden the field of choice from which to appoint the chairmen and members of the Citizen’s Registration Committees so as to qualify therefor all other government officials and employees covered by Letter of Instructions No. 559 including members of the barangay council, the Buklod ng mga Kabataang Kawani of the Commission on Civil Service and the officials of the Kabataang Barangays;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested in the Constitution, hereby decree:

Section 1. Amending Sec. 6 of Presidential Decree No. 1187.Sec. 6 of Presidential Decree No. 1187 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 6. Appointment of registration committee. The Commission shall directly or through its duly authorized representatives, appoint at least ten days before the registration day a citizens’ registration committee for each voting center to be composed of a chairman, a poll clerk, and a third member. The Chairman and the poll clerk shall be public school teachers. The third member shall be a member of the barangay council, the Buklod ng mga Kabataang Kawani, the official of the Kabataang Barangay or a government official or employee covered by the Letter of Instructions No. 559, dated June 23, 1977.

“The Commission on Elections shall, after due consultation with the Department, agency, or organization concerned, prescribe the procedure to facilitate the appointment of any member of the Barangay Council or the Buklod ng mga Kabataang Kawani, or officials of the Kabataang Barangay, or of any government official or employee, as member of any citizens’ registration committee.”

Section 2. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President  of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office