PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 466

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1 DATED SEPTEMBER 24, 1922, RELATIVE TO PART XX OF THE INTEGRATED REORGANIZATION PLAN.

WHEREAS, it is imperative to solve the criminal and lawless elements among the ranks and files of city and municipal police forces throughout the country;

WHEREAS, in order to expedite the disposition of all administrative cases against policemen, it is necessary to increase the membership of the Police Commission;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Presidential Decree No. 1, dated September 24, 1872, relative to Article II, Part XX of the Integrated Reorganization Plan is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Article II National Police Commission

“1. The present Police Commission is converted into a National Police Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission.

“2. The governing body of the Commission shall be composed of a Chairman and six members. The Chairman and members of the Commission shall serve full time in the Commission, provided that the President of the Philippines may, in his discretion, appoint the Chief of Constabulary and the director of the National Bureau of Investigation as members of the Commission in a concurrent capacity, for which purpose separate appointments may be extended to them as such members.

“No person shall be appointed Chairman or member of the Commission unless he is a member of the Philippine Bar or a holder of at least a Bachelor’s degree in Police Administration or Criminology. The Chairman and at least two of the members shall have had experience in law enforcement work for at least ten years.

“3. The Chairman and members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines for a term of six years. Of those first appointed, the Chairman shall hold office for six years, two members for four years, the other two members for three years, and the last two for two years; provided that the incumbent Chairman and members of the present Police Commission shall continue to serve in the new Commission in accordance with Paragraph 14, Article I, Chapter I of Part XXIII of this Plan.

“The Chairman and members of the Commission shall be removed from Office only for cause. All vacancies in the Commission except through expiration of term, shall be filed for the unexpired term only.”

Section 2. All laws, decrees, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 3. This decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

Presidential Decree No. 466 May 23, 1974