MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1917

AMENDING SECTIONS 153, 155 AND 156 OF TITLE IV (SPECIFIC TAX) OF THE NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE, AS AMENDED.

WHEREAS, the need for a cutback in the volume of crude oil imports has made it imperative that stringent measures to conserve fuel and avoid wasteful consumption thereof be adopted;

WHEREAS, one of the most effective measures of fuel and energy conservation is the restructuring of the prices of refined petroleum products;

WHEREAS, in order to correct the demand imbalance it is necessary to reshape the consumption on oil products by realigning the tax component of the price of refined petroleum products;

WHEREAS, the revision of the specific tax rates on these products will generate additional revenue to support the economic programs of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and decree the following:

SECTION 1. Sections 153, 155 and 156 of the National Internal Revenue Code as amended are hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SECTION. 153. Specific tax on manufactured oil and other fuels. — On refined and manufactured mineral oils and motor fuels, there shall be collected the following taxes which shall attach to the articles hereunder enumerated as soon as they are in existence as such:

(a) Kerosene, per liter of volume capacity, thirty two and three-fourth centavos;

(b) Lubricating oils, per liter of volume capacity, one peso and fifty centavos;

(c) Naptha, regular gasoline and all other similar products of distillation, per liter of volume capacity, one peso and sixty six and one fourth centavos; Provided, That on premium and aviation gasoline, the tax shall be one peso and fifty four and one fourth centavos, per liter of volume capacity;

(d) On denatured alcohol to be used for motive power, per liter of volume capacity, one centavo: Provided, That unless otherwise provided for by special laws, if the denatured alcohol is mixed with gasoline, the specific tax on which has already been paid, only the alcohol content shall be subject to the tax herein prescribed. For the purposes of this subsection, the removal of denatured alcohol of not less than one hundred eighty degrees proof (ninety per centum absolute alcohol) shall be deemed to have been removed for motive power, unless shown to the contrary;

(e) Processed gas, per liter of volume capacity, four and one-half centavos;

(f) Thinners and solvents, per liter of volume capacity, ninety one and one-half centavos;

(g) Liquefied petroleum gas, per kilogram, eighty five centavos: Provided, That liquefied petroleum gas used for motive power shall be taxed at the equivalent rate as the specific tax on diesel fuel oil;

(h) Asphalts, per kilogram, forty six centavos;

(i) Greases, waxes and petrolatum, per kilogram, eighty centavos; and

(j) Aviation turbo jet fuel, per liter of volume capacity, one peso and twenty three centavos.

“SEC. 155. Specific tax on bunker fuel oil. — On fuel oil, commercially known as bunker fuel oil, and on all similar fuel oils, having more or less the same generating power, there shall be collected, per liter of volume capacity, thirty three and one-half centavos, which tax shall attached to this fuel oil as soon as it is in existence as such.

“SEC. 156. Specific tax on diesel fuel oil. — On fuel oil, commercially known as diesel fuel oil, and on all similar fuel oils, having more or less the same generating power, per liter of volume capacity, fifty seven and one-half centavos, which tax shall attach to this fuel oil as soon as it is in existence as such.

“SECTION 2. This Decree shall take effect on May 17, 1984.

“DONE in the City of Manila, this 10th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia