PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 996

PROVIDING FOR COMPULSORY BASIC IMMUNIZATION FOR INFANTS AND CHILDREN BELOW EIGHT YEARS OF AGE

WHEREAS, the Child is one of the most important assets of the nation and every effort should be exerted to promote his welfare and enhance his opportunities for a useful and happy life;

WHEREAS, the Child can be protected against death, disease, and disability through an integrated and comprehensive basic immunization program for infants and children below eight years of age;

WHEREAS, immunization against tuberculosis, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, poliomyelitis, measles, rubella, and other diseases is proven and universally applied and generally accepted to be efficient, safe, and economical measures against the morbid and devastating effects of these diseases on infants and children;

WHEREAS, the Department of Health has the necessary resources for nationwide BCG Vaccination and resources can be developed for other immunizations to meet the needs for preventive services for infants and children;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order the following:

Section 1. Coverage. Basic immunization against certain diseases shall be compulsory for infants and children below eight years of age;

Section 2. Scope. Basic immunization services shall include: (a) BCG Vaccination against tuberculosis; (b) Inoculation against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis; (c) Oral poliomyelitis immunization; (d) Protection against measles; (e) Immunization against rubella; and (f) such other basic immunization services for infants and children below eight years of age which the Council for the Welfare of Children may recommend to the Secretary of Health.

Section 3. Implementation by the Department of Health. The Department of Health shall provide free basic immunization services under this Decree, subject to rules and regulations as the Secretary of Health shall issue on the immunization, ages, schedules, procedures, and available resources to carry out the purposes of this Decree.

Section 4. Responsibility of Parents, the Guardian, or Person Having Custody of the Infant or Child. It shall be the duty of the parents, guardian, or person having custody of the infant or child to see to it that such infant or child is presented for basic immunization services at such place and time as specified by the Department of Health.

Section 5. Responsibility of the Head of a School or Institution. The head of an institution where infants or children are educated, treated, cared for, or committed by law for preventive or rehabilitative services shall provide basic immunization services: Provided, that arrangements may be made by the said institution with the Department of Health for free immunization services.

Section 6. Immunization of School Entrants. It shall be the duty of all schools, public and private, to provide basic immunization services to all pre-school and primary school entrants who have not received such immunization, subject to rules and regulations as the Secretary of Health may promulgate.

Section 7. Penalty. Violations of any provision of this Decree shall be punished by imprisonment not exceeding one month or a fine not exceeding two hundred pesos, or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court, unless a higher penalty is provided for in the Revised Penal Code or special laws.

Section 8. Repealing Clause. All laws or any parts of any laws inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Decree is held invalid, the other provisions not affected thereby shall continue in operation.

Section 10. Effectivity Clause. This Decree shall take effect upon its approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office