PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 630

PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS TO GOVERN THE CONDUCT OF THE NATIONAL REFERENDUM ON JANUARY 30, 1975 AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

WHEREAS, to ensure the holding of a free, orderly and honest referendum on January 30, 1975, as provided under Proclamation No. 1366 dated December 31, 1974, it is necessary to prescribe rules and regulations to govern the conduct of the same; and

WHEREAS, it is also necessary that funds be appropriated to carry out the purposes of said proclamation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the following as part of the law of the land;

Section 1. The January 30, 1975 Referendum. The provisions of Presidential Decree No. 299 dated June 30, 1973, entitled: “Providing for the Manner of Voting and Canvass of Votes in Barangays (Citizens Assemblies),” as amended, shall govern the conduct of the National Referendum on January 30, 1975, including its provisions on prohibited acts, the imposition of penalties, prosecution of offenses and jurisdiction of courts. The provisions of Presidential Decree No. 210 dated June 8, 1973, entitled “Providing for a System of Registration for Members of the Barangays (Citizens Assemblies),” as amended, shall govern the registration of barangay members herein provided, including its provisions on prohibited acts, penalties, and jurisdiction of courts;

Section 2. Promulgation of Rules and Regulations. The Commission on Elections shall promulgate such rules and regulations and prescribe such forms as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Decree.

The Commission on Elections may procure any supplies, materials or services needed for the holding of the referendum either by negotiation or through sealed quotations if it finds the requirements of public bidding impracticable to observe.

The Commission may hire under contractual basis the services of personnel if this method is found to be more expedient and economical.

If upon the effectivity of this Decree, it should no longer be possible to reasonably observe the periods and dates herein prescribed, the Commission on Elections shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the same.

Any provisions of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding, the Commission on Elections may require its officials and employees, and those assigned thereto, to work overtime in connection with the registration and the holding of the referendum after the required office hours on regular working days and on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and on scheduled rest days, and pay compensation therefor, including overtime services rendered before the promulgation of this Decree, at the rate to be fixed by the Commission.

Section 3. Appropriations. The sum of EIGHT MILLION PESOS (P8,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated to be spent under the exclusive authority of the Commission on Elections to carry out the provisions of this Decree.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office