PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 475

APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS, INVOLVING REHABILITATION AND CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT, SYNCHRONIZING THE SAME WITH PREVIOUS PUBLIC WORKS APPROPRIATIONS.

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 3 provides appropriations primarily rehabilitate and reconstruct damage infrastructure facilities caused by calamities that brought havoc in the country in 1972;

WHEREAS, hand in hand with rehabilitation and reconstruction, there is a need to implement additional development projects in order to further accelerate economic development;

WHEREAS, there is also a need to increase the appropriations of previously authorized projects to assure their completion, in view of increased construction costs brought about by circumstances beyond the control of the government;

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide adequate appropriations to cover the local counterpart funds of ongoing and proposed foreign-financed projects in view of our increasing capability to absorb foreign assistance as demonstrated by the various loans and aids extended to Government projects.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and for sustained development of the economy, do hereby decree and order as follows:

Section 1. Capital Development Projects. The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary, are hereby appropriated, out of the general funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, from the proceeds of bond issues and/or loans from local or foreign financial institutions, to implement projects pertaining to the program of capital improvements of the Administration, subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth, for the purpose mentioned hereunder.

Title A Buildings

1. For the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, completion, including proper preparation and purchase of necessary materials and supplies, of the projects summarized hereunder:

Title B Highways

1. For the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, completion, including project preparation and purchase of necessary materials and supplies, of the projects listed hereunder:

Title C Artesian Wells & Springs

1. For drilling, construction, rehabilitation and improvement of artesian wells and/or the development of springs for water supplies, including the purchase of necessary construction materials and supplies of the projects listed hereunder: Provided, That in localities where the drilling of artesian wells is not feasible, the appropriations of artesian wells therefore, in this and the previous public works measures, may be used for the development of small springs for water supply, whenever feasible:

Title D Waterworks

1. For the completion, construction, rehabilitation, reconstruction, and/or extension, of waterworks systems including project preparation and purchase of necessary construction materials and supplies, of the projects listed hereunder:

Title E Shore Protection

1. For the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, completion, including project preparation and purchase of necessary materials and supplies, of the projects listed hereunder:

Title F River Control and Drainage

1. For the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, completion, including project preparation, and purchase of necessary materials and supplies, of the projects summarized hereunder.

Title G Irrigation

1. For the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, completion, including project preparation and purchase of necessary materials an supplies, of the projects summarized hereunder:

Title H Airports and Air Navigation Facilities

1. For the construction, installation, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, including project preparation and purchase of necessary materials and supplies, of the projects summarized hereunder.

Title I Telecommunications

1. For the construction, installation, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, completion, including project preparation and purchase of necessary materials and supplies of the projects listed hereunder:

Title J Railways

1. For the construction, installation, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, completion, including project preparation and purchase of necessary materials and supplies of the projects listed hereunder:

Section 2. Miscellaneous Projects. The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary are hereby appropriated, out of the general funds in the national treasury, not otherwise appropriated, subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth, for the purposes mentioned hereunder:

Section 3. Apportionment of the Portworks Special Fund. The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary are hereby apportioned and authorized to be released out of the Portworks Special Fund as provided in Act No. 3592, as amended, not otherwise apportioned, to implement the portworks projects which pertain to the Capital Development Program of the Administration, subject to the provisions hereinafter set forth and for the purposes mentioned hereunder:

Title K Portworks and Maritime Navigation

1. For the construction, improvement, rehabilitation, reconstruction, and completion, including project preparation and purchase of necessary materials and supplies, of the project summarized hereunder;

SPECIAL PROVISIONS

Section 4. Program of Work Required Before Prosecuting Public Works. Before prosecuting any public works project, the district, city or project engineer concerned shall be prepare a program of work for approval by the Department head concerned for any project with an estimated cost of more than P500,000: by the Bureau Head concerned for any project with an estimated cost of more than P200,000 but not more than P500,000; by the Regional Director concerned for any project with an estimated cost of more than P50,000 but not more than P200,000; and, by the District or City Engineer concerned for any project with an estimated costs P50,000 or less than. In no case shall construction funds be remitted to field offices or construction work on a project be started before the program of work is approved.

No program of work for any project which requires special site investigation, survey, and construction plans shall be approved unless such plans are used as basis of the program: Provided, That for projects with an estimated cost of P100,000 or more than PERT/CPM technique shall be used and time-scaled diagram of the activities as well as a monthly cash flow shall be made part of the program of work.

The program of work for any project shall not be amended except in case of unforeseen contingencies or any change in field conditions or other similar circumstances in which case an amendment may be allowed provided that such amendment will not result in the impairment of the expected accomplishment in excess of fifteen per centum thereof.

Section 5. Preliminary Studies. In the implementation of the work, a general plan of operations shall be prepared to indicate the methods and procedures to be allowed. This plan will cover and organize all relevant fields of study, delineation or responsibilities for undertaking each phase, specifying all analytical procedures and resources to be required for conducting the studies: Provided, that the appropriation shall include administrative services directly identified with the studies and purchase of equipment, materials and supplies.

Section 5. Rental of Equipment. Rental of equipment shall not be deducted at the time of the release of funds of public works or even in anticipation of use of the equipment but shall be paid based on actual use when the appropriation so released is P25,000 or less. When the appropriation so released is above P25,000 and use of rented equipment is anticipated, then deduction for rental shall be made at the time of the release of funds but such deduction shall not exceed ten per centum of the released appropriation: Provided, That should the amount so deducted should be remitted immediately to the district or city engineering office concerned.

Section 7. Preference to Local Labor. In the execution and construction of any public works project, the labor requirements shall be filled by laborers from the sitio, barrio, poblacion or municipality where the project is being undertaken. However, in case of skilled labor, it may be procured elsewhere within the province where the project is located; and in the case of specialized skilled labor, it may be procured outside the province where the project is located.

Section 8. Use of Private Consulting Service. For any public works project with an estimated cost of P200,000 or more, the Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communications may hire the services of Filipino or associated Filipino and foreign consultants or consulting firms whenever available, for a fee not exceeding two and one-half per centum of the estimated cost to review the project or plans and specifications devised by the bureau or office concerned, or for a fee not exceeding six per centum of the estimated cost to prepare the projects including plans and specifications thereof: Provided, That except for projects financed by loans from international lending institutions or projects financed in pursuance of bilateral agreements with foreign governments or their instrumentalities, whose foreign consultants services are required, the participation of the Filipino consultants and/or implementing agency concerned in such combined services shall be maximized.

Section 9. Prosecution of Public Works Projects by Administration. The provisions of any law, rules and regulation to the contrary notwithstanding and irrespective of the source of funds, all public works projects with a cost Two Hundred thousand pesos (P200,000) or less may be done by administration by the bureau of agency concerned without benefit or public bidding subject to the provision of Section seven hereof. Public works projects with a cost of more than Two Hundred Thousand Pesos (P200,000), shall after public bidding, be awarded by contract. If there are no responsible bids for the project, or the bids are higher than the government estimate on the cost of the project, the project may be prosecuted by administration by the bureau or agency concerned after securing the approval of the Department Head. If case of urgent necessity or emergency, projects costing more than P200,00 may be prosecuted by administration without benefit of public bidding upon representation by the bureau or agency concerned, subject to favorable recommendation of the Department Head and approval by the President of the Philippines.

Section 10. Purchase of Sites. Any appropriation herein authorized for construction of any project shall be understood to cover the acquisition or purchase of sites whenever such acquisition or purchase is necessary for the prosecution of the project.

Section 11. Purchase of Materials and Supplies. The Department Head concerned is authorized, in the interest of public service, subject to bidding and auditing requirements, to procure the necessary materials and supplies, needed for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair and/or maintenance of any public works project, regardless of the source of funds: Provided, that, when such materials and supplies are obtainable locally in the district, city or neighboring districts, the same may be procured by the District or City Engineer without prior authority from the Department Head: Provided, further, that, no surcharge shall be imposed for the service of procuring such materials and supplies: Provided, furthermore, That the cost of such materials and supplies shall not exceed the estimated cost of such materials and supplies stated in the approved program of work as provided under Section Four hereof.

Section 12. Engineering Surcharge and Other Overhead Expenses. No national surcharge shall be collected from the appropriation or expenditures authorized for any category of public works and all surcharges to be collected by the District or City Engineering office for administrative, overhead and engineering expenses, including the compensation and travel expenses as provided in Section Nine hereof and all other deductions shall not exceed ten per centum of expenditures of appropriation for any public works project, so that ninety per cent of said appropriation shall be expended directly for the project: Provided, That nine per cent of said expenditures shall accrue to the District or city engineering office and one per cent shall accrue to the regional engineering offices concerned: Provided, further, That such surcharges shall be under the custody of the disbursing officers of the said engineering offices: Provided, finally, That such surcharges may be used for the purchase of motor vehicles and equipment.

Section 13. Public Works Appropriations under this Decree are National disbursing Funds: Exceptions: All funds appropriated under the provisions of this Decree shall, when released, be carried in the account books of the treasurers or special disbursing funds and all projects herein specified are classified as national projects: Provided, that provincial fund allocated as counterpart shall not be considered as national fund.

Section 14. Interchangeability of Financing Methods. The President of the Philippines or his duly authorized representative may modify the financing methods indicated in this Decree and previous Public Works Acts and Decree, so as to enable the Department Head concerned to undertake the projects authorized to be financed either from general revenue, from proceeds from the sale of bonds, from loans, or from a portworks projects under Presidential Decree No. 3, from Portworks Special Fund, and/or from any of the aforementioned sources or from a combination thereof.

Section 15. Other Financing Methods. The provisions of existing laws, executive orders, rules and regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, the proceeds from the payment for reparations goods may be used for financing projects authorized in this Decree and any Public Works Act, including the purchase of necessary equipment, construction materials and supplies.

Section 16. Reports. The Department Head concerned shall submit an accomplishment report to the President. Such report shall include the appropriations released as of the date of said report and the percentage of work accomplished, further work to be done to complete the program of broad categories of public works and his recommendations if any, for transfer of appropriations or for program changes to be incorporated in the next Public Works Appropriations Measure.

Section 17. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 475 June 03, 1974