MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1845

DECLARING THE AREA WITHIN A RADIUS OF THREE KILOMETERS SURROUNDING THE SATELLITE EARTH STATION IN BARAS, RIZAL, A SECURITY ZONE

WHEREAS, the only earth station in the Philippines for world satellite telecommunications is located in a remote and sparsely populated place in sitio San Miguel, Barrio Pinugay, Municipality of Baras, Province of Rizal;

WHEREAS, the said earth station is vital to the existence and maintenance of satellite telecommunications between the Philippines and most countries of the world, and plays an invaluable role in the sustenance and development of our political, economic, commercial, and social life;

WHEREAS, in view of its location, it would be easy for saboteurs or criminal elements to destroy or cause damage to the said earth station thereby paralyzing the system and curtailing momentous public service; and

WHEREAS, to protect and insure the safety and uninterrupted operation of this modern media of international communications, it is necessary to establish a security zone all around the said earth station.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree the following:

SECTION 1. Declaration of Security Zone . — The entire area surrounding the satellite earth station in Sitio San Miguel, Barrio Pinugay, Municipality of Baras, Province of Rizal, within a radius of three kilometers from said earth station is hereby declared a security zone.

SEC. 2. Occupation by Third Parties Illegal . — All occupants of land within the security zone who do not own the land they are occupying, as well as occupants who are not bona fide tenants of the registered owners shall vacate the areas they are occupying within sixty (60) days from the date of this Decree.

SEC. 3. Occupation by Owner. — Owners of land within the security zone and/or their agents can occupy or continue to occupy their respective areas therein only with the prior written permission of the Minister of National Defense.

SEC. 4. Penal Provisions. — Any violation of the provisions of this Decree shall be punished by prision correccional in its minimum period and a fine of two thousand pesos, with subsidiary imprisonment in case of insolvency.

SEC. 5. Repealing Clause. — All laws, decrees, rules and regulations or parts thereof contrary to or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. Effectivity. — This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia