PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 685

AUTHORIZING GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATION IN THE CONFEDERATION OF PHILIPPINE EXPORTERS, INC., EXTENDING THE USE OF GOVERNMENT FACILITIES TO SAID CONFEDERATION, PROVIDING ASSISTANCE FOR PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the Confederation of Philippine Exporters, Inc., a non-stock, non-profit association of individuals, corporations, associations, partnerships, cooperatives and other institutions engaged in the export business or in servicing or financing of exports, is the only voluntary organization in the Philippines which integrates the private sector into a single corporate body in order to perform the vital function of assisting the Government in the development, promotion and expansion of the country’s export trade;

WHEREAS, in order to assist the Confederation of Philippine Exporters, Inc., in accomplishing its important role, it is necessary for the government to recognize it as a private entity dedicated to a public purpose, and to extend every possible assistance to insure its success.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree, as part of the laws of the land, the following:

Section 1. Declaration of Policy. It is hereby declared the policy of the State to actively encourage the participation of the private sector in the development, promotion and expansion of the Philippine export trade.

Section 2. Objectives. The Confederation of Philippine Exporters, Inc., hereinafter referred to as COPE, shall have the following objectives:

1) To help promote and expand the export trade of the Philippines;

2) To provide a forum for all persons, associations, and other institutions concerned with the export trade for the purpose of recommending ways and means to effectively improve and expand Philippine exports in particular, and promote the public interest in general;

3) To promote greater cooperation and coordination between exporters and the government agencies concerned;

4) To conduct studies pertinent to exports and to collate these data for the information of, and dissemination to, the members, and the public;

5) To support the adoption of internationally accepted quality standards and to encourage the observance of fair trade practices;

6) To actively participate whenever authorized to do so, in the formulation and implementation of an integrated national export promotion program;

7) To promote a spirit of service, mutual cooperation, efficiency and goodwill among its members;

8 ) To assist the government and perform such functions as may be delegated to it in matters concerning foreign trade; and

9) To organize private trade missions to foreign countries to promote Philippine exports and to represent the exporters in all government-sponsored trade missions to develop foreign markets for Philippine export products; and

10) To provide and maintain such other services as may be necessary to facilitate the development of exports.

Section 3. Government Representation. The representatives of the National Economic and Development Authority, Department of Trade, Finance, Foreign Affairs, Industry, Agriculture, Natural Resources, National Defense, Public Information, and Tourism, Board of Investment, Central Bank of the Philippines, Development Bank of the Philippines, Philippine National Bank, and all other agencies involved in the formulations and implementation of trading and export policies are hereby authorized to sit in the Board of Trustees of the COPE with all the rights and prerogatives of regular members.

Section 4. Composition of the COPE Board of Trustees. The COPE Board of Trustees is authorized to have twenty-five (25) member of which fourteen (14) members shall be elected from the private sector representing the various export industry groupings and the remaining eleven (11) members shall be elected from the agencies of the Government concerned with the country’s foreign trade.

Section 5. Donations and Grants. The COPE may receive such donations, bequests and grants from whatever sources, domestic or foreign to finance its operations. Such donations, bequests and grants shall be deductible in full from gross income and shall be exempt from donors or estate taxes.

Section 6. Government Assistance. All government offices, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporation, which are directly or indirectly concerned in the implementation of export promotion projects of the Government are hereby authorized to extend such assistance to COPE as may be necessary for projects that will redound to the benefit of the national economy.

Section 7. Repealing Clause. Any provisions of existing general or special laws inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree shall be deemed modified, amended or repealed accordingly.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 685 April 15, 1975