MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 2017

MERGING THE KALINGA-APAYAO COMMUNITY COLLEGE, BIBAK NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL SCHOOL, TABUK NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL, AND DOÑA EUFRONIA M. PUZON MEMORIAL SCHOOL INTO A STATE COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS THE KALINGA-APAYAO STATE COLLEGE, PROVIDING A CHARTER FOR THE PURPOSE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, the Constitution of the Philippines directs the State to establish and maintain a complete, adequate and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development and further prescribed that all educational institutions shall aim to develop scientific, technological and vocational efficiency;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 6-A also known as Educational Decree of 1972, it has been declared a policy of the government to re-orient the educational system toward an accelerated national economic growth and meaningful social development;

WHEREAS, to maximize the effective utilization of limited resources, it is necessary to integrate and convert the institutions of higher learning located in the Province of Kalinga-Apayao into one institution of higher learning in order to establish an effective and efficient state college that will serve as an instrument towards the rapid development of the national manpower resources not only of the Province of Kalinga-Apayao but all the other provinces of Region II;

WHEREAS, the establishment of a State College will provide better services in professional and technical training in the arts, sciences, humanities, and technology and in the conduct of scientific research and technological studies;

WHEREAS, the integration of the above-mentioned institutions of higher learning into an autonomous state college to be known as the “Kalinga-Apayao State College” is imperative to hasten the realization of national goals as well as enhance regional development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

SECTION 1. The present BIBAK National Agricultural School, Kalinga-Apayao Community College, Tabuk National High School And Doña Eufronia M. Puzon Memorial School, located in Kalinga-Apayao are hereby merged into a State College which shall be known as the KALINGA-APAYAO STATE COLLEGE, hereinafter referred to as the State College.

SECTION 2. The State College shall provide advance institutions in arts, agricultural and natural sciences as well as in technological and professional fields.

SECTION 3. The governing body of the State College shall be vested in the Board of Trustees to be composed of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, who shall be the Chairman of the Board, the President of the College as Vice-Chairman, and the Regional Director of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports for Region II, the Regional Director of the Economic Development Authority for Region II, the President of the Alumni Association of the State College, and three (3) prominent citizens of Kalinga-Apayao who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, as members.

In the absence or inability of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, or when these positions are vacant, the Vice-Chairman of the Board shall be the Acting Chairman or in his absence, the other members of the Board may elect from among themselves a temporary Chairman of the Board;

The three (3) appointive members of the Board shall hold office for four (4) years without reappointment: Provided, that one of the first three (3) appointive members of the Board shall be appointed for two (2) years only and another one for four (4) years. In case of permanent vacancy, the appointee shall hold office for the unexpired terms only.

SECTION 4. A quorum of the Board of Trustees shall consist of a majority of all members holding office at the time of the meeting. All processes against the State College shall be served on the President of the State College or his duly authorized representative.

SECTION 5. The Members of the Board of Trustees shall not receive compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred either in attendance of meetings of the Board or of other official business authorized by the Board.

SECTION 6. The Board of Trustees shall have the following powers and duties in addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise of all the powers of a corporation as provided in Section 36 of Batas Pambansa Bilang 68 otherwise known as the Corporation Code of the Philippines:

a. To prescribe rules for its own government and to enact for the government of the State College such rules and regulations not contrary to law, as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and functions of the State College;

b. To receive and appropriate such funds, specified by law, for the support of the State College;

c. To import duty-free commodities for educational purposes as an exception to existing laws as well as to receive in trust legacies, gifts and donations of real and personal property of all kinds, to administer the same for the benefit of the State College or the department thereof, or for aid to any student in accordance with directions and instructions of the donor, and in default thereof, in such manner as the Board of Trustees may in its discretion determine. All such donations shall be exempt from all taxes and shall be considered as deductible items from the income tax of the donors;

d. To approve the curricula and rules of discipline drawn by the State College Council as hereinafter provided;

e. To confer decrees upon successful candidates for graduation, to award honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of learning, public service, statemanship or eminence in any field of specialization of the State College, and to authorize the President of the State College to award certificates for completion of non-degree programs;

f. To appoint, on recommendation of the President of the State College, Vice-Presidents, deans, directors, registrars, heads of departments, professors, and other officials and employees of the State College; to fix their compensation, hours of service, and such other duties and conditions as it may promulgate, any provisions of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding; to remove them for cause after an investigation and hearing;

g. To provide fellowship for qualified faculty members and other scholarships to deserving students;

h. To fix tuition fees, matriculation fees, graduation fees, laboratory fees, and such special fees and charges, including other income generated by the State College, and to establish the said income into a specified trust fund for the exclusive use of the State College, any provision of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding;

i. To authorize the State College to undertake the construction and/or repair of its buildings, machinery and equipment and other facilities, any provision of law or executive order to the contrary notwithstanding provided that the funds for the purpose shall come from its appropriation;

SECTION 7. No student shall be denied admission to the State College by reason of age, sex, nationality, region or political affiliation.

SECTION 8. The head of the State College shall be known as the President of the State College. He shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports after consultation with the members of the Board.

The powers and duties of the President of the State College in addition to those specifically provided for in this Decree, shall be those usually pertaining to the office of the President of a State College;

SECTION 9. The incumbent presidents and/or heads of the institutions of higher learning integrated in this decree shall continue to serve as heads/presidents in their respective college or unit until such time as the terms of office and other conditions as well as other officials and employees of the State College shall have been determined by the Board of Trustees.

SECTION 10. There shall be an administrative council consisting of the President of the State College as chairman and the Vice-President and Deans as members, whose duty shall be to prepare and promulgate general policies of the State College governing personnel, financial management, and development planning, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees.

SECTION 11. There shall be a college council in each college or unit of the State College with the Dean as Chairman and all the faculty of the college or unit as members. The body of instructors, assistant professors, associate professors, and professors of each college shall constitute the faculty of the college;

The college council shall have the power to prescribe the curricula and rules of discipline of the college or unit of the State College subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. It shall fix the requirements for admission to the college or unit as well as for graduation and the conferring of degrees subject to review of the Board of Trustees.

SECTION 12. Members of the faculty of the State College shall not be exempt from any civil service examination or regulation as a requisite to appointment. No religious test shall be applied nor shall the religious opinions or affiliations be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members of the State College provided that no member of the faculty shall teach for or against any particular church or religious sect.

SECTION 13. There shall be an Advisory Council for each college or unit. The Advisory Council shall provide advice and counsel to the dean in matters of general policy concerning the affairs of the college or unit of the State College.

The present members of the Board of Trustees of the present institutions integrated in this Decree shall continue to serve as members of the Advisory Council of their respective institutions, except the Chairman of the Board of Trustees, for a term of four (4) years. Thereafter, the member of the Advisory Council of each college or unit of the State College shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the President of the State College.

SECTION 14. The Treasurer of the Philippines shall be ex-officio Treasurer of the State College. All accounts and expenses thereof shall be audited by the Commission on Audit or its duly authorized representative.

SECTION 15. All personnel, assets, records and appropriations of the institutions of higher learning integrated in this Decree are hereby transferred to the State College.

SECTION 16. The Minister of Education, Culture and Sports is hereby directed to take such steps as are necessary for the immediate implementation of this Decree. For this purpose, he is hereby authorized to create a technical committee to advice the Board of Trustees of the State College toward the proper establishment, development and expansion of the programs of the State College.

SECTION 17. On or before the fifteenth (15th) day of the second month after the opening of regular classes of each year, the Board of Trustees shall file with the Office of the President of the Philippines through the Minister of Education, Culture and Sports, a detailed report setting forth the progress, conditions and needs of the State College.

SECTION 18. In addition to the present appropriation of the institutions of higher learning integrated in this Decree, the sum of Ten Million Pesos (₱10,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated out of the funds of the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated to carry out the purposes of this Decree. Thereafter, funds needed for the maintenance and continued operation of the State College shall be included in the Annual Appropriation Act.

SECTION 19. All laws, acts, decrees, or executive order contrary to or inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SECTION 20. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia