MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1924

IMPLEMENTING AN EXPANDED AND ACCELERATED URBAN LAND REFORM AND SOCIAL HOUSING PROGRAM AND INCREASING THE CAPITALIZATION OF THE NATIONAL HOUSING AUTHORITY TO ₱5 BILLION

WHEREAS, the Constitution now mandates that the State “shall undertake urban land reform and social housing program to provide deserving landless, homeless and inadequately sheltered low-income resident citizens reasonable opportunity to acquire land and decent housing”;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Letters of Instructions Nos. 555 and 557 as amended by Letter of Instructions No. 686, the national government is implementing through the National Housing Authority the Slum Improvement and Resettlement (SIR) Program and the Sites and Services Projects Development Program which respond to the housing and related needs of the urban poor and implements the objectives of urban land reform and the provision of social housing program as provided in the Constitution;

WHEREAS, there is a need to expand and accelerate these programs not only in Metro Manila but in other urban centers of the country;

WHEREAS, the Ministry of Human Settlements is charged with the task of formulating a National Shelter Program which defines the housing objectives and targets of the national government;

WHEREAS, the National Housing Authority, an agency under the Ministry of Human Settlements, is the designated lead agency in the implementation of housing program for marginal and low-income families;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and decree as follows:

SECTION 1. The National Housing Authority under the supervision of the Ministry of Human Settlements, shall evolve and implement a comprehensive national program to meet the housing and related needs of marginal and low-income families in Metro Manila and other urban centers of the country. Such a program shall include the following components, to wit:

a. Improvement or upgrading of identified slums and other depressed communities to make them acceptable human habitats.

b. Development of sites and services projects for families displaced from danger areas, from land needed by the government for its infrastructure program and from slum improvement projects and to accommodate the normal increase in households and in-migration of marginal and low-income families.

c. Relocation and resettlement of families in pursuance of the campaign for the prevention and control of squatting.

d. Land acquisition in support of the above-mentioned components of the Program.

e. Comprehensive Livelihood Program as an integral component of the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran (KKK) and the Sariling Sikap Program.

SECTION 2. The Ministry of Human Settlements shall review the Program as prepared by the National Housing Authority and include the same in the National Shelter Program.

SECTION 3. To provide the National Housing Authority the long-term capability to undertake the comprehensive national housing program for marginal and low-income families, its authorized capitalization is hereby increased to ₱5 billion. The National Housing Authority, with the participation of other government agencies as prescribed under Letters of Instructions No. 555 and 557 and as amended by Letters of Instructions No. 686, shall implement specific projects for marginal and low-income families in accordance with annual budgets recommended by the Minister of Human Settlements and approved by the President.

SECTION 4. All provisions of laws, decrees, letters of instructions, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

SECTION 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia