PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 614

CONVERTING THE ILOCOS NORTE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY INTO A STATE COLLEGE TO BE KNOWN AS MARIANO MARCOS MEMORIAL COLLEGE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, PROVIDING A CHARTER FOR THIS PURPOSE, EXPANDING ITS CURRICULAR OFFERINGS, REDIRECTING ITS OBJECTIVES AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

WHEREAS, the Constitution of the Philippines directs the State to establish and maintain a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development and further prescribes that all educational institutions shall aim to develop scientific, technological and vocational efficiency;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 6-A also known as the Educational Development Decree of 1972 promulgated on September 29, 1972, it had been declared a policy of the government to reorient the educational system toward an accelerated national economic growth and meaningful social development.

WHEREAS, the conversion of the Ilocos Norte Institute of Technology into a state college to be known as Mariano Marcos Memorial College of Science and Technology, providing for its own charter, broadening for this purpose its curricular offerings and redirecting its objective would serve to better achieve the above national goals;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree to be part of the laws of the land the following:

Section 1. The present Ilocos Norte Institute of Technology located in the Municipality of Batac, Province of Ilocos Norte, is hereby converted into a state college to be known as Mariano Marcos Memorial College of Science and Technology, hereinafter referred to in the Decree as the State College.

Section 2. TheState College shall primarily provide higher technological, professional, and vocational instruction and training in science, agricultural and industrial fields, as well as short-term technician or vocational course. It shall also promote research, advance studies, and progressive leadership in its areas of specialization.

Section 3. In addition to its present secondary and collegiate curricular offerings, theState College shall offer other undergraduate and graduate courses in the fields of science, agriculture and industrial field as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary. It shall also offer opportunity or short-term technical or vocational courses within its areas of specialization to meet the needs of the region.

Section 4. No student shall be denied admission to the State College by reason of sex, ethnic considerations, or religious belief or affiliation.

Section 5. The head of theState College shall be known as the President of the Mariano Marcos Memorial College of Science and Technology. He shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Board of Trustees. His salary shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees comparable to that being received by Presidents of similar educational institutions of like enrolment and standing.

The powers and duties of the President of the State College in addition to those specifically provided for in this Decree, shall be those usually pertaining to the Office of the President of aState Collegeor University.

Section 6. The governing body of the State College shall be the Board of Trustees of the Mariano Marcos Memorial College of Science and Technology. It shall be composed of the Secretary of Education and Culture as Chairman, the Regional Director of the National Economic Development Authority, the President of the State College, and four (4) prominent citizens of Region No. 1 to be appointed by the President of thePhilippines as members.

Of the four appointed members one shall be an authority on science, one on agriculture, one on arts and trades and one on technology, Provided, That at least one of the four appointed members shall be an alumnus of the former Ilocos Norte Institute of Technology or State College. Of the first group appointed, the President shall designate one to serve for one year; one to serve for two years; one to serve for three years; and one to serve for four years. Thereafter, persons appointed to succeed such members shall hold office for the term of four years and until their successors who should be an expert in the same field shall have been appointed and qualified. In case of a permanent vacancy, the position shall be filled by appointment by the President of the Philippines. Such appointee shall hold office for the unexpired term only.

When the Secretary of Education and Culture is unable to perform his duties as Chairman of the Board due to illness, absence or other cause, or in case of vacancy in the office, the Undersecretary of Education and Culture shall temporarily perform the functions of the Chairman of the said Board. The Chairman may assign qualified officials to represent him with full authority in the Board.

Section 7. A quorum of the Board of Trustees shall consist of a majority of all the members holding office at the time a meeting is called. All processes against the Board of Trustees shall be served on the President or Secretary thereof.

Section 8. The members of the Board of Trustees shall be entitled to an allowance of one hundred pesos per meeting actually attended but not more than three hundred pesos a month; Provided, that they shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred either in attendance upon meetings of the Board or upon other official business authorized by resolution of the Board.

Section 9. The Board of Trustees shall have the following powers and duties in addition to its general powers of administration, and the exercise of all the powers of a corporation as provided in section Thirteen of Act Numbered Fourteen Hundred Fifty-Nine as amended otherwise known as the Corporation Law:

(a) To receive and appropriate for the purposes specified by law such sums as may be provided for the support of theState College;

(b) To confer degrees upon successful candidates for graduation of theState College. It may also confer honorary degrees upon persons in recognition of learning, statesmanship or eminence in any of the fields of specialization of theState College, or in recognition of public service. Provided, That such degrees shall not be conferred in consideration of or to reciprocate some personal favor;

(c) To authorize the President of theState Collegeto award proficiency certificates or diplomas to students who have completed non-degree courses;

(d) To appoint, on recommendations of the President of the State College, a vice-president, deans, directors, secretary of the State College, registrar, heads of departments, professors, instructors, lecturers and other officials and employees of the State College, to fix their compensations, hours of service, and such other duties and conditions as it may deem proper, to grant to them, in its discretion, leave of absences under such regulations as it may promulgate, any provisions of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding; to remove them for cause after an investigation and hearing; to establish chairs in the State College, and to provide for the maintenance or endowment of such chairs as may be necessary;

(e) To approve the curricula and rules of discipline drawn by the College Council as hereinafter provided;

(f) To fix tuition fees, matriculation fees, graduation fees, laboratory fees, and such special fees as will constitute a special trust fund for theState College;

(g) To provide fellowships for qualified faculty members and scholarships to deserving students;

(h) To prescribe rules for its own government and to enact for the government of the State College such rules and regulations, not contrary to law, as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and functions of theState College;

(i) To receive in trust legacies, gifts, and donations of real and personal property of all kinds, to administer the same for the benefit of the State College, or the departments thereof, or for aid to any student or students, in accordance with the directions and instructions of the donor, and in default thereof, in such manner as the Board of Trustees may in its discretion determine. All such donations shall be exempt from all taxes and to be considered as deductible items from the income tax of the donors, to import duty free commodities for educational purposes as an exception to existing laws; and

(j) To authorize the State College to undertake construction and/or repair of its buildings, machinery and equipment and other facilities, any provisions of law or executive order to the contrary notwithstanding, provided that the funds for the purpose shall come from its appropriation.

Section 10. On or before the fifteenth day of the second month after the opening of regular classes each year, the Board of Trustees shall file with the Office of the President of the Philippines a detailed report, setting forth the progress, conditions and needs of the State College.

Section 11. There shall be a College Council consisting of the President of the State College and all members of the faculty with the rank of professors. The Council shall have the power to prescribe the curricula and rules of discipline, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. It shall fix the requirements for admission to theState College, as well as for graduation and the conferring of degrees subject to review by the Board of Trustees. The Council alone shall have the power to recommend students or others to be recipients of degrees. Through the President of theState College or its duly authorized committee, the Council shall have disciplinary power over the students within the limits prescribed by the rules of discipline.

Section 12. The body of instructors and professors of the State College shall constitute the faculty of theState College.

The faculty shall be exempt as such from any civil service examinations or regulations as a requisite to appointment.

Section 13. No member of the faculty of the State College shall attempt directly or indirectly, under penalty of dismissal by the Board of Trustees, to influence students or any person in theState College towards any ideology, political or otherwise, which preaches the overthrow of the government through violence or subversion.

Section 14. There shall be a Secretary of the State College who shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees upon recommendation of the President of the State College. He shall also be the Secretary of the Board and shall keep such records of the State College as may be determined by the Board of Trustees.

Section 15. The Treasurer of the Philippines shall be ex-officio treasurer of theState College and all accounts and expenses therefor shall be audited by the Commission on Audit or its duly authorized representatives.

Section 16. Heads of Bureaus and offices of the National Government are hereby authorized to loan or transfer, upon request of the President of the State College, such apparatus, equipment or supplies as may be needed by the State College and to detail employees for duty therein, when in the judgment of the head of the bureau or office such apparatus, equipment, supplies or the services of such employees can be spared without serious detriment to the public service. Employees so detailed shall perform such duty as required under such detail and the time so employed shall be counted as part of their regular official service.

Section 17. All assets of the Ilocos Norte Institute of Technology, whether fixed or movable, records and personnel, are hereby transferred to the Mariano Marcos Memorial College of Science and Technology.

Section 18. In addition to the present appropriation of the Ilocos Norte Institute of Technology, the sum of five million pesos is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated for the improvement, operation and maintenance of theState College. Thereafter funds for the maintenance and operation of theState College shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

Section 19. The Secretary of Education and Culture is hereby directed to take such steps as are necessary for the immediate implementation of this Decree.

Section 20. All laws, decrees, executive orders contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of the Decree are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 21. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office