PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1237

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TALUSAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

WHEREAS, the primary goal of the State is to develop the entire country thru socio-economic upliftment of the inhabitants especially in this period of economic dislocation of our people,

WHEREAS, the primordial aim of development can be best achieved by the creation of local government units which could, through faster administrative response, greatly contribute to the social, educational, cultural and economic needs of the residents of the proposed municipality;

WHEREAS, subject locality, if created into an independent municipality will redound and contribute greatly to the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree, as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Talusan, Florida, Baganipay, Mahayahay, Laparay, Sagay, Kawilan, Samonte, Kasigpitan, Bualan, Bolingan, Aurora, Tuburan and Moalboal, all in the Municipality of Mabuhay, Province of Zamboanga del Sur, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and separate municipality which is created to be known as the Municipality of Talusan without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother Municipality of Mabuhay.

The new municipality shall be specifically bounded as follows:

“Beginning from point 1; intersection of Longtitude 122_53’43” and Latitude 7_19’47”; thence N 45_22’W with a distance of about 12,800 MTS. until it intersects at point 2; thence due west a distance 1,000 MTS. until it intersects and shoreline called point 3; thence following the shoreline moving northernly and easternly a distance of about 7,400 MTS. until it intersects at pt. 4; thence S 14_24’W with a distance of about 3080 MTS. until it intersects point 5; thence S 57_W with a distance of 6,280 MTS. until it intersects at creekline called point 6; thence following the creekline moving easternly with a distance of about 3,200 MTS. until it intersects at shoreline called point 7; thence following the shoreline moving southernly and westernly with a distance of 2,840 MTS. back to point 1 of beginning.”

The seat of the government of the newly created municipality shall be in barangay Talusan.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereinafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the Municipality of Talusan.

Section 3. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Mabuhay shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of Talusan until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Talusan shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of Talusan in the obligations, funds, assets, and other property of the Municipality of Mabuhay shall be transferred by the President to the newly created Municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office