PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1131

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAROGONG IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR.

WHEREAS, the primordial aim of the state is to provide every possible opportunity and facility to accelerate the pace of progress throughout the country not only in areas where economic development is behind but likewise in places where political reasons, among others, constitute a stumbling block toward the early realization of the aims and purposes of the new society;

WHEREAS, the government has engaged in intensified government projects necessitating close supervision by a well equipped and organized administrative machineries;

WHEREAS, the municipality of Tubaran in the province of Lanao del Sur is comprised of so vast a territory that the present officials thereof are unable to efficiently discharge the functions of government;

WHEREAS, a division of said municipality into two municipalities would not only enhance the development and progress of the areas involve but would also ensure peace and order within the localities;

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed municipality of Marogong will redound and contribute greatly to the economic, social and political upliftment of the residents of the area or areas affected;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order and make as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Tubaran in the province of Lanao del Sur shall remain a municipality, exercising powers and discharging functions over the areas specified in the law of its creation, except the barangays of Marogong Proper, Marogong East, Cairantang, Gandamato, Balut, Lindongan, Bolawan, Piangologan, Padas, Canibongan, Mantailoco, Matampay, Mayaman, Cahera, Bagumbayan, Binubaran, Paigoy Coda, Cabasaran, Sarang, Mapantao, Romagondong, Bumbaran, Pasayanun, Bonga, Bitayan, Dirangun, Piamangowan, Pabrica, Puracan and Tataya, all of the aforesaid municipality, which are hereby segregated therefrom to constitute a separate and independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Marogong, both in the province of Lanao del Sur.

Section 2. The seat of government of the municipality of Marogong shall be in Barangay Marogong Proper.

Section 3. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the Municipality of Marogong.

Section 4. The present elective officials of the municipality of Tubaran shall perform their duties as such in the newly created municipality of Marogong until the officials of the latter shall have been duly appointed by the President and they shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the election for provincial and municipal officials following the issuance of this decree, and shall have qualified unless sooner remove at the pleasure of the President. Other officials and employees necessary in the organization and operation of the municipal government shall be appointed in the manner provided for under existing laws.

Section 5. Upon the effectivity of this decree, the proportionate share of the new municipality of Marogong in the obligation, funds, assets and other properties of the municipality of Tubaran shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 6. All laws or parts of laws as well as the executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office