PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1262

AUTHORIZING UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS THE INSTANT REGISTRATION OF QUALIFIED VOTERS IN THE NATIONAL REFERENDUM OF DECEMBER 17, 1977 AND PRESCRIBING THE MECHANICS THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, one of the goals of the New Society is to broaden the base of citizen participation in the democratic process and to afford ample opportunities for the citizenry to express their views on vital national issues;

WHEREAS, one way of broadening the base of participatory democracy is to facilitate and minimize the registration of voters so as to assure that the results of any election, plebiscite or referendum shall truly reflect and will of the sovereign people;

WHEREAS, notwithstanding the satisfactory registration of voters undertaken in accordance with Presidential Decrees No. 1909 (continuing system) and No. 1187 (precinct level), nevertheless the Commission on Elections, obviously desirous to maximize further the registration of voters and enable them to participate in the democratic exercise on December 17, 1977, has recommended that the method of instant registration be resorted to under certain conditions and safeguards;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution do hereby decree:

Section 1. Instant Method of registration. Any person who possesses all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications of voter on December 17, 1977, but who on that date has not been registered as such, may personally appear on referendum day before the citizen’s Registration Committee of the voting center nearest his residence and apply verbally for registration under the system of instant registration.

Section 2. Who May Avail of Instant Registration. The following persons shall be entitled to register under the system of instant herein provided:

1. Persons whose names appear in the 1971 list of voters, provided they have not since then acquired any disqualification;

2. Members of the Kabataang Barangay who shall be eighteen (18) years old December 17, 1977 and who are not subject to any disqualification;

3. Former rebels or dissidents who have returned to the fold of the law and who possess all the qualifications and none of the disqualifications of a voter.

4. Other persons who possess all the qualifications and none of the disqualification of a voter.

Section 3. Ascertaining the Qualifications of Applicant. The Citizen’s Registration Committee shall, if it finds the applicant qualified, enter his name, address and date of birth in the list of instant registrants.

Section 4. Instant registration Shall be Entitled to Vote. Any person whose application for instant registration is approved shall be allowed application to cast his vote immediately thereafter in the same voting center.

Section 5. List of Instant Registrations. The list of voters registered under the system of instant registration shall be submitted to the election registrar concerned at the close of the polls.

Section 6. Filing of Registration Forms. At the time of instant registration, the applicant shall not be required to accomplish any registration form; Provided, however, that not later than two weeks after the day of referendum, any voter so registered and allowed to cast his vote in the manner prescribed herein shall personally appear before the election registrar of his city, municipality or municipal district to accomplish the application for registration (Comelec Form No. 1) which shall be distributed and reserved in the book of voters in accordance with Presidential Decree No. 1099. Thereafter, the voter shall be issued his voter’s certificate of registration (Comelec Form No. 2).

The failure, without justifiable clause, of the voter to appear and accomplish his registration form as provided in the preceding paragraph shall constitute a ground for the cancellation, after due notice, of his registration.

Section 7. Implementing Rules and Regulations. The Commission on Elections shall promulgate the rules and regulations necessary to implement this Decree.

Section 8. Repealing Clause. All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 9. Penalties. Any person who, being already a registered voter, register again in another voting center under the system herein provided and costs his vote therein, shall be guilty of a less serious election offense punishable in accordance with section two hundred and thirty-three of Republic Act 6388, otherwise known as the Election Code of 1971.

Section 10. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1262, December 13, 1977