MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 35

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO CONDUCT A SURVEY OF PORT FACILITIES OF THE CITY OF MANILA

WHEREAS, the shipping congestion in the Port of Manila and the reported pilferage at the piers have developed into such serious proportions that commercial ships have begun to omit Manila as a port of call and insurance underwriters have raised their coverage rates to the detriment of ultimate consumers,

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee to conduct a survey of the port facilities of the City of Manila. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

Mr. Alfredo de Leon Commander Chick Parsons Mr. Vicente Fragante Major Enrique Razon, P.A. Mr. L. P. Jepson Mr. Manuel Elizalde, and Mr. Toribio Teodoro

The departments, bureaus or offices concerned shall furnish to the Committee such technical and clerical assistance, data, and information as it may require in connection with the performance of its duties and the Committee shall have access to and the right to examine any books, documents, papers or records of said departments, bureaus, or offices.

The Committee shall submit within ten days from the date of this Order, definite recommendations calculated to immediately improve conditions in order to avoid congestion and pilferage in said port. On the basis of its survey, the Committee is further directed to submit a plan for the permanent improvement of port facilities of the City of Manila in order to bring about efficient handling and disposition of incoming and outgoing cargoes, which is a decisive factor in world commerce.

Done at the City of Manila, this 29th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Forty-Six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-W – 44]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 35, May 29, 1946