MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 11

CREATING GUERRILLA AMNESTY COMMISSIONS

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 8 dated September 7, 1946, duly concurred in by the Congress of the Philippines, and by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, do hereby create and appoint fourteen Guerrilla Amnesty Commissions consisting of the following Judges of First Instance to take cognizance of the cases in the provinces respectively assigned to them:

FIRST COMMISSION:

Judges Ceferino Hilario, Manuel Arranz, Eulogio de Guzman and Bernardino Quitoriano — for the Provinces of Cagayan, Isabela, Nueva Viscaya and Batangas;

SECOND COMMISSION:

Judges Simeon Ramos, Ceferino de los Santos, Patricio Ceniza and Higino de Guia — for the Provinces of Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, Abra and La Union;

THIRD COMMISSION:

Judges Conrado Sanchez, Sotero Rodas, Antnio Cañizares and Rafael Amparo — for the Provinces of Mountain Province and Baguio, Pangasiinan, Zambales and Nueva Ecija;

FOURTH COMMISSION:

Judges Francisco Jose, Angel H. Mojica, Basilio Bautista and Bonifacio Ysip — for the Provinces of Tarlac, Pampanga, Bataan and Bulacan;

FIFTH COMMISSION:

Judges Alfonso Felix, Dionisio de Leon and Francisco Alfonso — for the City of Manila;

SIXTH COMMISSION:

Judges Emilio Peña, Jose Gutierrez David and Pascual Santos — for the Provinces of Rizal, Cavite and Palawan;

SEVENTH COMMISSION:

Judges Fernando Jugo, Mariano de la Rosa and Buenaventura Ocampo — for cases from the different provinces and cities now pending appeal in the Supreme Court;

EIGHT COMMISSION:

Judges Felix Bautista Angelo, Ramon R. San Jose, Oscar Castelo and Meynardo Farol — for the Provinces of Laguna (including San Pablo City), Quezon, Batangas, Mindoro, and Marinduque;

NINTH COMMISSION:

Judges Jose Surtida, Catalina Buenaventura, Hermones Caluag and Jose R. de Venecia — for the  Provinces of Camarines Sur, Camarines Norte, Albay, Catanduanes, Sorsogon and Masbate;

TENTH COMMISSION:

Judges Fernando Hernandez, Manuel Blanco, Querube Macalintal and Edmundo Piccio — for the Provinces of Capiz, Iloilo, Antique and Romblon;

ELEVENTH COMMISSION:

Judges Francisco Arellano, Gregorio Narvasa, Segundo Moscoso and Felix Martinez — for the Provinces of Occidental Negros, Oriental Negros, Siquijor and Cebu;

TWELFTH COMMISSION:

Judges Fidel Fernandez, Mariano C. Melendres, Manuel Laserna and Hermogenes Concepcion — for the Provinces of Samar, Leyte and Bohol;

THIRTEENTH COMMISSION:

Judges Froilan Bayona, Pedro Villamor, Anatolio Mañalac, and Perfecto Palacio — for the Provinces of Surigao, Agusan, Occidental Misamis, Oriental Misamis, Bukidnnon and Lanao;

FOURTEENTH COMMISSION:

Judges Pablo Villalobos, Felicisimo Ocampo, Enrique Fernandez and Antonio Belmonte — for the Provinces of Zamboanga, Sulu, Davao and Cotabato.

With the exception of the Judges of the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Commissions, no Judge shall take part in the deliberation of his Commission upon the cases in the province to which he has been appointed or assigned as Judge. No Judge of First Instance shall try and decide any case which he may have previously passed upon as a member of the Commission.

The Provincial Fiscal of each province shall submit to the corresponding Amnesty Commission all the cases pending (1) in the different Justice of the Peace Courts, (2) in his office, and (3) in the Court of First Instance, in which the accused claim the benefit of Amnesty Proclamation No. 8. The Commission shall examine the facts and circumstances surrounding each case, and, if necessary or if requested by either or both of the interested parties, shall conduct summary hearings of witnesses both for the complainants and the accused. The decision or resolution on a given case need not state the facts in detail but merely and briefly the grounds upon which it is based. Cases already decided by the Court of First Instance but not yet elevated on appeal shall be passed upon and decided by the Commission. Cases pending appeal shall be passed upon and decided by the Seventh Commission. Any reasonable doubt as to whether a given case falls within the proclamation shall be resolved in favor of the accused.

Such stenographers and employees of the Court of First Instance as may be needed by the Commission shall be made available to it by the Judge of such court. The members of the Commission and their employees will be entitled to per diems and travelling expenses from the appropriations of the Department of Finance.

Any vacancy in any of the Commissions due to the death, sickness, resignation or transfer of any of the judges herein named, may be filled by the Secretary of Justice by assigning another judge thereto.

The different Commissions hereby created shall begin to function as soon as practicable.

The Secretary of Justice is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the purpose of expediting the work of the Commissions.

Done at the City of Manila, this 2nd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the first.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 50]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 11, October 2, 1946