MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 42

INTENSIFYING THE NATIONAL FOOD PRODUCTION CAMPAIGN

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to take immediate steps to increase the production and supply of foodstuffs to forestall famine and starvation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct that –

SECTION 1. An intensified nation-wide food production campaign shall be waged under the auspices of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce.

SEC. 2. The Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce shall be the General Manager of this campaign. In that capacity, he is empowered to promulgate rules and regulations to insure the success of the campaign.

SEC. 3. Provincial governors, city and municipal mayors are hereby designated deputies of the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce in the prosecution of the food production campaign herein provided for and in enforcing such rules and regulations in their respective jurisdictions as the Secretary may promulgate in pursuance of this Order. I call upon all branches, instrumentalities, and agencies of the Government, particularly the Departments of the Interior, Instruction, and Health and Public Welfare, to extend all possible cooperation in the conduct of this campaign.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce is hereby authorized to assign such personnel of the Department of Agriculture and Commerce and of the bureaus and offices under him and, with the concurrence of the heads of the other executive departments, of the personnel under them, as may be necessary for this campaign.

SEC. 5. Such funds as from time to time will be provided for by the National, Provincial, City and Municipal Governments for undertaking the food production campaign authorized in this Order shall be disbursed and duly accounted for by the officials concerned with approval of the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce.

SEC. 6. This Order shall take effect on its promulgation.

Done at the City of Manila, Philippines, this 17th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) MANUEL ROXAS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Chief of the Executive Office

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-W – 44]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.

Administrative Order No. 42, June 17, 1946