Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Twelfth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand three.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9269]

AN ACT CREATING THE SECOND LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT OF THE CITY OF ZAMBOANGA

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION. 1. Creation . — There is hereby created another legislative district in the City of Zamboanga. Henceforth, barangays Ayala, Bagong Calarian, Baliwasan, Baluno, Cabatangan, Camino Nuevo, Campo Islam, Canelar, Capisan, Cawit, Dulian (Upper Pasonanca), La Paz, Labuan, Limpapa, Maasin, Malagutay, Mariki, Pamucutan, Pasonanca, Patalon, Recodo, Rio Hondo, San Jose Cawa-cawa, San Jose Gusu, San Roque, Sta. Barbara, Sta. Maria, Sto. Niño, Sinubung, Sinunuc, Talisayan, Tulungatung, Tumaga, Zone 1, Zone 2, Zone 3, and Zone 4 shall compose the first legislative district while barangays Arena Blanco, Boalan, Bolong, Buenavista. Bunguiao, Busay, Cabaluay, Cacao, Calabasa, Culianan, Curuan, Dita, Divisoria, Dulian (Upper Bunguiao), Guisao, Guiwan, Kasanyangan, Lamisahan, Landanga Gua, Landang Laum, Lanzones, Lapakan, Latuan, Licomo, Limaong, Lubigan, Lumayang, Lumbangan, Lunzuran, Mampang, Manalipa, Mangusu, Manicahan, Mercedes, Muti, Pangapuyan, Panubigan, Pasilmanta, Pasobolong, Putik, Quiniput, Salaan, Sangali, Sta. Catalina, Sibulao, Tagasilay, Taguiti, Talabaan, Talon-talon, Taluksangay, Tetuan, Tictapul, Tigbalabag, Tigtabon, Tolosa, Tugbungan, Tumalutab, Tumitus, Victoria, Vitali and Zambowood shall form part of the second legislative district.

The foregoing provision shall be without prejudice to the resolution by appropriate agency or forum of any existing boundary disputes or cases involving questions of territorial jurisdiction between Zamboanga City and the adjoining local government units: Provided , However, That the territorial jurisdiction of the disputed area or areas shall remain with the local government unit, which has existing administrative supervision over said area or areas until the final resolution of the case.

SEC. 2. Election of Representatives . — For the purpose of the 2004 election, the City of Zamboanga shall elect only one (1) representative, who shall represent the City until the representative of each legislative district shall have been elected in the immediately succeeding regular election to be held after the 2004 election and thereafter.

SEC. 3. Rules and Regulations . — The Commission on Elections shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 4. All laws, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby amended, repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on January 19, 2004 and February 6, 2004, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: MAR 19 2004

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia