Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Twelfth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-second day of July, two thousand two.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9190]

AN ACT RECOGNIZING CEBU INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL AS AN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF INTERNATIONAL CHARACTER, GRANTING CERTAIN PREROGATIVES CONDUCIVE TO ITS GROWTH AS SUCH, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Cebu International School, herein referred to as the School, is hereby declared an educational institution of international character authorized to operate educational programs that primarily and principally adhere to universally accepted and recognized educational policies.

SEC. 2. The members of the Cebu International School, Inc., shall be comprised of the parents or guardians, whether of Philippine or foreign nationality, of the children who have enrolled and attended the School for at least one (1) school year: Provided , That the school year shall be determined in accordance with the School’s own calendar of studies and work schedule: Provided, further , That the School shall be governed by a Board of Trustees, herein referred to as the Board, elected at large from among the corporation’s members of good standing.

SEC. 3. To enable the School to continue carrying out its educational program, improve its standard of instruction and meet the special needs of the foreign temporary resident community for quality education, it shall:

(a) accept applicants for admission, regardless of nationality, in accordance with its own eligibility standards, and rules for admission and grade placement: Provided , That no single alien nationality shall consist more than thirty percent (30%) of the entire student population in a given school year, as stated in the records of the School;

(b) be managed and administered by a superintendent, who shall possess the qualifications prescribed by the Board;

(c) upon consultation with the Secretary of Education, determine its own curriculum and teach whatever language or languages it may deem proper and determine the amount of fees and assessments which may be reasonably imposed upon its students, to maintain or conform to the School’s standard of education;

(d) maintain standards of education compatible with those obtaining in similar schools of generally recognized standing; and

(e) employ its own teaching and management personnel selected by the Board either locally or abroad, from the Philippines or other nationalities, such foreign personnel being exempt from laws that imposes nationality restrictions on control and administration of educational institutions, except laws that have been or will be enacted for the protection of employees: Provided , That such exemption shall not extend to their liability for income taxes.

SEC. 4. The Secretary of Education shall issue such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 5. If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Act is subsequently declared unconstitutional, the validity of the remaining provisions hereof shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 49 and Senate Bill No. 2168 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 11, 2002 and November 11, 2002, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: FEB 21 2003

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia