Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Thirteenth Congress

Third Special Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the nineteenth day of February, two thousand seven.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9441]

AN ACT ESTABLISHING A MARINE RESEARCH AND BREEDING CENTER IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF BALER, PROVINCE OF AURORA, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. There is hereby established, under the supervision of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture, a marine research and breeding center in the Municipality of Baler, Province of Aurora.

SEC. 2. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture, in coordination with the Province of Aurora, is hereby authorized to assist in the establishment and maintenance of such facilities and equipment as may be necessary to implement the intents and purposes of this Act. For this purpose, the marine research and breeding center shall formulate such operating guidelines as shall be recommended by the Department of Agriculture for research and experimentation on, and the breeding, propagation and distribution of spawners, fry or fingerlings of, marine species endemic to the waters around the Province of Aurora.

SEC. 3. The marine research and breeding center, with the technical assistance of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture and such other agencies involved in marine research, shall conduct continuing research and experimentation on the culture and propagation of native marine species especially as they apply to the peculiarities and characteristics of local conditions, for the purpose of improving existing technology and for maximizing income potentials of the fishing industry.

SEC. 4. The marine research and breeding center, with the assistance of the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of the Department of Agriculture, shall take such steps as may be necessary to encourage the culture of marine species native to the province and thereby promote and attract investments in this field of economic endeavor by providing through the facilities of the breeding component of the center, the application of the technologies developed by the research component of the center and ensure the ready and steady supply of spawners, fries and fingerlings to those engaged in this industry.

SEC. 5. The Secretary of Agriculture shall include in the Department’s program the funding requirements for the establishment and operationalization of the marine research and breeding center. Thereafter, the amount necessary for the continued operation and maintenance of the center shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) MANNY VILLAR President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 20, 2006 and February 19, 2007, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: APR 28 2007

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia