Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Thirteenth Congress

Third Special Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the nineteenth day of February, two thousand seven.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9432]

AN ACT CREATING A BARANGAY TO BE KNOWN AS BARANGAY TUMANA IN THE CITY OF MARIKINA, METRO MANILA

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Creation of Barangay Tumana . — Sitio Tumana in Barangay Concepcion Uno, City of Marikina, Metro Manila is hereby separated from Barangay Concepcion Uno and constituted into a new barangay to be known as Barangay Tumana.

The technical description of Barangay Tumana shall be as follows:

From the corner of Everlasting Street and Roxas Street, Twinville Subdivision going south, along the centerline of Rosas Street, J. del Rosario Street and Angel Santos Street; thence along the centerline of old Marikina River Course until it intersects the property of Wood Ridge Residential Estate; thence to the west along the property line of Wood Ridge Residential Estate; thence to the northeast between the property line of Wood Ridge Residential Estate and Loyola Grand Villas; thence to the northwest along Finland Street until it intersects Quezon City boundary; thence to the northeast along Marikina-Quezon City boundary until it crosses Marikina River; and thence to the east along the centerline of Everlasting Street until it intersects the point of beginning.

SEC. 2. Conduct and Supervision of Plebiscite . — Pursuant to Section 10 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, the new barangay shall exist upon the majority of the votes cast by the qualified voters of Barangay Concepcion Uno, City of Marikina, Metro Manila in a plebiscite to be conducted and supervised by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) in the area affected, within ninety (90) days from the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 3. Barangay Officials . — The first set of officials of the said barangay shall be appointed by the city mayor of Marikina and shall hold office until such time that their successors have been duly elected and qualified.

SEC. 4. Public Infrastructure and Facilities . — All existing public infrastructure and facilities for public use existing therein at the time of the approval of this Act are hereby transferred without cost or compensation and shall be administered by the new barangay.

SEC. 5. Internal Revenue Allotment Shares . — Barangay Tumana shall be entitled to Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA) shares pursuant to Section 285 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991.

SEC. 6. Appropriations . — The amount necessary to conduct the plebiscite as provided for under this Act shall be borne by the City of Marikina, Metro Manila.

SEC. 7. Effectivity . — This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) MANNY VILLAR President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA, JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 20, 2006 and February 19, 2007, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: APR 10 2007

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia