Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Eleventh Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-fourth day of July, two thousand

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9107

AN ACT PROMOTING AND PRESERVING THE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES OF THE COUNTRY ESTABLISHING FOR THIS PURPOSE THE PHILIPPINE SCIENCE HERITAGE CENTER, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled.

SECTION 1. Title. – This Act shall be known as the “Philippine Science Heritage Center Act.”

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy . – It shall be declared the policy of the State to support and encourage the development of the country’s science and technology program, to promote the Philippines’ scientific contributions to the world, and to highlight the richness of our heritage in science and technology.

SEC. 3. Philippine Science Heritage Center . – There is hereby created a Philippine Science Heritage Center, hereinafter referred to as the “Center”, which shall be managed, operated and maintained by the National Academy of Science and Technology (NAST). The Center shall be the main repository of the country’s contributions, achievements and accomplishments in the field of science and technology.

SEC. 4. Powers and Functions. – The Center shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) To document the works, ideas, inventions and products of Filipino scientists, and other accomplishments in the field of science and technology;

(b) To establish a display area for samples of inventions, scientific products, memorabilia, references and library materials;

(c) To produce printed materials to be used by the academe in teaching values education with scientific insights, and which may be used as an alternative source of information for the general public;

(d) To serve as the core network of science museums in the Philippines; and

(e) To perform such acts as may be necessary for the effective implementation of this Act.

SEC. 5. Rules and Regulations. – The NAST, in coordination with the Department of Science and Technology and other government agencies and instrumentalities, shall formulate the rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 6. Appropriations. – The amount needed to carry out the provisions of this Act is hereby authorized to be appropriated in the General Appropriations Act of the year following its enactment into law, in addition to the amount appropriated for the National Academy of Science and Technology.

SEC. 7. Fees and Charges. – The Center may impose fees and other charges sufficient to cover the costs of subsidizing the operation and maintenance of the facilities of the Center.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause. – All laws, decrees, rules and regulations inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 9. Separability Clause. – If, for any reason, any part or provision of this Act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, any part or provision not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.

SEC. 10. Effectivity. – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Approved:

(Sgd.) AQUILINO Q. PIMENTEL JR. President of the Senate

(Sgd.) FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill No. 12304 and Senate Bill No. 2261 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on February 8, 2001.

(Sgd.) LUTGARDO B. BARBO Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: APR 14 2001

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia