CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES

Metro Manila

Fourteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand nine.

Republic Act No. 10001

AN ACT REDUCING TAXES ON LIFE INSURANCE POLICIES, AMENDING FOR THIS PURPOSE SECTIONS 123 AND 183 OF THE NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1997, AS AMENDED

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled;

Section 1. Section 123 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“ SEC. 123. Tax on life Insurance Premiums. There shall be collected from every person, company or corporation (except purely cooperative companies or associations) doing life insurance business of any sort in the Philippines a tax of two percent (2%) of the total premium collected, whether such premiums are paid in money, notes, credits or any substitute for money: but premiums refunded within six (6) months after payment on account of rejection of risk or returned  for other reason as a person insured shall be included in the taxable receipts; nor shall any tax be paid upon reinsurance by a company that has already paid tax, nor upon premiums collected or received by any branch of a domestic corporation, firm or association doing business outside of the Philippines on account of any life insurance of the insured who is a nonresident, if any tax on such premium is imposed by the foreign country where the branch is established nor upon premium collected or received on account of any reassurance, if the insured, in case of a personal insurance, resides outside the Philippines, if any tax on such premiums is imposed by the foreign country where the original insurance has been issued or perfected; nor upon that portion of the premium collected or received by the insurance companies on variable contracts, in excess of the amounts necessary to insure the lives of the variable contract owner.

“Cooperative companies or associations are such as are conducted by the members thereof with the money collected from among themselves and solely for their own protection and not for profit.”

Sec. 2. The new rate of two percent (2%) shall apply only to insurance policies that will be issued after the effectivity of this Act: Provided, however, That insurance policies taken out before the effectivity of this Act but the premiums are not yet fully paid, the new rate of two percent (2%) shall be applied to the remaining years.

Sec. 3. Section 183 of the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 183. Stamp Tax on Life Insurance Policies. – On all policies of insurance or other instruments by whatever name the same may be called, whereby any insurance shall be made or renewed upon any life or lives, there shall be collected a one-time documentary stamp tax at the following rates:

If the amount of insurance does not exceed Php 100,000.00

Exempt

Php 10.00

Php 25.00

Php 50.00

Php 75.00

Php 100.00

Sec. 4. Five (5) years after the effectivity of this Code, no tax on life insurance premium shall be collected: Provided, further, That on the said date, all policies insurance or other instruments by whatever name the same shall be called whereby any insurance shall be made upon any or lives shall be exempt from the documentary stamp tax.

Sec. 5. Rules and Regulations. – The Secretary of Finance shall, upon recommendation of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of the provision of this Act.

Sec. 6. Separability Clause. – If any provision of this Act is held unconstitutional or invalid, all other provisions not affected thereby shall remain invalid.

Sec. 7. Repealing Clause. – All laws, executive orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Sec. 8. Effectivity. – This act shall take effect fifteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Philippines.

Approved,

President of the Senate

Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which is a consolidation of House Bill NO. 6017 AND Senate Bill No. 3502 was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 15, 2009 and December 11, 2009, respectively.