Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Twelfth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-eighth day of July, two thousand three.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9265]

AN ACT CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN ISIDRO IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO DEL NORTE

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Creation . – There is hereby created a new municipality in the Province of Davao del Norte to be known as the Municipality of San Isidro.

SEC. 2. Seat of the Municipal Government . – The seat of government of the new Municipality of San Isidro shall be in Barangay Sawata.

SEC. 3. Territorial Boundaries . – The Municipality of San Isidro as herein created composed, composed of barangays Sawata, Sabangan, Mamangan, Sto. Niño, Igangon and Kipalili, of the Municipality of Asuncion, and barangays Dacudao, Datu Balong, Libuton, Pinamuno, Monte Dujali, Linao and San Miguel, of the Municipality of Kapalong, all in the Province of Davao del Norte, has the following technical description:

Bounded on the North by the Municipality of Kapalong; on the South by the Municipality of Kapalong and the Municipality of Asuncion; on the East by the Province of Compostela Valley; and on the West by the Municipality of Kapalong.

The foregoing provision shall be without prejudice to the resolution by the appropriate agency or forum of any boundary dispute or case involving question of territorial jurisdiction between Municipality of San Isidro and the adjoining local government units (LGUs): Provided, however , That the territorial jurisdiction of the disputed area or areas shall remain with the LGU, which has existing administrative supervision over said area or areas until the final resolution of the case.

SEC. 4. Plebiscite . – The Municipality of San Isidro shall acquire corporate existence upon the ratification of its creation by a majority of the votes cast by qualified voters in a plebiscite to be conducted in the barangays comprising the Municipality of San Isidro pursuant to Section 3 hereof and in the municipalities of Asuncion and Kapalong, Province of Davao del Norte within thirty (30) days from the approval of this Act.

The Commission on Elections shall conduct and supervise such plebiscite.

SEC. 5. Officials of the Municipality of San Isidro . – Upon ratification of its creation by a majority of the votes cast by qualified voters in a plebiscite, the mayor, vice mayor and the members of the sangguniang bayan shall be appointed by the President of the Republic of the Philippines, in consultation with the representative of the congressional district and the provincial governor, and shall serve until the new set of officials shall have been elected and qualified in the next local elections following the approval of this Act.

SEC. 6. Internal Revenue Allotment Shares . – During the first year of acquisition of its corporate existence, the Municipality of San Isidro shall receive the Internal Revenue Allotment (IRA) shares of barangays as provided in Section 3 hereof from the Department of Budget and Management. Thereafter, the Municipality of San Isidro and all the barangays comprising it shall be entitled to IRA shares pursuant to the provision of Section 285 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991.

SEC. 7. Appropriations . – The amount necessary to conduct such plebiscite as provided for under this Act shall be borne proportionately by the municipalities of Kapalong and Asuncion and the barangays comprising the new Municipality of San Isidro.

SEC. 8. Repealing Clause . – All laws, executive orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SEC. 9. Effectivity . – This Act shall take effect upon its approval.

Approved,

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON President of the Senate

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA Speaker of the House of Representatives

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 17, 2003, and February 6, 2004, respectively.

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

Approved: MAR 15 2004

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia