Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila

Fourteenth Congress

Third Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-seventh day of July, two thousand nine.

[REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9905]

AN ACT CREATING A BARANGAY TO BE KNOWN AS BARANGAY BANAWA-ENGLIS IN THE CITY OF CEBU

Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Creation of Barangay Banawa-Englis . — The sitios of Banawa and Englis are hereby separated from Barangay Guadalupe and constituted into a new barangay to be known as Barangay Banawa-Englis, City of Cebu.

Barangay Banawa-Englis will encompass the following puroks:

(a) Puroks in Sitio Banawa:

(1) Eskina Banawa (comprising the satellite market, Gullas Compound up to corner Suzara Street all along V. Rama Avenue);

(2) Verano Compound I;

(3) Verano Compound II;

(4) Falek Compound and Sundance Hills;

(5) Damiana’s Compound;

(6) Banawa Riverside (comprising Kana-as and Immanuel Bible School Area);

(7) Caimito;

(8) Tambis;

(9) Cristina Village;

(10) Josefa Village;

(11) Woodland Heights;

(12) Pacana Compound;

(13) Windy Hills;

(14) Sambag;

(15) Remedios;

(16) Greenville;

(17) Lomboy;

(18) Kawayan;

(19) San Roque;

(20) Santo Niño;

(21) Rosalina Village;

(22) Kalubihan;

(23) Kabukalakan;

(24) Kasagingan;

(25) Sampaguita;

(26) Kamanggahan;

(27) Katugasan;

(28) Forest Hills Subdivision;

(29) Go Chan Subdivision;

(30) Maria Luisa South;

(31) White Hills;

(32) Golden Ville;

(33) Sta. Ana;

(34) Francisca Village;

(35) Horseshoe Hills Subdivision;

(36) Filomena Village; and

(37) Paseo Arcenas.

(b) Puroks in Sitio Englis:

(1) Happy Valley;

(2) SUDINA (Sudlon in Action);

(3) San Roque EPRA;

(4) Zodiac Ville;

(5) ESCO (Englis Social Circle Organization);

(6) Central Englis;

(7) EYHA (Englis Young Hearts Association);

(8) Department of Agriculture;

(9) Englis Riverside Association;

(10) Espina Village;

(11) SUSCO;

(12) Lower Happy Valley;

(13) CYPA;

(14) PERPASS (Perpetual Parents Association);

(15) YGA (Young Generation Association);

(16) Fatima;

(17) Lorenzo Drive;

(18) EPRA; and

(19) NOGRA.

The territorial boundary of Barangay Banawa-Englis shall be as follows:

From the East going South starting from the bridge at M. Velez Street to share common boundary with Barangay Capitol, which is the Guadalupe River going down and up to the bridge at B. Rodriguez Street.

Thence, turning right towards the West and starting from the bridge at B. Rodriguez Street, and passing along the same street up to the corner of Happy Valley Street, then turn left following the same street up to and across Rosalina Subdivision and thereafter, to share the existing boundaries of barangays Calamba, Labangon, Tisa and Buhisan.

Thence, again starting from the East at the Guadalupe Bridge and along M. Velez Street going West up to the corner of V. Rama Avenue, turn right towards the North and along V. Rama Avenue up to the corner of Suzara Street, turn left towards the West and along the same street to cut across and along the outer edges of Falek Compound at Sundance Hills down to and across the outer edges of Damiana’s Compound up to the dry small creek.

Thence, following the Northward direction of the creek up to the portion directly behind the outer edges of the lots at Villa Salud Subdivision up to the junction of Quijada (Doña Modesta) and the unnamed street leading towards the Maria Luisa South Subdivision; thereafter to follow a westerly imaginary straight line up to the hills where the West-Northwest boundary lines of barangays Bulisan and Sapangdatu intersect.

SEC. 2. Conduct and Supervision of Plebiscite . — The Commission on Elections (COMELEC) shall conduct and supervise the plebiscite to be held in the area affected within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Act.

SEC. 3. Barangay Officials . — The first set of barangay elective officials of Barangay Banawa-Englis shall be elected in a special election to be conducted within sixty (60) days after the ratification by the majority of the votes cast in a plebiscite held in the areas affected.

SEC. 4. Beginning of Corporate Existence of Barangay Banawa-Englis . — The corporate existence of Barangay Banawa-Englis, City of Cebu shall commence upon the election and qualification of its punong barangay and majority of the members of its sangguniang barangay.

SEC. 5. Seat of Barangay Government . — The seat of Barangay Government of Barangay Banawa-Englis shall be located at the old Sitio Banawa.

SEC. 6. Internal Revenue Allotment Shares . — Barangay Banawa-Englis, City of Cebu shall be entitled to Internal Revenue Allotment shares pursuant to Section 285 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the “Local Government Code of 1991”.

SEC. 7. Appropriations. — The amount necessary to conduct the plebiscite as provided for under this Act shall be charged against the Contingent Fund of the COMELEC.

SEC. 8 . Effectivity. — This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general and local circulation.

Approved,

This Act which originated in the House of Representatives was finally passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on December 15, 2009 and December 14, 2009, respectively.

Approved: JAN 07 2010

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia