Republic of the Philippines

Congress of the Philippines

Metro Manila

Thirteenth Congress

Second Regular Session

Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-sixth day of July, two thousand five.

REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9346 ]

AN ACT PROHIBITING THE IMPOSITION OF DEATH PENALTY IN THE PHILIPPINES

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. The imposition of the penalty of death is hereby prohibited. Accordingly, Republic Act No. Eight Thousand One Hundred Seventy-Seven (R.A. No. 8177), otherwise known as the Act Designating Death by Lethal Injection is hereby repealed, Republic Act No. Seven Thousand Six Hundred Fifty-Nine (R.A. No. 7659), otherwise known as the Death Penalty Law, and all other laws, executive orders and decrees, insofar as they impose the death penalty are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SEC. 2. In lieu of the death penalty, the following shall be imposed:

(a) the penalty of reclusion perpetua , when the law violated makes use of the nomenclature of the penalties of the Revised Penal Code; or

(b) the penalty of life imprisonment, when the law violated does not make use of the nomenclature of the penalties of the Revised Penal Code.

SEC. 3. Persons convicted of offenses punished with reclusion perpetua , or whose sentences will be reduced to reclusion perpetua , by reason of this Act, shall not be eligible for parole under Act No. 4103, otherwise known as the Indeterminate Sentence Law, as amended.

SEC. 4. The Board of Pardons and Parole shall cause the publication at least once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation of the names of persons convicted of offenses punished with reclusion perpetua or life imprisonment by reason of this Act who are being considered or recommended for commutation or pardon: Provided, however ; That nothing herein shall limit the power of the President to grant executive clemency under Section 19, Article VII of the Constitution.

SEC. 5. This Act shall take effect immediately after its publication in two national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,

(Sgd.) JOSE DE VENECIA JR. Speaker of the House of Representatives

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON President of the Senate

This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 2254 and House Bill No. 4826 was finally passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives on June 7, 2006.

(Sgd.) ROBERTO P. NAZARENO Secretary General House of Representatives

(Sgd.) OSCAR G. YABES Secretary of the Senate

Approved: JUN 24 2006

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO President of the Philippines

Source: CDAsia